department of state growth section num construction general this section crossreferences sections num num num or num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent sections num num and num or num must be included in the specification the term independent reviewer should be amended to superintendent or independent certifier as applicable to selected project delivery model .
this section covers general items relating to construction contracts and should be read in conjunction with sections num num and numor num .
part a management systems part b industrial part c site part d program and progress part e prosecution of work part f offsite part g insurance and incident reporting .
part a management systems num.anum quality management systems standards the works under this contract shall be undertaken in accordance with a quality management system that meets the requirements of relevant asnzs iso standards .
the standards specified in this clause form part of this specification .
copies are not included in this document .
these standards include asnzs iso num quality management systems requirements asnzs iso num environmental management systems specification with guidance for use asnzs num ohs management systems the quality systems shall demonstrate compliance with all relevant acts and regulations and the requirements of the contract specification and as a minimum must include a quality plan which addresses the requirements in this specification and demonstrates compliance with relevant asnzs iso standards templates for inspection and test plans and templates for all lot records required by inspection and test plans commissioning plans required by the contract construction procedures required by relevant specifications procedures and systems for management of design and construction records .
the contractor must exercise quality control of the works including works undertaken by subcontractors and must establish systems and procedures that will provide the information specified in this section to provide assurance of that control .
num.anum quality terms and definitions quality terms and definitions shall be as defined by the australian standard asnzs iso num quality management systems fundamentals and vocabulary .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth other definition and terms shall be as follows asset component means a component part of a road bridge or other asset forming part of the works .
accredited laboratory or accredited method means i for all inspections other than for material which is supplied from outside australia a laboratory or method as the case requires accredited by the national association of testing authorities nata for those inspections or inspection methods ii for all material which is supplied from outside australia a laboratory or method accredited by nata for those inspections or inspection methods or by another laboratory or method accredited by a recognised certifying body approved in the contract or if the contract does not provide such approval then by a recognised certifying body approved by the superintendent .
independent reviewer means the independent reviewer appointed by the superintendent to undertake audits of the quality management system .
inspection means and incorporates measuring testing or otherwise examining goods and services or works or materials including where appropriate raw materials components and intermediate assemblies for determining conformity with the specified requirements .
lot or work lot means a discrete element of work which has been constructed in a continuous operation under essentially uniform conditions and is essentially homogeneous with respect to material properties general appearance and construction process .
a lot must only comprise a single layer batch or area of like work and unless otherwise specified the extent of each lot must not exceed one days production .
lot diagram means a diagram showing the location and bounds of each work lot within an asset component comprising multiple lots that are not identified separately on the design drawings or in the work breakdown structure .
e.g .
an earthworks embankment a section of pavement or a soil nail wall .
lot records means all test and inspection records and certificates required by the applicable inspection and test plan .
lot register means a register or system that enables identification of each lot within the work breakdown structure and the completion and conformance status of each lot .
measuring includes checking for line level dimensional accuracy and quantity .
online access means accessible via the internet as an electronic record .
test includes taking of samples and specimens and preparation of materials and work for testing .
hold point means those points beyond which the stated activity must not proceed without the quality assurance verifiers approval to proceed .
the quality assurance verifiers approval to proceed beyond the hold point does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for satisfactory execution or performance of the work .
hold points are identified in the specification by the letters hp in the left margin and by bold text print or arise from a nonconformity .
text which is bold typed but not identified by the letters hp in the left margin does not reflect a hold point .
such text reflects specified obligations on the contractor requiring the review or approval of the quality assurance verifier .
they are bold typed for ease of identification .
quality assurance verifier a person engaged by a contractor to undertake specified department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth quality assurance functions as identified in this specification including release of hold points .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth review point verification check points identified in the inspection and test plans requiring verification of requirements and collection of records .
witness point verification check points identified in the inspection and test plans that are not designated as hold points but require inspection by the superintendent .
work package one or more lots of the same work kind covered by a single inspection and test plan .
num.anum quality representatives the contractor shall appoint persons to the following quality representative positions a quality management representative to manage and administer the contractors quality management system in accordance with the appropriate australian standards and the contractors quality plan and one or more quality assurance verifiers to manage and administer the releasing of hold points the closure of work packages and the closure of notices of non conformance relating to work lots .
the quality assurance verifiers must be accountable to the contractor but required to act as independent verifiers of the quality assurance process not be involved in the daytoday construction or supervision of construction have appropriate qualifications experience and competence to undertake their role proficiently have a thorough understanding of relevant design documentation and specification requirements be the only persons authorised to release hold points and close work packages within their designated scope of authority any proposed changes to the nominated quality representatives must be notified promptly to the principal and the superintendent .
within num working days of receipt of the notice of nomination of quality representatives the superintendent shall advice of acceptance or rejection of the nominations .
num.anum quality plans and procedures a general the contractor shall submit for consideration by the superintendent a controlled copy of the quality plans and procedures relating to each stage of the work under the contract not less than num business days prior to the commencement of that stage of the work unless specified otherwise .
the quality plans and procedures required under the contract shall cover but not be limited to the following management systems quality traffic environmental occupational health and safety incident management and reporting .
the incident management and reporting system shall incorporate as a minimum the incident requirements of part g of this section and sections num and numor num .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth the quality plan must nominate and define the responsibility authority and reporting function of personnel primarily responsible for ensuring the effectiveness of the quality management system including a quality management representative who has responsibility for ensuring that the requirements of the quality plan are implemented and maintained and for authorising closure of notices of nonconformance that are not related to work lots and one or more quality assurance verifiers responsible for releasing hold points authorising closure of work packages and authorising closure of notices of non conformance relating to work lots designate for each quality assurance verifier the scope of construction activities that they are authorised to verify and provide for all quality representatives sufficient information to demonstrate relevant qualifications experience and required competencies to exercise the designated scope of their authority .
a quality plan or procedure shall be changed if it i does not adequately address the specification requirements ii is causing nonconformity iii has to be changed because of an audit or iv no longer represents current or appropriate practice .
the contractor shall immediately notify the superintendent of any change to the plans or procedures and the amended documentation shall be submitted to the superintendent within num business days of such notice .
b management system plans the quality plan for a stage of the contract shall require the preparation of the following management system plans and shall be forwarded to the superintendent by the nominated time traffic management plan refer section num environmental management plan refer section numor num health and safety coordination plan refer section num. c work undertaken by subcontractors the contractor must ensure that all works carried out by subcontractors complies with the requirements of this specification .
the quality plan must include procedures and criteria for the evaluation selection supervision and monitoring of performance of subcontractors procedures that will ensure that subcontractors comply with the quality plan requirements relating to the work breakdown structure inspection and test plans hold points and witness points product identification and traceability department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth construction procedures control of nonconformance progressive closure of work packages management of defects online access to records num.anum work breakdown structure the work breakdown structure must be subdivided into discrete sections of the works between readily identified points such as intersections interchanges cross roads stream crossings or other points established by the contractor to manage staging of the works within each discrete section must be structured in successive layers of assets classified by standard asset types asset components within each asset classified by standard component types and work packages within each asset component where each work package represents a group of work lots covered by an inspection and test plan must include a system of uniquely identifying each separate element within the structure must be progressively defined and maintained in the contractors record management system .
unless otherwise specified the standard asset types and asset component types must conform to the austroads guide for road construction quality assurance .
the quality plan must include the following details for the work breakdown structure a definition of the discrete sections of the works .
the standard asset types and asset component types .
a system that will be used to uniquely and consistently identify each element of the work breakdown structure in the design and construction program design documentation and construction records .
num.anum inspection and test plans the content of the inspection and test plans and associated lot records must conform to the austroads guide for road construction quality assurance .
the contractor must ensure that inspection and test plans include all verification check points required by relevant specifications prepare a template for each of the construction records designated in each inspection and test plan and submit each inspection and test plan template and the associated construction record templates at least num work days prior to commencing any related construction activities .
verification check points identified in the content of the inspection and test plans shall be designated as either a review point hold point or witness point .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth construction record templates must show the specified inspection and test requirements and acceptance criteria and require entry of the actual inspections and tests performed and test results .
the submitted templates must be amended to address any nonconformances notified by the superintendent .
prior to commencing any work package an inspection and test plan and associated construction record must be prepared using the relevant template .
num.anum nominated hold points and witness points the contractors quality plans and procedures shall identify all hold points and witness points including all hold points identified by the specification .
the superintendent must be given reasonable notice of each witness points and the intended release of each hold point and may nominate persons to attend each witness point and the release of each hold point .
unless otherwise specified or agreed by the superintendent reasonable notice means at least num business day .
a hold point must only be released by the nominated quality assurance verifier who must physically inspect the works and the completed lot records to verify compliance with the inspection and test plan and the design documentation before releasing the hold point .
num.anum product identification and traceability the contractors procedures and systems for records management must ensure that every work lot required to construct the works is uniquely identified each work lot is recorded on the inspection and test plan for the relevant work package within the work breakdown structure the lot records for each work lot are traceable to the work lot and to the relevant checkpoint within the applicable inspection and test plan and all requisitions for testing and the corresponding test certificates are traceable to the relevant lot record .
num.anum commissioning plans commissioning plans must be prepared for any commissioning tests that are required under the contract must be identified in a schedule in the quality plan which shows the proposed date for submission unless otherwise specified must be submitted to the superintendent at least num business days prior to the planned commencement of the respective commissioning tests and must be amended to address nonconformances notified by the superintendent before the commissioning tests commence .
each commissioning plan must define the tests required for each specified performance requirement when the tests will be undertaken the test methods the responsible testing authority arrangements for witnessing of tests by the superintendent and the form and content of the test reports .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth num.anum construction procedures the contractor must ensure that documented construction procedures will achieve specified requirements are understood and used by construction personnel identify hold points and witness points that must be notified to the superintendent and are reviewed for corrective action in the event of nonconformance .
construction procedures that are required under the contract to be submitted for review must be identified in a schedule in the quality plan which shows the proposed date for submission must be submitted to the superintendent at least num business days prior to the planned commencement of the respective construction activities and must be amended to address nonconformances notified by the superintendent before the construction activities commence .
num.anum control of nonconforming product the contractor must notify the principal and the superintendent of any nonconformance with respect to the contract requirements within num business days of the nonconformance being identified by the contractor or notified by the principal or the superintendent maintain a register in which each notice of nonconformance and the status of each notice is recorded review and analyse the cause of all nonconformances and develop a plan of corrective action to minimise the likelihood of reoccurrence .
the quality plan must include a procedure for managing nonconformances and identify which of the following options is proposed rectification to achieve full compliance thereby extinguishing the nonconformance a design change to accommodate the nonconformance whilst still meeting all specified requirements repairs permitted by the relevant reference documents subject to the principal accepting proposed repair procedures and inspection and test plans the principal accepting the nonconformance as a defect .
a work lot nonconformance must be treated as a hold point which must not be released until a procedure for managing nonconformances acceptable to the principal is submitted to the principal and the superintendent the superintendent has been notified of the intended release of the hold point the works and the lot records have been inspected to verify that the accepted procedure for managing nonconformances has been implemented or any work lot nonconformance accepted by the principal as a defect has been recorded in the defect register and department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth each notice of nonconformance must be recorded in the register as either a work lot non conformance or a process nonconformance and the status of each notice of non conformance must be recorded as open in the register until in the case of process nonconformances closure has been authorised by the quality manager or in the case of work lot nonconformances the associated hold point has been released .
the register must enable each work lot nonconformance to be traced to the affected work package in the work breakdown structure .
num.anum progressive closure of work lots the quality plan must include procedures that will ensure that work packages are closed as soon as practicable after completion of the work lots within the work package .
work packages must not be closed until all related inspections have been completed all tests have been completed and the results recorded all nonconformances have been notified and recorded in the register of notices of nonconformance all nonconformances have either been closed or with the superintendents approval transferred to the defects list all changes to design details have been recorded and cross referenced to the relevant design change notice on a marked up and certified copy of the relevant drawings the complete set of construction records are available for inspection by the principal and the superintendent via the online access service the designated quality assurance verifier authorises closure of the inspection and test plan to which the work lots relate and closure of the work package is recorded in the contractors records management system .
work packages must be closed before the work package is covered up unless approved otherwise by the superintendent manufactured components including precast and fabricated components are erected or installed into the works the work package can be recorded as completed on a progress certificate .
num.anum defects prior to completion of the works and for the duration of the defects liability period the contractor must maintain a register for monitoring the rectification of any defects recorded in the process of closure of work packages or identified by the contractor or notified by the principal or superintendent after closure of the respective work packages .
records of defects must not be deleted from the defects register .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth the defects register must identify the asset component to which the defect relates include sufficient detail to enable the defect to be readily located identify any defects proposed to be accepted by the principal and include references to any correspondence between the parties in respect of such defects show details of the proposed rectification plan record when the defect is rectified and when the defect is closed .
a defect must not be closed in the defects register unless the rectification plan has been accepted in writing by the principal a nominated quality assurance verifier has physically inspected the rectification works and verified compliance with the rectification plan and a nominated quality assurance verifier has authorised closure of the defect or the defect has been accepted in writing by the principal .
num.anum audits by the contractor the contractor shall carry out audits in accordance with the requirements of asnzs iso num guidelines for quality andor environmental management systems auditing .
the contractor shall prepare an audit and surveillance schedule for each subcontractor which shall be submitted to the superintendent for review prior to the commencement of work by the subcontractor .
the contractor shall conduct regular surveillance and audits of all onsite and offsite subcontractors sufficient to ensure that all work and materials comply with the contract .
the contractor shall notify the superintendent of the times when formal audits of a subcontractor are to occur .
the contractor shall carry out surveillance for precast concrete structural steelwork and protective coatings of structural steelwork in accordance with the following references vicroads technical bulletin no num guide to surveillance of structural steelwork vicroads technical bulletin no num guide to surveillance of precast concrete vicroads technical bulletin no num guide to surveillance of protective coatings of structural steelwork .
the contractor shall comply with all the requirements of these references including using companies accredited by nata for surveillance of these respective activities and surveillance officers engaged by these companies having the qualifications and experience specified in these respective references .
num.anum records during the execution of work under the contract the contractor shall maintain records pertaining to the contract in accordance with the contract and the contractors quality system .
the contractor shall maintain the following records as a minimum all test records all relevant survey information department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth all plant and labour records confirming daily usage and work activities throughout the contract all weather records and copies of all construction programs .
the contractor must establish records management procedures and systems that will ensure that the design and construction records identified in the left column of table num.anum below including records for works undertaken by subcontractors are integrated within a system managed by the contractor the principal and the superintendent have convenient online access electronic documents accessible via the internet to the design and construction records and .
design and construction records are recorded progressively and promptly in the system to show as far as reasonably practicable the current status of the works .
table num.anum design construction records reporting variables the work breakdown structure project section or asset type ifc design documentation project section design change notices work breakdown structure or design drawing number construction procedures itp work lot record templates work lot register work breakdown structure or status closed work lot records work breakdown structure sampling and test results register work lot or test laboratory asbuilt drawings work breakdown structure notice of nonconformance register work breakdown structure defects register work breakdown structure the contractor shall make all records pertaining to the contract available to the superintendent at all times and when requested by the superintendent the contractor shall provide a copy of the requested records within num business days .
the online access must present records in a format acceptable to the principal and the superintendent enable convenient searching and selection of records based on the reporting variables specified in the right column of table num.anum enable printing of reports or downloading of reports in electronic microsoft office or adobe pdf format .
further to definition of practical completion in the general conditions of contract the supply of the following documents are deemed to be essential for the use operation and maintenance of the works completed works report contract records asconstructed drawings service installations and relocations department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth design calculations .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth the contractors records management system shall include the provision of these documents by the contractor to the superintendent for review and acceptance prior to issue of a certificate of practical completion .
within num days of the submission of each document the superintendent shall advise whether the document is accepted .
the completed works report shall include completed copies of the relevant forms listed below .
gnum.c.num pavement construction record gnum.c.num misc .
pavement construction and road layout record gnum.c.num minor culverts record gnum.c.numa traffic facilities record gnum.c.numb signs gnum.c.num wearing surface record gnum.c.num surface treatment water blasting gnum.c.num pavement marking record gnum.c.num bridge completion report .
electronic copies of the above form in the required microsoft excel format are available for download at httpwww.transport.tas.gov.auroadspecificationsspecification_listings the completed works report shall also contain the following information records on the condition of the completed works e.g .
roughness surveys deflection surveys baselines for corrosion or other protection systems and records relevant to assessing the structural capacity of the works including where applicable subsurface conditions foundations and substructures .
the contractor must provide an electronic copy of the design and construction records to the principal prior to final completion in a format that will enable the records to be archived in the principals asset management system num.anum asconstructed drawings an electronic version of the design drawings will be supplied to the contractor by the superintendent prior of giving possession of site .
changes made by the contractor to the supplied autocad dwg or dxf drawings shall be in accordance with standard specification tnum cadd manual .
a set of asconstructed drawings in both autocad dwg or dxf format and adobe acrobat pdf format shall be produced from these autocad files at a resolution suitable for effective interpretation .
drawings should be marked with the latest revision number and titled as constructed on each drawing .
any changed information is to be enclosed in a cloud bubble on the plan for easy identification .
as constructed information for installed and relocated services shall be included on the drawings and shall also be provided to each service authority with the relevant details and in the required formats to meet their individual requirements for this documentation .
copies of this information with confirmation of receipt and acceptance by the service authority shall be supplied by the contractor to the superintendent .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth for works requiring the design and construction or renewal of structures the design calculations pertaining to the issued for construction design drawings will be supplied to the superintendent .
this shall be completed by the contractor prior to the superintendent issuing the certificate for practical completion num.anum surveillance and audits by the superintendent the superintendent will arrange surveillance and audits to ensure that the contractor is complying with the quality management system .
the contractor shall upon being given reasonable notice by the superintendent make or arrange to be available all facilities documentation records and personnel including those of any subcontractors that are reasonably required for audits to be undertaken .
notwithstanding that the principal may have previously undertaken audits of a subcontractors quality management system in connection with other work the contractor shall include the operations of all such subcontractors in the contract quality plan and shall fulfil all the quality obligations of the contract .
the principal will carry out audit and surveillance of the work of all subcontractors as it sees fit in the same way that it may carry out audit and surveillance of all work done and materials supplied by the contractor .
the superintendent may for this purpose have recourse to audit and surveillance carried out for other contracts with the principal .
copies of any such audit and surveillance reports used by the superintendent will be provided to the contractor .
the superintendent must be granted access to inspect and audit the contractors design and construction records and if requested by the superintendent the contractor must arrange for personnel to explain the design and construction records .
the superintendent must notify the contractor at least num business day prior to an inspection specifying the scope of the records to be made available for audit .
num.anum road safety audits the contractor shall carry out road safety audits at the stages of the works as set out below .
road safety audits shall be carried out in accordance with the austroads guide to road safety part num road safety audit .
the audit team shall be lead by a senior road safety auditor who has undertaken appropriate training in road safety audits .
other team members shall also have undertaken appropriate training in road safety audits .
road safety auditors shall be independent of any other commitment or obligation to the contractor or consultant carrying out the design for the contract .
audits shall be conducted at the stages nominated in table num.anum .
road safety audits shall be completed and all issues raised in the audit responded to prior to commencement of the next stage of work .
the contractor shall ensure that road safety audits are incorporated into its design management plan its construction management plan and the contractors program .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth table num.anum strikethrough inapplicable rows stage of work timeframe for road safety audit to be undertaken timeframe for submission of road safety audit report a preliminary design within num days of completion within num days of completion of the audit b detailed design within num days of completion within num days of completion of the audit c during construction where traffic management measures are proposed as specified in traffic management clauses as specified in traffic management clauses d preopening num days prior to opening road to traffic no later than num days prior to opening road to traffic e postopening num hours after opening road to traffic within num days of completion of the audit the superintendent may request comment by the senior road safety auditor on road safety issues associated with the contract .
the preopening road safety audit report shall identify issues that require rectification prior to opening the road to traffic .
strikethrough this paragraph if it is inappropriate the principal has undertaken a road safety audit of the tender design drawings provided in volume of tender documents .
the resulting report has been included as appendix of the specification and for the purpose of this clause shall be deemed to be the necessary road safety audit of the draft functional design .
the contractor shall promptly address all issues raised in road safety audits and shall prepare a written response to the audit that details action takento be taken to address each issue raised provides justification for proposals not to undertake action on particular issues raised highlights issues raised not considered to be the responsibility of the contractor .
where the contractor proposes not to undertake action in response to identified issues the approval of the superintendent shall be obtained .
the contractor shall provide to the superintendent a copy of the road safety audit report together with the contractors written response to the report within the timeframes specified in table num.anum .
the contractor shall prepare and maintain a register of all road safety audits .
the register shall include audit stage and date summary of each issue status of action to address each issue verification of completed action .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part b industrial num.bnum rates of pay and conditions of employment the contractor shall at its own cost inform and keep itself informed of and comply with all state and federal industrial legislation regulations and industrial awards to which the contractor is bound and any certified agreements and industrial agreements to which the contractor is party .
the contract sum will be deemed to include the cost of all wages conditions and other costs arising from compliance with legislation regulations awards certified agreements and industrial agreements applicable to the contractor and no adjustment will be made to the contract on account of such requirements or any new matter introduced into an award or any certified agreement or industrial agreement .
persons who are required under part num of the education act num to be enrolled at a school or be provided with home education must not be employed on works under the contract .
num.bnum work bans and limitations the contractor shall keep the superintendent informed concerning any industrial or occupational health and safety matter which affects or may affect work under the contract and shall also inform the superintendent of action being taken by the contractor to resolve such matters .
the contractor shall make no claim against the department of state growth for any costs loss expense or damage arising from any industrial action resulting in a strike work stoppage work ban or work limitations of any kind .
the superintendent may grant an extension of time for completion pursuant to the general conditions of contract for lost time arising from industrial action outside the control of the contractor .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part c site num.cnum commencement of work hp the contractor shall not commence work on site before the following documents have been submitted to the superintendent and the superintendent has authorised release of the hold point a evidence of public liability and workers compensation insurance conforming with the requirements of the general conditions of contract b third party property damage insurance in accordance with clause num.gnum c health and safety coordination plan d environmental management plan for initial works e traffic management strategy and traffic management plans for the initial works f any other relevant requirement of the contract .
any delays in the commencement of work due to the contractors failure to comply with these requirements will not be grounds for an extension of time for completion of the works or any separable part nor shall it form the basis of any claim for additional payment .
num.cnum contractors site compound the contractor shall erect maintain secure and subsequently remove such buildings compounds sanitary accommodation explosive magazines and associated services as required by the contractor for the supervision and construction of the works .
workplace amenities facilities and environment shall be in accordance with worksafe code of practice managing the work environment and facilities ..
the contractor shall obtain all necessary local municipal permits and approvals associated with the site establishment and access arrangements associated with its site compound .
the location and form of such buildings and compounds shall a minimise noise disturbance and inconvenience to all abutting properties b maintain a minimum clearance of num m to the closest boundary of all abutting properties c be consistent with and complement the environmental management plan and health and safety coordination plan d provide suitable hardstand areas for storage of materials and equipment and parking vehicles e allow for all pedestrian traffic .
the contractor subject to the agreement of the superintendent and the local municipal authority may be permitted to use portions of the site for establishment of buildings and compounds .
the buildings compounds associated services sanitary accommodation and explosive magazines erected by the contractor shall be regarded as materials or constructional plant and as such shall be considered as constructional plant under the general conditions of contract .
at the completion of the works these facilities will remain the property of the contractor and shall be removed from the site and the area reinstated to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
num.cnum sanitary accommodation department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth the contractor shall allow its toilets and washing facilities to be used by the superintendents representatives .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth num.cnum superintendent representatives site office strikethrough if not required the contractor shall provide an office at the site for the exclusive use of the superintendents representatives within num business days of taking possession of the site .
the office amenities facilities and working environment shall be in accordance with worksafe code of practice managing the work environment and facilities .
the office shall also be fitted to provide the following requirements strikethrough items below if not required suitable desk accommodation for persons with ergonomic furniture in good condition including desks desk chairs shelving and a minimum of visitors chairs a drained sink with running hot and cold water with adjacent minimum bench area of num m x num m two telecommunication connections one of which shall be a high speed data port for each desk connected to the nearest exchange insert any further requirements restrict entries to one typed line in addition the contractor shall provide suitable hardstand parking for vehicles adjacent to the office for the exclusive use of superintendents representatives .
the department of state growth will pay monthly telephone and electricity usage charges where a separate account dedicated to the office is presented .
maintenance cleaning and servicing of this accommodation shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
upon completion of the contract the contractor shall arrange for the disconnection of any services and remove the building from the site .
num.cnum high visibility jackets all personnel including supervisors surveyors labourers and plant operators shall at all times wear high visibility clothing .
num.cnum contractors representatives on commencement of work the contractor shall advise the superintendent in writing of the names addresses and telephone numbers of employees who can be contacted in an emergency and out of hours .
any proposed changes shall be notified promptly to the superintendent and confirmed in writing .
num.cnum procurement of water for construction purposes the contractor shall make its own arrangements for water supply to provide the quantity and quality required to complete the work .
for any chosen source of water supply the contractor shall obtain the necessary approvals from the appropriate authorities and shall act in accordance with any conditions stipulated .
num.cnum major traffic control items details of the times and dates of erection and removal of major control items and of any changes to such items shall be forwarded to the superintendent for a direction as to suitability at least num business days prior to the erection and removal of or changes to the major traffic control items .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth num.cnum project information signs strikethrough if not required notwithstanding the provisions of section num the contractor shall supply install maintain and later remove project information signs as specified below a supply the contractor shall supply information signs in accordance with the requirements of section num manufacture of road signs .
information signs shall be regarded as a category b sign for the purposes of section num .
the letter size and style of the sign legend shall comply with the requirements of the drawings specified in the project information sign schedule in clause num.cnume .
b mounting and location the contractor shall mount the information signs on timber frangible posts in accordance with section num erection of signs .
c not used d not used e project information sign schedule the contractor shall provide information signs in accordance with the following schedule the sign typesdrawing numbers in the schedule below are applicable to state government funded works only in the case of federal government funded works contact state roads project manager for information on project information signing requirements and insert details in the schedule below project information sign schedule type in the appropriate requirements below serial sign type drawing no .
number required location a type num numb b type num numb f removal the project information signs shall remain in place for the defect liability period and be removed within num days of the issuing of final certificate .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part d program and progress num.dnum construction program a interpretation for the purposes of this subclause construction program means a program in the format of an activity orientated critical path network which shows how the contractor proposes to complete the works or any separable part of the works within the period or by the respective dates for practical completion .
b construction program requirements i no requirement strikethrough this requirement if inapplicable a construction program is not required to be submitted by the contractor .
items c d e f and g of this clause do not apply .
ii minor construction contracts strikethrough this requirement if inapplicable before commencing work under the contract the contractor shall supply to the superintendent for review a construction program illustrating the planned sequence of work .
the program shall be in bar chart form including the principal activities to be undertaken and restraints clearly identified with a time scale shown in weeks and months .
the program shall identify critical path activities include dates for starting and completion of the principal activities and planned dates for practical completion of the works or separable parts .
items c d e f and g of this clause shall apply as far as they are applicable .
iii major construction contracts strikethrough this requirement if inapplicable where a program has been provided as part of the tender it shall be incorporated into the contract until the construction program has been reviewed by the superintendent .
within num business days after the date of acceptance of tender the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for review a construction program which takes into account the requirements of the contract .
the program shall be submitted in both electronic format and hard copy .
the program shall be computer based using microsoft project num or an alternative computer program approved by the superintendent .
it shall be in sufficient detail to demonstrate any entitlement that the contractor may from time to time claim to have pursuant to the general conditions of contract and be capable of providing reports which are able to identify the following features in acceptable formats num. detailed activities for all work elements including design activities construction activities service relocations and work by statutory authorities num. procurement periods and delivery dates for major items of goods plant and materials num. activity dependencies num. critical path activities identified for the works and any separable portion of the works num. duration earliest and latest start and finish dates and total and free floats for each activity num. dates by which decisions or materials are required from the superintendent or the principal department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth num. milestones which identify significant events including completion of separable portions num. allowance for adverse weather and other time risk allowances num. nonwork periods num. dates by which design work or drawings to be produced by the contractor or samples will be submitted to the superintendent including allowance for reviews and resubmittals num. the estimated value of work to be done each month throughout the contract .
the contractor shall submit with the construction program the estimated contract value of work to be done each month throughout the contract and detailed reasons for any divergence from the program and cash flow submitted with the tender .
items c d e f and g of this clause shall apply .
iv utility service relocation in developing the construction program the contractor shall consider all issues associated with the relocation of public utility services .
the contractor shall fully inform itself of the impact of the works under the contract on existing services and make allowance in its construction program for the lead times required by each service authority for design liaison supply of materials notification to residents and construction periods including making allowance for any periods of the year when services can not be relocated .
the contractor shall consider the impacts of its service relocation strategy in the development of its construction program .
c review of submitted program i if the superintendent considers that the submitted construction program or any subsequent revision thereto does not show sufficient details or is impractical or does not comply with the requirements of the contract or will not result in completion of the works or any separable part of the works by the relevant date for practical completion the superintendent may direct the contractor to resubmit to the superintendent an amended construction program within num business days for further review .
ii should the submitted construction program provide for completion of the works or a separable part of the works in advance of the relevant times for practical completion and the superintendent does not direct the contractor to supply an amended construction program the contractor may proceed to prosecute the work in accordance with the submitted construction program at the contractors own risk .
the dates for particular activities or practical completion shown on a construction program will not be accepted as a substitute for any corresponding specified dates in the contract which shall continue to be the basis for assessment of progress of work and any claims made under the contract for extensions of time and additional costs .
d review of progress at generally monthly intervals unless otherwise agreed the contractor and the superintendent shall together review the progress of the work under the contract in comparison with the current construction program .
prior to the meeting the contractor shall update the current construction program to show the status and progress of work on each activity .
progress shall be recorded by means of actual start and actual finish dates for activities together with percentage completion andor remaining duration of incomplete activities .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth the review of progress will be conducted as a site meeting between representatives of the department of state growth and the contractor held generally monthly or at shorter intervals as decided by the superintendent .
reviews held as site meetings shall be chaired by the superintendent or the superintendents representative and minutes shall be prepared by the superintendent and distributed to the contractor within num business days of the meeting .
e updating and reporting on construction program the contractor shall maintain a complete record of the construction program and its changes on cddvd and in hardcopy throughout the contract .
i the contractor shall submit to the superintendent updated construction programs num. at intervals not exceeding num months during the contract or num. within num business days of any change to the critical path for the works or any separable part of the works .
num. within num business days of a request to do so from the superintendent including if applicable an explanation in writing of delays in execution of the work under the contract in comparison with the construction program .
ii updated construction programs shall provide the same level of detail as the original construction program and shall num. show the asconstructed program in respect of all work carried out to the time of updating num. be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for any changes from the previously submitted construction program num. incorporate all extensions of time which have previously been granted or allowed up to that time by the superintendent pursuant to subclause num of the general conditions of contract num. be accompanied by a statement of any claims for extensions of time which have previously been notified by the contractor in accordance with subclause num of the general conditions of contract in respect of which the superintendent is yet to determine .
iii any updated construction program submitted in accordance with i above shall be reviewed by the superintendent on the basis set out in item c above .
f rate of progress where the superintendent at any time considers that the rate of progress is insufficient to ensure completion of the works or any separable part of the works by the relevant date for practical completion the superintendent may direct the contractor to submit within num business days written details of the intended procedure for the execution of the remainder of the work under the contract .
g failure to submit construction program where the contract requires the contractor to provide to the superintendent a construction program no payment will be made to the contractor until the contractor has furnished to the superintendent a construction program that accords with the requirements of the contract .
num.dnum adverse weather conditions not used department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth num.dnum working hours before commencing work under the contract the contractor shall advise the superintendent in writing the working hours proposed for the execution of the work under the contract .
further to the provisions of clause num of the general conditions of contract a no work shall be carried out between good friday and easter monday inclusive on any sunday public holiday or during the christmas to new year periods b no work shall be carried out on the site outside the period between numam or sunrise whichever is the later and numpm or sunset whichever is the earlier unless otherwise specified or approved by the superintendent .
work outside the proposed working hours without written approval of the superintendent may proceed only in the following situations in cases of emergency where situations would create significant traffic disruption andor hazardous conditions unless rectified or when plant breakdown or extenuating circumstances have delayed an activity that can not be stopped .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part e site and execution of work num.enum site management and supervision strikethrough inapplicable requirements below a site supervision the contractors site management programming and program control quality assurance and methods of work shall be supervised daily by an experienced and qualified engineer .
this engineer shall possess the experience and qualifications which would be acceptable to the institution of engineers australia as satisfying the requirements for corporate membership including at least num years experience in the relevant construction field .
b site survey for the purposes of setting out the works in conformity with the specification and drawings the contractor shall engage an experienced and qualified surveyor .
this surveyor shall possess the experience and qualifications which would be acceptable to the institution of surveyors australia as satisfying the requirements for corporate or associate membership or alternatively possess the experience and qualifications which would be acceptable for membership to the institution of engineering and mining surveyors australia .
the surfaces and quantities measured by the contractor under this contract shall be made available to the superintendent in an electronic format or other format approved by the superintendent .
c landscape supervisor the contractor shall nominate a landscape supervisor to be on site for the duration of all landscape work .
this person shall have a landscape trade certificate tafe equivalent qualification or at least num years horticultural expertise on work of a similar size and scope .
should the contractors site supervisory staff prove unsatisfactory with respect to progress quality of work and methods of work the superintendent may direct the contractor to provide such additional competent and experienced staff as may be necessary to ensure satisfactory progress of the works and that the quality and the methods of work are acceptable .
num.enum provisional items a general prior to commencement of any works to be undertaken on provisional items the contractor shall obtain approval of the superintendent for the works to proceed .
b establishment of daywork rates i labour and plant within num business days of a request by the superintendent the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for acceptance daywork rates for labour and plant not included in the schedule of daywork rates and which are proposed to be employed for work included under this clause .
where no schedule of daywork rates was included in the tender documents the daywork rates submitted for acceptance by the superintendent shall apply to all labour and plant proposed to be used for the work .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth the rates shall be submitted as hourly rates or where daily rates are used the hourly rate shall be taken to be onetenth of the daily rate .
these rates shall also cover all overhead administrative costs all operator costs including site allowances mobilisation costs fuel servicing and profits and if accepted shall be taken into account by the superintendent in making a determination pursuant to clause numof the general conditions of contract .
ii materials the maximum allowance for management supervision administrative costs overheads and profit for the supply of materials directed by the superintendent to be incorporated into the works as part of directed daywork shall be num and shall be applied to the actual costs of the material supplied .
if the rates submitted by the contractor for labour and plant are considered to be unacceptable the superintendent will advise the contractor accordingly within num business days after which the contractor shall resubmit within num business days amended rates for acceptance .
if such rates are still unacceptable the superintendent will set rates within num business days of the submission of the amended rates .
in setting the rates for labour and plant the superintendent will consider current market rates other contract rates for similar labour or items of plant doing similar work on other contracts the model age and condition of items of plant proposed for use on the works by the contractor and other relevant information and factors .
daywork rates submitted with the tender will be subject to the relevant price adjustments provided for in the contract .
daywork rates submitted and accepted or set by the superintendent during the contract will not be subject to price adjustment but may be reviewed at periods not less than num months .
dayworks shall not proceed using labour plant and materials which do not have daywork rates accepted or set by the superintendent .
labour plant and materials used for urgent repairs in accordance with clause num of the general conditions of contract and for which no daywork rates have been accepted or set by the superintendent will be paid for in accordance with the provision of clause num of the general conditions of contract .
num.enum cooperation the department of state growth reserves the right to perform work or award other contracts for work on or adjacent to the site .
the contractor shall cooperate with all other contractors and other work forces so as to avoid delay or hindrance to their work and to ensure that all work is performed expeditiously .
num.enum maintenance of site the contractor shall in accordance with the requirements of section num of contract specific clauses maintain the roads and all other road reservation areas within the limits of works for the period between the date of possession of site and practical completion of the whole of the works including periods of suspension .
the contractor shall respond to an emergency with an initial emergency response unit consisting of the following a minimum of num personnel with appropriate traffic management qualifications and vehicle an emergency kit of temporary warning signs flashing lights barriers safety clothing shovels brooms chainsaw and a mobile telephone .
in addition the contractor shall maintain on site num m of sand or other absorptive product and num m of premix asphalt exclusively for use in the event of an emergency .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth immediately following achievement of practical completion of the contract the contractor and the superintendents representative shall conduct a routine maintenance condition survey of the whole of the maintenance area to record those maintenance elements outside the specified intervention standard .
where a maintenance feature is identified outside the specified intervention standard the superintendent may a direct the contractor to bring the deficient asset feature elements to within the specified intervention standard within a period to be determined by the superintendent or b arrange for the rectification of those features by others and in this event a deduction will be made to the contract sum for the full cost of such works .
the superintendent will provide a written record of the contract completion condition survey to the contractor within num business days of the completion of the survey .
the superintendents ruling on the condition of any asset feature element will be final .
num.enum examination and testing of materials and work a general the contractor shall be responsible for carrying out all examination and testing of materials and work under the contract in accordance with the requirements of the specification .
unless otherwise specified materials and workmanship shall comply with the relevant standard as defined in section num. b allowance for testing in construction program the contractor shall make allowance in the construction program for the time necessary to arrange for and to carry out examination and testing of materials and work .
c notification where inspection of materials or work by the superintendent or his representative is specified as a hold point or where a hold point is created by a nonconformance at least num hours notice of testing andor inspection shall be given to the superintendent .
d tests unless otherwise specified all tests and sampling shall be undertaken in accordance with the appropriate vicroads codes of practice and applicable test methods as current at the time of performance of the tests .
unless otherwise specified all tests shall be conducted by experienced testing officers in a laboratory accredited by the national association of testing authorities nata for the test methods used under the contract and all tests shall be endorsed in accordance with the nata registration for that laboratory .
lists of current vicroads codes of practice are available online at the vicroads website www.vicroads.vic.gov.au .
all construction materials sampling shall be undertaken by either i personnel from a nata laboratory accredited for the appropriate sampling methods or ii personnel who have successfully completed an accredited tafe course in sampling of construction materials delivered by a registered training organisation and have taken a refresher course in sampling of construction materials every three years .
the sampler shall be identified on the test report .
e test results the contractor shall submit to the superintendent a monthly summary or if requested by the superintendent a weekly summary of testing undertaken .
the summary shall department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth include details of all tests undertaken the result of each test and sufficient additional information to demonstrate that the specified minimum frequency of testing is being complied with .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth the summary of test results shall be submitted to the superintendent by the second day of the week following the relevant period .
f calibration all test equipment used for tests carried out in accordance with clause num.enumd above shall be calibrated by a laboratory accredited by nata for the particular calibration method .
num.enum blasting strikethrough a or b below as appropriate a blasting shall not be undertaken in the execution of the work under the contract .
b blasting may be permitted in the execution of the work under the contract .
unless otherwise consented to by the superintendent no explosives shall be manufactured or charges loaded before numam or after numpm or on any day other than an ordinary working day and no charge shall be primed and no shot fired before numam or after numpm .
the contractor shall give occupants of nearby buildings and structures and owners of underground services adequate notice of intended blasting .
prior to blasting the contractor shall arrange with occupants and the owners of underground services for any necessary protection of persons property or livestock .
num.enum drainage of work site the contractor shall at all times provide for the safe discharge of seepage drainage and stormwater during the execution of the works under the contract .
the contractor shall be responsible to obtain all approvals from the local authorities and accept all costs associated with the discharge of any water into an existing outfall on a temporary or permanent basis .
num.enum clean up of site unless otherwise specified the contractor shall remove from site before the cessation of work each day all temporary or surplus material not forming part of the specified works .
the contractor shall be responsible for the proper disposal of the temporary or surplus material and no additional payment will be made for this work .
num.enum instructions by other government departments and authorities other government departments and authorities and their representatives whether federal state or local often have responsibilities that impact on department of state growths works .
the contractor shall report any instruction orders or directions given by an authorised representative of these government departments and authorities to the superintendent immediately by mobile phone or as soon as practicably possible .
the contractor shall cooperate with an authorised representative who is requesting access to the site under powers conferred by legislation and follow any instructions given by the authorised representative in the format nominated by the legislation .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part f offsite num.fnum inspection of property prior to commencing operations the contractor shall engage a suitably qualified and experienced architectural consultant to undertake inspections on all buildings and structures including heritage structures within a minimum distance of e.g .
num m of the site .
two copies of the written existing conditions report for each property including any photographs shall be prepared and signed by the property owner and the architectural consultant .
the condition of the buildings structures and the property shall be detailed in the existing conditions reports which shall form the basis of assessment of any structural damage to buildings and structures arising out of the contractors operations in the event of a claim by the owneroccupier .
the contractor shall be responsible for the repair of any damage caused to property due to the contractors operations .
the contractor shall submit to the superintendent a copy of all existing condition reports of property and buildings prior to commencing work adjacent to such property or building .
the copy of this report will be returned to the contractor within num business days of submission .
for the purposes of this clause the site is defined as the nearest point of the work adjacent to any building or structure .
the contractor shall bear all costs associated with any claim for damages resulting from the effects of the contractors operations including ground vibration directly caused by the contractors construction methods .
the cost of such damage shall be in addition to damage caused by other action attributed to the contractors work .
before final payment is made the contractor shall obtain written clearance from all landowners and occupiers affected by the provision of this clause to certify that the landowner and occupier have no claim for any loss or damage due to the contractors operation .
a copy of all written clearances shall be forwarded to the superintendent prior to the contractors final claim .
num.fnum work in private property where the contractor is authorised by the superintendent to enter private property to carry out work under the contract the contractor shall give the occupier of the land a minimum of num business days notice of intention to enter or to remove any fence and shall also erect any temporary fencing that may be necessary .
entry shall be by a gate or gates to be erected by the contractor which shall be kept securely locked when not in use .
where fences are rabbit proof the gates erected shall also be made and kept rabbit proof and the contractor shall be responsible and liable for the trespass of vermin .
num.fnum clearances from landowners and occupiers before final payment is made the contractor shall produce written clearances from all landowners and occupiers whose properties have been entered by the contractor or the contractors employees or agents for the purpose of carrying out work under the contract to certify that the landowner and occupier have no claim against the department of state growth for any loss or damage due to the contractors operations and that the land and improvements have been left in a satisfactory condition .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth num.fnum community liaison strikethrough if not required where the work under the contract may cause disruption annoyance or inconvenience to stakeholders including residents businesses and travelling public the contractor shall be responsible for all aspects of stakeholder consultation and advice to the public .
such advice shall include reasonable notice to support a high level of community awareness prior to particular eventsactivities that will affect stakeholders responding to any queries and resolution of issues during particular eventsactivities and postimplementation advice to respond to any queries and resolve difficulties .
the contractor must identify how they will communicate with stakeholders and include consideration of protocols for liaising with all stakeholders including emergency services and the media who should be consultedinformed stakeholder categories why they should be consultedinformed stakeholder interest andor influence what should be communicated key messages when it should be communicated timing how it should be communicated communication tools and pathways protocols for dealing with public complaints and feedback .
the contractor shall not issue any public information concerning the project including publications documents andor social media content in any media without prior approval of the superintendent which shall not unreasonably be withheld .
the contractor shall provide to the superintendent a copy of any material intended for public distribution about the project with at least num days notice prior to the intended distribution date .
the contractor shall immediately refer to the superintendent all enquiries concerning the project from any media .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with a minimum num days notice of any request to work outside approved normal working hours .
the contractor shall maintain and submit to the superintendent on a monthly basis a communications register of all public media and other stakeholder complaints and enquiries made directly to the contractor in relation to the contract .
the contractor shall maintain a customer public point of contact name and phone number and submit this to the superintendent at least num days prior to any works commencing .
the contractor shall not be required to answer questionsissuesconcerns that relate to the rationale for the project the scope of work provided for under the contract or other project issues not within the contractors control .
such matters shall be recorded and advised to the superintendent .
the contractor shall immediately advise the superintendent of any media enquiries or unannounced site visits by media councilors or politicians .
the contractor shall direct all media enquiries to the superintendent .
num.fnum use and care of roads the contractor shall be responsible for repair of damage caused to any roads bridges or other structures by transporting material under the contract .
the contractor is advised that the department of state growth and municipal councils have power under their respective acts to recover the cost of repair of damage to roads .
if requested by the superintendent the contractor shall submit clearances from municipal and other authorities concerned before the final certificate is issued .
in respect of repair of damage to roads the contractor will be deemed when tendering department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth a to have inspected the roads used for transport b to have acquired by consultation with the municipal or other authorities concerned knowledge of the roads and any existing or likely restrictions upon their use which could affect the transport proposals c to have assessed the possibility and extent of any damage to the roads which may be caused by transport under the contract d to have made due allowance for the effects of such restrictions and for the cost of rectification of such damage in accordance with the requirements of the authorities concerned .
num.fnum failure to lodge security deposit and return of executed contract documents no contract payments will be made until the contract security has been lodged with the principal .
payment will also be withheld where signed contract documents have not been returned within num business days of being issued by the principal .
num.fnum security further to clause num of the general conditions of contract the contractor shall provide performance security as detailed in annexure part a of the general conditions of contract .
num.fnum goods and services tax a any contract lump sum amounts or rates in contract schedules of rates are exclusive of any gst but are inclusive of all the contractors expenses insurance duties imposts charges and taxes payable by the contractor .
b all invoices shall be in the form of a tax invoice as defined in the relevant legislation including supplying the contractors australian business number .
the gst component of the invoice shall be separately identified .
the contractor shall provide any other requisite information to enable the department of state growth to claim any related input tax credits .
the department of state growth will pay to the contractor on any supply in accordance with this contract an amount equivalent to the gst payable by the contractor under gst law .
c in this clause gst law means a new tax system goods and services tax act num as amended and includes any act of the australian parliament that imposes or deals with gst .
num.fnum payment of subcontractors not used num.fnum defects liability further to clause num of the general conditions of contract any omissions and defects which existed at the commencement date of the defects liability period shall be corrected by the contractor within the time nominated by the superintendent in writing .
where the superintendent has not nominated the time for correction of omissions and defects the contractor shall undertake any required work within num business days of the commencement date of the defects liability period .
num.fnum final statement by contractor department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth not used department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part g insurance and incident reporting the contractor shall comply with all insurance requirements contained in the general conditions of contract including any annexures .
num.gnum incident reporting the contractor shall implement and maintain an incident reporting system for the duration of the contract .
the contractor shall enter into the incident reporting system details of all incidents including near incidents arising from or relating to the work under the contract or on or adjacent to the site during the contract term which may or could have resulted in claims for personal injury or property damage to third parties .
the incident reporting system shall record all incidents in respect of which any third party may claim .
this shall include any possible claim for personal injury and all damage to property in excess of num .
the incident reporting system shall also record details of notes records and photographs or any other evidence relating to any incident .
the incident reporting system shall also record details of any injury or damage caused by registered motor vehicles .
num.gnum reportable incidents upon the happening of any incident likely to give rise to a claim under any insurance policy effected by the principal the contractor shall give notice thereof the superintendent as soon as possible .
without prejudice to the generality of the obligation to report incidents the contractor shall notify in accordance with this cause all incidents that involve a personal injury unless trivial b minors num years old c serious near misses d triggering a sixth sense of a dangerous situation e damage to a third partys property which is likely to exceed num f ohs claims where the actions of one worker could be said to have caused injury .
num.gnum actions in respect of incidents the contractor shall take immediate steps to minimise the extent of personal injury or property damage arising from an incident .
the contractor shall take careful note of the evidence surrounding the incident including notes or reports of the facts relating thereto and photographs .
the contractor shall as soon as practicable inform the principal in writing of any incident that may give rise to a claim under an insurance policy effected as required by any of the insurance clauses under the general conditions of contract and shall ensure that the superintendent is kept fully informed of the incident the subsequent action and developments concerning the claim .
the contractor shall take such steps as are necessary or appropriate to ensure that a sub contractor shall in respect to an event or claim of a like nature arising out of or relating to the operations or responsibilities of the subcontractor take in relation to the superintendent the like action to that which the contractor is required to take under this clause .
where the incident is reportable to the principals insurer under its policy the contractor shall at its own expense in accordance with policy conditions department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth a notify the principals insurer immediately num by telephone if the matter is sufficiently serious to alert the principals insurer and seek advice num in writing with a copy to the superintendent and preserve any evidence such as notes or photographs b send to the principals insurer immediately upon receipt any letter of demand writ claim summons or proceedings or other like documentation c cooperate at its own cost with the principals insurer in the investigation and defence of claims including attendance at court if required .
num.gnum monthly reporting the contractor shall report monthly to the superintendent on all incidents included in the incident reporting system including details of which matters have been reported to the principals insurer together with the date of such report and the status of resolution of each incident .
num.gnum auditing of incident reporting system the contractor shall permit the superintendent staff of the principals insurer its auditors or any other auditors approved by the superintendent to access and audit the incident reporting system and any documentation associated with claims or relating to incidents or near incidents and to take copies of any documents associated with claims or relating to the incidents .
num.gnum general the effecting of insurance as required by the insurance clauses in this contract shall not in any way limit or derogate from the liabilities or obligations of the contractor in performing its work under the contract .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth section num bituminous surfacing and cold planing general this section crossreferences sections num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent part a quality management system part b industrial part c site part d environmental management part e program and progress part f site and execution of work part g offsite part h insurance and incident reporting part a quality management system num .
anum the quality management system the contractor shall plan develop and maintain a documented quality management system in accordance with this specification and with australian standard asnzs iso num quality management systems requirements except for requirements of clause num design and development .
the quality management system shall cover all work under the contract .
num .
anum hold points definition those points beyond which the work may not proceed without review by the superintendent .
hold points are identified in the specification by the letters hp in the left margin and by bold text print or arise from nonconformances .
the review by the superintendent of a hold point will not relieve the contractor of responsibility for satisfactory execution or performance of the work .
the superintendent must be given reasonable notice of intended release of each hold point and may nominate persons to attend the release of each hold point .
unless otherwise specified or agreed by the superintendent reasonable notice means at least num business days .
text which is bolded but not identified by the letters hp in the left margin is not a hold point .
these are specified obligations on the contractor requiring the review or approval of the superintendent .
they are bolded for ease of identification .
num .
anum quality management system documents further to the general conditions of contract the contractor shall submit for consideration by the superintendent the following a a controlled copy of the contract specific quality plan within weeks of the date of acceptance of the tender i.e .
a document setting out the specific quality practices resources activities and responsibilities relevant to the contract b specific quality proceduresdescriptions relating to the work not less than num days prior to the commencement of that work .
however for works proposed at the commencement of the contract for which num days is not possible a period of num working days will be accepted .
unless otherwise specified quality plans are not required for annual supply contracts .
department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth num .
anum additional quality management system requirements the contractor shall comply with the specified australian standard for quality management systems .
in addition the following requirements shall be satisfied a for asnzs iso num i identification the contractor shall identify all test results with the precise locations to which they relate .
ii traceability traceability is not required unless otherwise specified .
iii testing the frequency of testing shall be adequate to demonstrate compliance with the specification .
in some instances the minimum frequency of testing is covered in the specification .
iv special processes notwithstanding any special processes which may be identified by the contractor special processes shall include the processes in table num.anum .
table num.anum special processes special processes b nonconformance all nonconformances where the disposition of the nonconformance violates the contractual requirements are to be promptly reported to the superintendent for agreement via nonconformance reports .
such nonconformances automatically create hold points .
further all nonconformance reports shall include i the cause of the nonconformance ii the proposed method of rectifying the nonconformance and iii the proposed changes made to the work procedures to prevent a recurrence .
c audits audits carried out by the contractor to comply with the requirements of the relevant quality management system standard shall be conducted by a qualified auditor in accordance with asnzs iso num guidelines for auditing management systems .
d defects prior to completion of the works and for the duration of the defects liability period the contractor must maintain a register for monitoring the rectification of any defects recorded in the process of closure of work packages or identified by the contractor or notified by the principal or superintendent after closure of the respective work packages .
records of defects must not be deleted from the defects register .
department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth the defects register must identify the asset component to which the defect relates include sufficient detail to enable the defect to be readily located identify any defects proposed to be accepted by the principal and include references to any correspondence between the parties in respect of such defects show details of the proposed rectification plan record when the defect is rectified and when the defect is closed .
a defect must not be closed in the defects register unless the rectification plan has been accepted in writing by the principal a nominated quality assurance verifier has physically inspected the rectification works and verified compliance with the rectification plan and a nominated quality assurance verifier has authorised closure of the defect or the defect has been accepted in writing by the principal .
num .
anum records the contractor must establish records management procedures and systems that will ensure that the design and construction records including records for works undertaken by subcontractors are integrated within a system managed by the contractor the principal and the superintendent have convenient online access electronic documents accessible via the internet to the design and construction records and .
design and construction records are recorded progressively and promptly in the system to show as far as reasonably practicable the current status of the works .
the contractor shall make all records pertaining to the contract available to the superintendent at all times .
where requested by the superintendent the contractor shall provide the superintendent with a copy of records .
within num weeks of the date of practical completion and before issue of the final certificate whichever is earlier the contractor shall make available a register of all records held .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with a copy of such records or part thereof as requested .
within num weeks of the date of practical completion and before issue of the final certificate whichever is earlier the contractor shall provide asconstructed drawings in accordance with the following requirements a asconstructed drawings with departures clearly marked shall show the works as constructed b the location of services within the limits of the work shall be clearly marked .
this is not practical for sprayed sealing and asphalt resurfacing contracts it really applies to new pavement constructions and bridge works num .
anum surveillance and audits by superintendent the superintendent will arrange surveillance and audits to ensure that the contractor is complying with the quality and environmental management systemplan .
the contractor shall upon being given reasonable notice by the superintendent make or arrange to be available all facilities documentation records and personnel including those of any subcontractors that are reasonably required for the audit or surveillance to be undertaken .
department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth notwithstanding that the principal may have previously undertaken audits of a subcontractors quality management system in connection with other work the contractor shall include the operations of all such subcontractors in the contract quality plan and shall fulfil all the quality obligations of the contract .
the superintendent will carry out audit and surveillance of the work of all subcontractors as it sees fit in the same way that it may carry out audit and surveillance of all work done and materials supplied by the contractor .
the superintendent may for this purpose have recourse to audit and surveillance carried out for other contracts .
copies of any such audit and surveillance reports used by the superintendent will be provided to the contractor .
department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth part b industrial num .
bnum rates of pay and conditions of employment the contractor shall comply with all relevant industrial legislation including industrial awards to which the contractor is bound any certified agreements andor enterprise flexibility agreements to which the contractor is party .
the contract sum will be deemed to include the cost of all wages and other costs arising from the requirements of the awards certified agreements and enterprise flexibility agreements to which it is bound and no adjustment will be made to the contract on account of such requirements or any new matter introduced into an award or any certified agreement or enterprise flexibility agreement except if otherwise provided for in the contract .
persons below the victorian statutory minimum school leaving age shall not be employed on works under the contract .
num .
bnum work bans and limitations the contractor shall keep the superintendent informed concerning any industrial matter which could affect the progress of the work under the contract .
the contractor shall inform the superintendent immediately if bans are applied to the work under the contract or if work under the contract ceases due to industrial action and shall also inform the superintendent of measures being taken to resolve such action .
the contractor shall make no claim against vicroads for any costs loss expense or damage arising from any industrial action resulting in a strike work stoppage work ban or work limitations of any kind .
the superintendent may grant an extension of time for completion pursuant to the general conditions of contract for lost time arising from industrial action outside the control of the contractor .
department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth part c site num .
cnum possession of site and commencement of work a commencement and completion of work the contractor shall not commence work on site before objective evidence to the existence of public liability and worksafe insurance conforming with the requirements of the general conditions of contract has been provided to the superintendent and the health and safety coordination plan as required by section num has been submitted to the superintendent for review .
any delays in commencement of work caused by this requirement will not be grounds for an extension of time for completion of the works or any part thereof nor shall it form the basis of any claim for additional payment .
the superintendent will consult with the contractor to establish the date of commencement of the work or separable part of the work and will confirm in writing the date so agreed .
if agreement as to the date of commencement can not be reached the superintendent will fix the date and notify the contractor in writing .
separable parts of the works if any specified in subclause num.cnum a shall be completed within the number of weeks or consecutive working days specified in subclause num.cnum a from the respective dates of commencement notified in writing to the contractor .
b possession of site under traffic when work is to be undertaken on a road open to traffic the contractor will be given possession of all or part of the carriageway during such portions of the day as are specified in subclause num.cnum b .
the remainder of the carriageway shall remain clear of obstruction to traffic .
where a width of possession is shown in subclause num.cnum b such width shall be measured between the traffic faces of barriers or between the pavement edge and the traffic face of any barriers placed .
where the contractor is given possession of the full width of the carriageway traffic may be diverted only between the hours indicated in subclause num.cnum b in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num .
cnum high visibility jackets all personnel including supervisors surveyors labourers and plant operators shall wear high visibility clothing in accordance with the requirements of the worksite safety traffic management code of practice at all times .
num .
cnum contractors representatives on commencement of work the contractor shall advise the superintendent in writing of the names addresses and telephone numbers of employees who can be contacted in an emergency and out of hours under the contract .
any proposed changes of representatives addresses or telephone numbers shall be notified promptly to the superintendent and confirmed in writing to the superintendent .
num .
cnum site cleanup environmental control measures shall be maintained in working order for the duration of the works .
at the completion of the contract any environmental controls installed will remain the property of the contractor and shall be removed from the site .
department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth num .
cnum schedule of details a commencement and completion of separable parts of the works separable part location no .
of weeksdays for completion a b c d b possession of site location width hours department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth part d environmental management num.dnum environmental management plans the contractor shall be responsible for the preparation implementation and other arrangements associated with the environmental management plan emp .
the emp shall include as a minimum the following a environmental aspects an assessment of all environmental aspects that could be impacted on the environment including but not limited to matters covered in this specification including num.dnum e with reference to epa publication num guideline for environmental management spraying bituminous materials .
b legal and other requirements details of approvals licences and permits necessary to meet statutory requirements .
c resources roles responsibility and authority details of staff involved in the approval implementation and review of the emp .
d competence training and awareness an induction and training plan to ensure that all site personnel including subcontractors understand the emp and are aware how the emp is to be implemented in relation to the works including any possible emergency response procedures .
e operational control emp shall document environmental procedures to manage all identified impacts and environmental protection requirements including any permits .
these procedures may include but are not limited to water quality and monitoring including loss of bitumen or runoff during or after rain leading to water pollution aggregate entering stormwater pits kerb and channel air quality including odour and other emissions from bitumen bitumen overspray and drift especially in marked areas of roadside significance materials and resource use including use and care of stacksites treatment of hazardous chemicals and petroleum spills preservation of habitat and parking vehicles or plant in roadway reserves waste management including raised reflective pavement markers petroleum wastes and weed management and plant hygiene .
these procedures may include inspection and test plans and checklists .
the location of environmental controls should be documented on a site plan .
the procedures should consider the environmental risk objectives targets control measures maintenance if appropriate monitoring and measurement if required and contact information .
f emergency preparedness and response an emergency response procedure shall include but is not limited to processes for managing any environmental emergency onsite including spillage of bitumen and fuels and shall include responses such as contacting emergency services relevant stakeholders and cleanup of the site .
the contractor shall also detail its program for training its staff in its emergency preparedness and response procedures .
g nonconformity environmental incidents and corrective and preventative action procedures .
h audit a documented process for audit of the emp including the onsite environmental protection measures .
i review and continual improvement a procedure for review and continual improvement of the environmental management plan .
hp the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for review an environmental management plan not less than num weeks prior to the commencement .
work shall not commence until department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth the superintendent is satisfied that the plan meets the requirements of this specification and the controls detailed in the plan are implemented and the superintendent has authorised release of the hold point .
department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth part e program and progress num .
enum review of progress if at any time the superintendent considers that the rate of progress is insufficient to ensure completion of the whole or any separable part of the works by the relevant date for practical completion the superintendent may direct the contractor to submit within num days written details of the intended procedure for the execution of the remainder of the work under the contract .
a updating and reporting on construction program the contractor shall maintain a complete record of the construction program and its changes on cddvd and in hardcopy throughout the contract .
i the contractor shall submit to the superintendent updated construction programs num. at intervals not exceeding num months during the contract or num. within num business days of any change to the critical path for the works or any separable part of the works .
num. within num business days of a request to do so from the superintendent including if applicable an explanation in writing of delays in execution of the work under the contract in comparison with the construction program .
ii updated construction programs shall provide the same level of detail as the original construction program and shall num. show the asconstructed program in respect of all work carried out to the time of updating num. be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for any changes from the previously submitted construction program num. incorporate all extensions of time which have previously been granted or allowed up to that time by the superintendent pursuant to subclause num of the general conditions of contract num. be accompanied by a statement of any claims for extensions of time which have previously been notified by the contractor in accordance with subclause num of the general conditions of contract in respect of which the superintendent is yet to determine .
iii any updated construction program submitted in accordance with i above shall be reviewed by the superintendent on the basis set out in item c above .
b rate of progress where the superintendent at any time considers that the rate of progress is insufficient to ensure completion of the works or any separable part of the works by the relevant date for practical completion the superintendent may direct the contractor to submit within num business days written details of the intended procedure for the execution of the remainder of the work under the contract .
c failure to submit construction program where the contract requires the contractor to provide to the superintendent a construction program no payment will be made to the contractor until the contractor has furnished to the superintendent a construction program that accords with the requirements of the contract .
num .
enum adverse weather conditions time lost due to adverse weather conditions is defined for the purpose of this contract as time lost due to wet weather fog excessively hot excessively cold andor dangerously windy department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth conditions and to the effects of these adverse weather conditions e.g .
wet site conditions following rain .
the contract period includes the following allowance for time lost due to adverse weather conditions insert number of working days where applicable and strikethrough inapplicable alternatives whole of works working days separable part a working days separable part b working days separable part c working days separable part d working days this allowance is based on an num hour working day num day working week and includes does not include allowance for periods when works are suspended due to adverse weather .
this allowance is for administrative purposes only and is not to be construed as the actual time lost due to adverse weather conditions likely to be encountered during the contract .
the contractor is deemed to have made all necessary inquiries as to adverse weather in accordance with the general conditions of contract .
the contractors site representative shall notify the superintendent immediately of any time lost due to adverse weather conditions and shall confirm such notification in writing within num days .
this confirmation shall provide details of the nature and extent of delays and the construction activities affected .
the superintendent if satisfied that the contractor has taken reasonable steps to minimize the period of delay will certify at the end of each month an appropriate period of time lost and will issue to the contractor a monthly summary of certified time lost .
the maximum period of time which will be certified on any working day will be num hours .
where the contractor is required to provide a construction program only delays affecting critical activities will be considered as time lost due to adverse weather conditions .
if the total period of time certified exceeds the total allowance for the whole of works or applicable separable part of works specified above the superintendent will in accordance with the general conditions of contract grant an extension of time for completion of the whole of works or applicable separable part of works on the basis of num working day for each num hours of certified time in excess of the allowance .
no extension of time will be granted until the total excess period equals num hours or a multiple thereof .
periods of less than num hours duration shall accrue to form part of any subsequent extension of time .
no additional costs arising from extensions of time granted due to excess adverse weather will be made .
department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth num .
enum working hours before commencing work under the contract the contractor shall advise the superintendent in writing the working hours proposed for the execution of the work under the contract .
further to the provisions of the general conditions of contract a no work shall be carried out between good friday and easter monday inclusive on any sunday public holiday or during the christmas to new year periods b no work shall be carried out on the site outside the period between numam or sunrise whichever is the later and numpm or sunset whichever is the earlier unless otherwise specified or approved by the superintendent .
notwithstanding the provisions of the general conditions of contract and the provisions of this clause work may be carried out on saturdays andor sundays if specified or approved by the superintendent or if directed by the superintendent and the tender includes surcharge rates for saturday and sunday work .
if no item for a surcharge has been provided in the schedule of rates and the superintendent has directed saturday or sunday work the superintendent will value the work in accordance with the provisions of the general conditions of contract .
department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth part f site and execution of work num .
fnum cooperation department of state growth reserves the right to perform work or award other contracts for work on or adjacent to the site .
the contractor shall cooperate with all other contractors and other work forces so as to avoid delay or hindrance to their work and to ensure that all work is performed expeditiously .
num .
fnum examination and testing of materials and work a general the contractor shall be responsible for carrying out all examination and testing of materials and work under the contract in accordance with the requirements of the specification .
unless otherwise specified materials and workmanship shall comply with the relevant standard of the standards association of australia .
b allowance for testing in construction program the contractor shall make allowance in the construction program for the time necessary to arrange for and to carry out examination and testing of materials and work .
c notification where inspection of materials or work by the superintendent or his representative is specified as a hold point or where a hold point is created by a nonconformance at least num hours notice of testing andor inspection shall be given to the superintendent .
d tests unless otherwise specified all tests and sampling shall be undertaken in accordance with the appropriate vicroads codes of practice and applicable test methods as current at the time of performance of the tests .
unless otherwise specified all tests shall be conducted by experienced testing officers in a laboratory accredited by the national association of testing authorities nata for the test methods used under the contract and all tests shall be endorsed in accordance with the nata registration for that laboratory .
lists of current vicroads codes of practice are available online at the vicroads website www.vicroads.vic.gov.au .
all construction materials sampling shall be undertaken by personnel from a nata laboratory accredited for the appropriate sampling methods .
e test results the contractor shall submit to the superintendent a monthly summary or if requested by the superintendent a weekly summary of testing undertaken .
the summary shall include details of all tests undertaken the result of each test and sufficient additional information to demonstrate that the specified minimum frequency of testing is being complied with .
the summary of test results shall be submitted to the superintendent by the second day of the week following the relevant period .
f calibration all test equipment used for tests carried out in accordance with clause num.fnumd above shall be calibrated by a laboratory accredited by nata for the particular calibration method .
department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth part g offsite num .
gnum community liaison strikethrough if not required where the work under the contract may cause disruption annoyance or inconvenience to stakeholders including residents businesses and travelling public the contractor shall be responsible for all aspects of stakeholder consultation and advice to the public .
such advice shall include reasonable notice to support a high level of community awareness prior to particular eventsactivities that will affect stakeholders responding to any queries and resolution of issues during particular eventsactivities and postimplementation advice to respond to any queries and resolve difficulties .
the contractor must identify how they will communicate with stakeholders and include consideration of protocols for liaising with all stakeholders including emergency services and the media who should be consultedinformed stakeholder categories why they should be consultedinformed stakeholder interest andor influence what should be communicated key messages when it should be communicated timing how it should be communicated communication tools and pathways protocols for dealing with public complaints and feedback .
the contractor shall not issue any public information concerning the project including publications documents andor social media content in any media without prior approval of the superintendent which shall not unreasonably be withheld .
the contractor shall provide to the superintendent a copy of any material intended for public distribution about the project with at least num days notice prior to the intended distribution date .
the contractor shall immediately refer to the superintendent all enquiries concerning the project from any media .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with a minimum num days notice of any request to work outside approved normal working hours .
the contractor shall maintain and submit to the superintendent on a monthly basis a communications register of all public media and other stakeholder complaints and enquiries made directly to the contractor in relation to the contract .
the contractor shall maintain a customer public point of contact name and phone number and submit this to the superintendent at least num days prior to any works commencing .
the contractor shall not be required to answer questionsissuesconcerns that relate to the rationale for the project the scope of work provided for under the contract or other project issues not within the contractors control .
such matters shall be recorded and advised to the superintendent .
the contractor shall immediately advise the superintendent of any media enquiries or unannounced site visits by media councilors or politicians .
the contractor shall direct all media enquiries to the superintendent .
num .
gnum use and care of roads the contractor shall be responsible for repair of damage caused to any roads bridges or other structures by transporting material under the contract .
the contractor is advised that vicroads and municipal councils have power under their respective acts to recover the cost of repair of damage to roads .
if requested by the superintendent the contractor shall submit clearances from municipal and other authorities concerned before the final certificate is issued .
in respect of repair of damage to roads the contractor will be deemed when tendering a to have inspected the roads used for transport department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth b to have acquired by consultation with the municipal or other authorities concerned knowledge of the roads and any existing or likely restrictions upon their use which could affect the transport proposals c to have assessed the possibility and extent of any damage to the roads which may be caused by transport under the contract d to have made due allowance for the effects of such restrictions and for the cost of rectification of such damage in accordance with the requirements of the authorities concerned .
num .
gnum failure to lodge security deposit and return of executed contract documents no contract payments will be made until the contract security if any has been lodged with the corporation .
payment will also be withheld where signed contract documents have not been returned within num business days of being issued by the corporation .
num .
gnum security for shells for minor works strikethrough the entire text of this clause further to clause num of the general conditions of contract the contractor shall provide performance security as either a num of contract sum or b num of contract sum plus retention of num of each progress payment up to a maximum of num of the contract sum as indicated in schedule num .
where schedule num does not indicate which option is to apply then a shall apply to this contract .
department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth part h insurance and incident reporting part h insurance and incident reporting the contractor shall comply with all insurance requirements contained in the general conditions of contract including any annexures .
num .
hnum incident reporting the contractor shall implement and maintain an incident reporting system for the duration of the contract .
the contractor shall enter into the incident reporting system details of all incidents including near incidents arising from or relating to the work under the contract or on or adjacent to the site during the contract term which may or could have resulted in claims for personal injury or property damage to third parties .
the incident reporting system shall record all incidents in respect of which any third party may claim .
this shall include any possible claim for personal injury and all damage to property in excess of num .
the incident reporting system shall also record details of notes records and photographs or any other evidence relating to any incident .
the incident reporting system shall also record details of any injury or damage caused by registered motor vehicles .
num .
hnum reportable incidents upon the happening of any incident likely to give rise to a claim under any insurance policy effected by the principal the contractor shall give notice thereof the superintendent as soon as possible .
without prejudice to the generality of the obligation to report incidents the contractor shall notify in accordance with this cause all incidents that involve a personal injury unless trivial b minors num years old c serious near misses d triggering a sixth sense of a dangerous situation e damage to a third partys property which is likely to exceed num f ohs claims where the actions of one worker could be said to have caused injury .
num .
hnum actions in respect of incidents the contractor shall take immediate steps to minimise the extent of personal injury or property damage arising from an incident .
the contractor shall take careful note of the evidence surrounding the incident including notes or reports of the facts relating thereto and photographs .
the contractor shall as soon as practicable inform the principal in writing of any incident that may give rise to a claim under an insurance policy effected as required by any of the insurance clauses under the general conditions of contract and shall ensure that the superintendent is kept fully informed of the incident the subsequent action and developments concerning the claim .
the contractor shall take such steps as are necessary or appropriate to ensure that a sub contractor shall in respect to an event or claim of a like nature arising out of or relating to the operations or responsibilities of the subcontractor take in relation to the superintendent the like action to that which the contractor is required to take under this clause .
where the incident is reportable to the principals insurer under its policy the contractor shall at its own expense in accordance with policy conditionsa notify the principals insurer immediately num by telephone if the matter is sufficiently serious to alert the principals insurer and seek advice num in writing with a copy to the superintendent and preserve any evidence such as notes or photographs b send to the principals insurer immediately upon receipt any letter of demand writ claim summons or proceedings or other like documentation c cooperate at its own cost with the principals insurer in the investigation and defence of claims including attendance at court if required .
department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth num .
hnum monthly reporting the contractor shall report monthly to the superintendent on all incidents included in the incident reporting system including details of which matters have been reported to the principals insurer together with the date of such report and the status of resolution of each incident .
num .
hnum auditing of incident reporting system the contractor shall permit the superintendent staff of the principals insurer its auditors or any other auditors approved by the superintendent to access and audit the incident reporting system and any documentation associated with claims or relating to incidents or near incidents and to take copies of any documents associated with claims or relating to the incidents .
num .
hnum general the effecting of insurance as required by the insurance clauses in this contract shall not in any way limit or derogate from the liabilities or obligations of the contractor in performing its work under the contract .
department of state growth march num section num page num of num department of state growth section num traffic management tasmania this section crossreferences sections num num num or num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent sections num num and num or num must be included in the specification this section covers general items relating to construction contracts and should be read in conjunction with sections num num and numor num .
part a management systems part b worksite risk management process for traffic management part c traffic management planning part d traffic management operation part e temporary road safety barrier systems part f temporary barrier end treatments part g temporary road lighting part h performance requirements part i records part a management systems num.anum outline this specification sets out the requirements for the management of all traffic including pedestrians and construction site traffic .
the objectives of this specification are to ensure that traffic management is appropriately planned implemented and maintained ensure traffic management is included in the contractors worksite risk management process in accordance with clause num.cnum ensure the safety of road users and construction personnel during all operations .
num.anum general the contractor shall manage traffic in accordance with the tasmanian traffic act the tasmanian traffic road rules regulations traffic control for works on roads tasmanian guide num the performance requirements of this specification as num manual of uniform traffic control devices in particular part num traffic control for works in roads .
the order of precedence of the documents shall be in the order as listed above .
other relevant standards and guides asnzs num road safety barrier systems and asnum variable message signs part num portable signs austroads guide to traffic management .
asnzs iso num risk management principles and guidelines hb num communication and consulting iso guide num risk management vocabulary num.anum definition of terms further to asnum clause num the terms used in this specification shall be as defined in table num definition of terms below .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth table num definition of terms term definition pcb an abbreviation for portable concrete barrier that is to comply with asnzs num .
traffic management plan the traffic management plan prepared by the contractor in accordance with the requirements of the contract .
nominated traffic officer the nominated traffic officer shall be responsible for preparation and implementation of traffic guidance schemes .
traffic guidance scheme a traffic guidance scheme prepared by the contractor in accordance with the requirements of the contract as a means of planning depicting and communicating individual traffic changes .
accreditation all personnel involved in traffic control shall have current accreditation having attended a recognised traffic management course for the relevant level of traffic control in accordance with section num training requirements of the state growth traffic control for works on roads tasmanian guide num .
slow moving mobile work sites works travelling at numkmh or less .
num.anum contractors responsibilites the contractor shall provide a safe worksite for the public its workers and subcontractors at all times and in all conditions and manage traffic flow through a site ensuring delays and inconveniences are contained within the performance limits of this specification .
num.anum information to be supplied at tender the contractor shall provide evidence to demonstrate compliance with this specification and to demonstrate an understanding of site specific traffic management requirements including the type and length of temporary work site protection and delineation and how disruptions to traffic are to be minimised .
further to the requirements listed in the form of tender details to be submitted with the tender shall cover worksite risk assessment for traffic management in accordance with clause num methods to be used to meet traffic management requirements including detours and work staging plans details of passage for emergency vehicles name qualifications and experience of the nominated traffic officer refer clause num.cnum demonstrating extent of traffic management experience in road construction works and associated activities .
num.anum traffic management strategy and traffic management plan the contractor shall detail the requirements of this specification in the traffic management strategy and traffic management plan .
part b worksite risk management process for traffic management num.bnum general the contractor shall undertake a traffic management related risk assessment for both construction and public traffic .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth the contractor shall ensure that all sub contractors adhere to the traffic management risk assessment .
risk management shall be in accordance with asnum clause num risk management and asnzs iso num .
risk assessments shall include the identification and analysis of all safety risks likely to arise during the works in the planning setting up operating changing and dismantling phases of a traffic management plan .
num.bnum risk control measures further to asnum section num the following table num guidelines for risk control selection provides guidelines on controls to be considered during the risk assessment process .
these guidelines will be used in the assessment of the worksite risk assessment as part of the tender assessment process .
the contractor shall incorporate into the traffic management plan the actions identified in the risk assessment .
table num guidelines for risk control selection safety hazardrisk factors hierarchy of control consider the practicability of controls from left to right .
select the most practical given the circumstances and level of risk .
record the reason if a higherlevel control is not considered practicable .
elimination substitution engineering isolation administrative bevavourial clearances to traffic lateral clearance between the nearest edge of a lane carrying traffic and the entire worksite including all roadworks vehicles or equipment and pedestrian workers road closure detour side track safety barriers lane closure vehicle crash attenuators speed reduction warning signsvms delineation of travel path high speed traffic through worksites road closure detour side track safety barriers lane closure portable traffic signals vehicle crash attenuators speed reduction warning signsvms traffic controller poor advance sight distance to worksite numm road closure traffic diversion vehicle crash attenuators lead andor tail vehicles extra advanced warning signsvms speed reduction delineation of travel path poor observance by motorists of directionsinstructions road closure traffic diversion lane closure portable traffic signals speed reduction police presence on site extra signsvms reassessment of information provided narrow pavement width with no escape route numm width road closure traffic diversion safety barriers speed reduction delineation of travel path presence of workers at worksite road closure traffic diversion safety barriers increased separation from vehicular speed reduction warning signs delineation of travel path and worksite department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth safety hazardrisk factors hierarchy of control consider the practicability of controls from left to right .
select the most practical given the circumstances and level of risk .
record the reason if a higherlevel control is not considered practicable .
elimination substitution engineering isolation administrative bevavourial traffic excavation adjacent to traffic nummm deep within numm of traffic road closure traffic diversion different construction method safety barriers speed reduction delineation of travel path presence of unprotected hazards within clear zone road closure traffic diversion safety barriers speed reduction delineation of travel path rough or unsealed road surface due to roadworks road closure traffic diversion speed reduction warning signsvms high volume of traffic through worksites num vehicles per day road closure detour side track safety barriers lane closure portable traffic signals speed reduction high volume of heavy vehicles through worksite road closure detour side track safety barriers lane closure portable traffic signals speed reduction works vehicles enteringleaving worksite safety barriers lane closure portable traffic signals speed reduction warning signsvms delineationcontrol of access points cyclistspedestrians through worksites alternative pathway adequate separated or shared road space speed reduction warning signsvms delineation from other traffic num.bnum traffic separation requirements temporary road safety barrier systems shall be used for separation of traffic from roadworks and hazards as specified .
barriers should be used when workers or pedestrians in vulnerable situations need protection .
there is a need to separate opposing traffic .
there are hazardous objects or deep excavations near traffic .
further to asnum appendix d the minimum traffic separation requirements are listed in the following table num traffic separation requirements .
table num traffic separation requirements posted speed during roadworks see notes num and num below distance from travelled path to road workers and hazards num num metres num num metres num num metres num num metres num kmh safety barrier safety barrier risk assessment risk assessment num num kmh safety barrier safety barrier risk assessment risk assessment department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth num num kmh safety barrier containment fence risk assessment risk assessment num kmh risk assessment risk assessment risk assessment risk assessment notes num .
the posted speed during roadworks shall be the highest speed which will allow the passage of vehicles in safety but in no instance shall it exceed the original posted speed prior to roadworks .
num .
num kmh speed zones shall be no longer than num metres with the minimum length of num metres .
num .
for excavations andor embankments nummm depth and numm from the travelled path a safety barrier is required .
num .
for the purposes of this table excavations and embankments shall be regarded as a longitudinal depression or batter with the slope of the side adjacent to traffic num to num or steeper .
num .
for safety barrier types refer to clause num.enum num .
this table shall apply once ground has been disturbed by the contractors works .
however if a site is identified in the risk assessment as a high risk site the use of temporary road safety barriers and energy absorbing devices including truckmounted attenuators for physical separation as a means of providing protection from traffic shall be used .
the contractor shall not use road closures as a means of controlling traffic during the works unless there are no other alternative control measures possible and then only when approved by the superintendent .
this does not apply to road closures necessary during emergency work where the contractor will be directed to close roads and detour traffic by the superintendent or tasmania police .
num.bnum speed restrictions speed restriction zones shall only be imposed over the localised work area as required .
whenever practicable any restrictions on traffic should be removed if not required to apply over night .
some restrictions on traffic can remain where the worksite is located on a multi lane road and there is sufficient capacity available to carry the expected overnight traffic volumes .
single lane operation without any traffic control should not normally operate at night unless the traffic volume is less than num vehicles per day and the length of road involved is not greater than num metres .
in other situations traffic signals should be used to control traffic on the single lane section .
num.bnum site classification for traffic management work sites or each part of a work site where a different traffic management regime is employed shall be classified as either high profile or low profile .
where the specification includes such a classification it shall apply .
where no classification is specified the contractor shall classify the site or part of the site based on a high profile site being one at which annual average daily traffic is equal to or greater than num vpd sum of two directions with a low profile site less than num vpd .
however the requirements of clause num.bnum may require that the site be classed as high profile .
num.bnum high profile sites for these sites the traffic management plan shall also include the following identification by name and mobile telephone number the person who shall be on site at all times during work in continuous mobile telephone contact with responsibility for implementing the traffic management monitoring performance achievement and having full authority to cease work or take other emergency action when the procedures do not achieve the performance requirements .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth in areas outside mobile phone range other communication systems such as radio or satellite phone shall be provided to communicate back to the contractors operations management base .
special provision for local landowners and businesses and the nature and timing of personal contact to advise of the effects and how and to what extent special needs will be addressed .
information on how any adjacent work by other contractors or government authorities is to be coordinated .
the contractor is responsible for obtaining this information .
the nature of actions to cover the contingency where procedures do not achieve the requirements of this specification .
part c traffic management planning num.cnum nominated traffic officer the contractor shall submit to the superintendent the name of its nominated traffic officer .
the nominated traffic officer shall be responsible for ensuring that the traffic control at the worksite has been prepared and implemented by individuals with the correct level of training for the type of work being undertaken .
training requirements for those involved in providing traffic control at worksites are set out in section num of the state growth traffic control for works on roads tasmanian guide num .
num.cnum traffic management plan num.cnum general traffic management for all worksites required in the performance of the works shall include preparation of a traffic management plan .
the traffic management plan shall cover all work associated with the preparation submission and revision where necessary of the traffic management plan and traffic guidance schemes implementation and monitoring of the traffic management plan and schemes when such is specified details in accordance with asnum section num methods of communication how the contractor intends to provide advance warning to the public on delaysdiversions where any staging of the work is necessary the staging of work shall be marked up on plan overlays for each stage of the work how the contractor proposes to open the site to clear traffic backup the names and qualification level of all personnel responsible for traffic control and drawings of each traffic guidance scheme e.g fig .
num in as num .
generic traffic management plans may be used provided they are checked at each worksite in accordance with this specification .
where the risk assessment deems it necessary the contractor shall prepare sitespecific traffic guidance schemes .
num.cnum specific requirements the traffic management plan shall describe traffic arrangements which provide for any necessary sequencing of the work under the contract while minimising disruption and confusion to road users local traffic emergency vehicles pedestrians and cyclists where required describe how the construction work zone shall be physically and visually isolated from road users department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth provide details of arrangements to be made for detouring traffic provide details of all road closures andor restrictions required to undertake the work under the contract detail provisions to maintain the specified number of traffic lanes in each direction include the names and contact details of the nominated outofhours representatives include a schedule of traffic guidance schemes giving a general description of the relevant traffic arrangements and the date when the traffic guidance scheme will be submitted provide details of the contractors organisational structure for traffic management issues including a list of the duties and responsibilities of each position nominated in that structure and take into account any project specific requirements stated in the project specification .
num.cnum public contact plan the traffic management plan shall provide details of the consultative process proposed to ensure consultation with and notification to the community business road users bus operators schools and other stakeholders in advance of alterations to existing traffic conditions .
the contractors proposed inputs into the communication process shall ensure the timely notification of the superintendent principal travelling public emergency services adjacent landowners and businesses of impending changes to traffic conditions .
this process shall take cognisance of any principals requirements with respect to public notifications provide details of how local access to communities and adjacent private properties and businesses will be maintained provide for participation of a senior member of the contractors site personnel on any traffic coordination committee convened by the principal provide details of the methods including plant such as electronic variable message signs for providing advance notice to the public advance warning shall be in the form of adequate signage stating expect delays for the next km from monthyear to monthyear .
the sign should also advise on alternative routes in association with the signs and devices specified at section num of asnum .
these shall be installed at least num days prior to work commencing .
the signs shall be at each end of the worksite .
ensure emergency services such as police ambulance and fire brigades are advised in writing at least num days prior to any planned event likely to cause significant delays .
contact details for advice to emergency services are listed in annexure num.a .
all messages on electronic portable variable message signs and the location of these signs shall be approved by the superintendent .
all media advertisements for traffic delaysdiversions will be arranged by the superintendent on the advice of the contractor .
the contractor shall provide all details at least num days prior to the delaydiversion together with evidence of all the relevant ownerauthority approvals .
this also applies to all other communications including letters to stakeholders .
num.cnum electronic portable variable message signs electronic portable variable message signs shall be capable of displaying messages that are readable be mounted on a trailer suitable for registration in accordance with statutory requirements for the state of tasmania comply with as num variable message signs part num portable sign be suitable for use on roads with speed limits greater than numkmh department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth may include the option of a radar or similar vehicle speed detection unit with vehicle speed triggered messages configurable and configurable trigger speeds display dimensional requirements as described in asnum have full matrix configuration that is capable of displaying alphanumeric characters graphics and moving messages have a high strength graffiti resistant display face have automatic brightness control that increases visibility during the day and dims display to eliminate flaringglare during overcastnight time operation have amber or yellow pixels on a matt black background have all enclosures rated to ipnum have a control system which will enable local and remote monitoring of status sign control message changing and diagnostic reporting have a control system which will include a self test and status reporting facility have a control system which will be designed to include security features such as equipment tamper and alarm reporting and password protection be mounted on a trailer with extendable stabilisers for levelling and stabilising in high winds and have a lockable tow bar and wheels num.cnum traffic guidance schemes where any change to existing traffic arrangements is proposed or where construction conflicts with normal traffic movements the contractor shall prepare a traffic guidance scheme in accordance with asnum clause num which clearly details the revised traffic arrangements at all locations affected by the change or conflict .
traffic guidance schemes shall include layout sketches for individual construction stages .
hp the contractor shall not less than num working days prior to implementation of the proposed traffic rearrangement submit to the superintendent the traffic guidance schemes .
hp the superintendent shall agree to the traffic guidance scheme prior to implementing the proposed traffic rearrangement .
in submitting the proposed traffic guidance scheme to the superindentent .
sufficient time for public notification shall be allowed for as per clause num.cnum .
the traffic guidance scheme shall show proposed temporary signing and other traffic control device layouts including temporary barriers temporary pavement marking and temporary islands to a suitable scale and be fully dimensioned and shall generally agree with the construction sequence and other requirements shown elsewhere in the contract .
the traffic guidance scheme shall also state the period for which these are to be in place time and date and the person who is responsible for installing maintaining and removing them .
where the traffic guidance scheme includes changes to regulatory signs or devices the contractor shall include details certified by the nominated traffic officer with the traffic guidance scheme .
the contractor shall allow num days for the superintendents direction with respect to suitability of the proposed traffic rearrangement .
num.cnum side tracks further to asnum all sidetracks shall be designed in accordance with austroads guides be sealed and line marked with temporary pavement markings when in use for more than one week department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth have a lateral clearance of at least num m from any obstruction .
in difficult situations however the superintendent may authorise a reduced clearance with an absolute minimum of num mm .
have a maximum grade of num percent .
be not less than num m wide if intended for two lanes of traffic and not less than numm wide if intended for single lane one way traffic .
be completely removed and the area reinstated when the works are completed .
hp at least num days prior to the construction of the sidetracks the contractor shall submit to the superintendent detailed drawings of the proposed sidetracks including all signs and linemarking .
the linemarking details shall cover existing and temporary linemarking including the removal of conflicting and temporary linemarking .
the submitted drawings shall have been certified by an engineer experienced in road design who has qualifications admitting to corporate membership of the institution of engineers australia .
the submission of the drawings of the sidetracks to the superintendent does not constitute approval of the design and shall not in any way relieve the contractor of the responsibility for the satisfactory performance and adequacy of the sidetracks .
the design shall provide for a minimum drainage opening as specified elsewhere or if not specified a minimum of a one year flood capacity including any necessary rock pitching .
num.cnum implementation of traffic management plan the contractor shall implement the traffic management plan in accordance with the schedule included in the plan .
should the superintendent so direct the contractor shall provide details of the traffic management plan or any changes to that plan to any bodies nominated by the superintendent .
the contractor shall monitor the continued effectiveness of the traffic management plan during the contract and shall revise and update the plan where necessary .
num.cnum implementation of traffic guidance schemes the contractor shall implement only those traffic guidance arrangements that have been deemed suitable by the superintendent .
prior to any change to existing traffic arrangements the contractor shall ensure that the traffic management arrangements conform with the traffic guidance scheme .
should the contractor wish to depart from such arrangements an amended traffic guidance scheme shall be prepared .
hp an amended traffic guidance scheme shall be submitted to the superintendent in accordance with num.cnum above .
on a daily basis the contractor shall ensure that all applicable traffic redirection andor warning measures and safety requirements are implemented prior to proceeding with any relevant work under the contract .
the contractor shall monitor the effectiveness of the traffic guidance scheme and revise it in response to incidents andor traffic disruptions .
details of a traffic guidance scheme shall be provided on request to any other body department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth nominated by the superintendent .
part d traffic management operation num.dnum general traffic management shall include provision and placement of the prescribed traffic control devices for the warning guidance and protection of the traffic and protection of workers construction plant and other property on or adjacent to the works ensure that any delays to the passage of traffic are not greater than that specified in clause num.hnum ensure that construction maintenance and removal of temporary access along or across the site for pedestrians cyclists and agricultural machinery is provided as necessary relocate any bus stops affected by changes in traffic arrangements include the covering and uncovering of new signs as necessary provide for the maintenance of emergency vehicle access at all times include relocation of all existing signage and any modifications required thereto to ensure that the standard of signage is consistent with that existing prior to the contractor commencing work and that it is consistent with the requirements of the traffic guidance schemes supply and installation of site access signs and all other traffic control signs as detailed in the traffic guidance schemes supply and operation of traffic control devices supply and installation of temporary delineation of trafficked corridors supply installation and operation of temporary traffic signals place electronic portable variable message signs at least numm from edge lines supply and installation of temporary delineation where access to streets and side roads has been altered provide dust control maintain entrances and construction of alternative entrances as necessary to private properties provide traffic guidance schemes provide any information required for public notices provide outofhours representatives include the design and construction of sidetracks where no separate item is provided for this work in the schedule provide maintenance of trafficable surfaces where specified supply and installation of temporary barriers supply and installation of temporary barrier end treatments provide maintenance and repair of barrier provide all other facilities for the safe passage of vehicular traffic through and around the works and remove all temporary works and control devices used in the provisions for traffic ensure that all signs are erected on posts sunk in ground with numm to underside of sign from ground level in accordance with asnum clause num .
num.dnum supply and installation of temporary road lighting including connection to the electricity supply authoritys network if ordered where required temporary road lighting shall include supply of all materials plant and equipment installation and maintenance of temporary road lighting equipment and removal of temporary equipment after permanent road lighting is installed or as directed by the superintendent .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth num.dnum pedestrian movements where it is necessary to provide for pedestrian andor cyclist access along or across portions of the work under the contract the contractor shall provide such temporary pathways as necessary .
the pathways shall be clearly delineated signed and fenced to prevent easy access to the remainder of the work under the contract .
signs shall be provided adjacent to the pathway to clearly indicate that access to the remainder of the work under the contract is absolutely prohibited .
adequate illumination shall be provided during all periods of darkness .
where a large volume of pedestrian traffic has to cross the site consideration shall be given to directing pedestrians to suitably constructed and protected crossings .
special provision for pedestrians may be required where the direction of traffic flow is opposite to that normally expected .
num.dnum rotating yellow lamps all construction vehicles being used on the work site shall have activated cabmounted yellow rotating lamps fitted with a minimum numw halogen bulb .
num.dnum fixed multi message signs fixed multi message signs not electronic portable variable message signs may be used in accordance with all other requirements of this specification section num the tasmanian traffic code of practice and the following they shall only be used as a temporary sign during daylight working hours .
colours and legends shall be in accordance with as num .
a road safety message may be white on a blue panel using class num sign material .
signs may be double sided .
num.dnum delineation of the traffic path delineation of the traffic path shall be in accordance with asnum .
star pickets shall not be used as delineator posts .
part e temporary road safety barrier systems num.enum general temporary road safety barrier systems shall be in accordance with standard specification rnum road safety barrier systems and shall have recesses at their base to allow drainage at ground surface level to pass through .
num.enum types of safety barriers when a need for temporary barriers is identified the barrier type shall be determined on the basis of the following considerations the type shape deflection performance and test characteristics of the barrier the speed of traffic travelling through the work site and the clearance between the traffic and the work area .
the minimum clearance behind safety barriers to the work area shall be the greater of either the dynamic deflection of the product in accordance with asnum clause num or as shown in table num minimum safety barrier deflections to work areas however when the work department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth is below the adjacent road surface the clearance is to be increased to that identified in the risk assessment .
where the use of precast concrete barriers pcbs at intersections will create visibility problems for motorists to safely negotiate the intersection the contractor shall be permitted to use other approved barriers or devices as determined by the risk assessment .
steel beam safety barrier sbsb may be used instead of pcbs in some locations subject to the approval of the superintendent .
sbsb will not be approved for temporary erection where posts have to be installed through pavements which remain part of the permanent works .
where identified as high risk in the risk assessment opposing traffic shall be separated by an appropriate barrier except that the distance shall be measured from the edge lines of the opposing traffic flows .
safety barriers may be manufactured from either concrete or steel .
water filled plastic barriers shall not be used as safety barriers .
table num minimum safety barrier deflections to work areas safety barrier type maximum intended posted speed limit during roadworks kmh minimum clearance or nogo zonenum metres refer figure num.enum .
precast concrete or steel barrier with units connected by steel pin or equivalentnum and a num metre minimum length num num num num num num w beam guard fence with num metre post spacing num num num num num num num.enum safety barrier clearance the minimum clearance between the edge of traffic lanes and barriers shall be in accordance with asnum clause num as indicated in figure num safety barrier clearances .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth figure num safety barrier clearances where possible safety barriers should not be located behind kerb and channel so as to avoid the possibility of a speeding vehicle being launched into the air by the kerb and striking the top of the safety barrier and then rolling into the work area .
where the location of a safety barrier behind kerb and channel can not be avoided then the safety barrier should be located such that its front face is either less than num metres behind the kerb or greater than num metres behind the kerb but not more than num metres to avoid high angle impacts .
the following lengths of safety barrier should generally apply minimum greater of num metres or minimum length specified by the safety barrier manufacturer .
maximum num metres desirable but may be more depending on a traffic management plan .
in determining the location and length of safety barrier to be used consideration should be given to the manufacturers stated performance characteristics of individual safety barrier systems .
num.enum working behind barriers when barriers are in place workers shall not work within the barrier deflection zone .
containment fences in accordance with asnum clause num shall be placed behind the barrier to constrain the work areas beyond the likely deflection limits of the barrier if struck by a vehicle .
num.enum on site storage where temporary barriers are required plant and materials shall be treated as a hazard and be protected .
where temporary barriers are not required plant or materials shall not be stored less than num metres from the nearest edge of any traffic lane and any plant or materials stored overnight within num metres of the nearest edge of any traffic lane shall be delineated with warning lights adjacent to the traffic lanes .
part f temporary barrier end treatments the ends of temporary barriers must be protected with a suitable approved end treatment .
temporary road safety barrier systems shall be in accordance with the requirements and principles of asnum and the state growth design guide shall be adhered to for leading and trailing terminals both gating and nongating whether redirective of nonredirective for all road safety barrier systems .
all proprietary and public domain terminal systems shall not extrude components towards the traffic lanes when impacted by a vehicle .
part g temporary road lighting num.gnum provision of temporary lighting where existing roadway lighting is provided roadway lighting shall be provided at all times .
existing lighting shall not be removed until alternative temporary lighting is provided to at least the same standard as the existing lighting .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth num.gnum installation where directed by the superintendent the contractor shall install operate and maintain temporary road lighting installations for the full period during which the relevant temporary roadway is in use andor until the permanent road lighting is installed and becomes operational .
temporary road lighting shall be installed in the locations identified in the risk assessment or as otherwise directed by the superintendent .
part h performance requirements num.hnum general all worksites and types of work undertaken in the performance of the works shall be undertaken in accordance with this specification .
num.hnum long term and bituminous surfacing work sites the following requirements shall apply to long term worksites and bituminous surfacing operations only a delay shall be defined as the actual stoppage time measured from the time at which the first vehicle is stationary the duration of stopping for any vehicle shall not exceed num minutes where there has been advance warning to the public where there has been no advance warning the contractor shall ensure that a stoppage time of num minutes is not exceeded .
num.hnum .
nonconformances a nonconformance shall be determined by the superintendent andor contractor and shall include but not be limited to the following instances failure to maintain delineation as detailed in a traffic guidance scheme failure to maintain all signs as detailed in a traffic guidance scheme failure to maintain any other traffic control device detailed in a traffic guidance scheme .
failure to maintain minimum travelled path dimensions traffic delay periods exceeding any maximum period nominated in the contract failure to coverremove unused signs and traffic control devices within two hours of completion of any revised traffic arrangement failure to provide the required notification to the community or local businesses of changes to traffic movement failure to use other than designated construction workplace entries or exits failure to maintain a defect and obstruction free travelled path through areas subject to traffic guidance schemes and undertaking traffic rearrangement without a traffic guidance scheme approved by the superintendent .
all nonconformances shall be remedied by the contractor within two hours of receipt of written notice of the nonconformance .
failure to remedy any nonconformance within the two hour period shall entitle the principal to carry out remedial work deemed necessary pursuant to the general conditions of contract .
part i records the contractor shall comply with the guidelines and procedures set out in appendix a of asnum .
the contractor shall develop itps checklists and procedures as part of the traffic department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth management plan which shall include the requirements of appendix a of asnum .
all records are to be made available upon request and shall be included in the contract records .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth num traffic management details contract no .
num contract name main road intersection upgrade tenderer the civil contractor pty ltd .num i traffic management details required at tender none how delays of less than num minutes without advance warning will be achieved specification num.hnum for all sites .
.num ii peak times length of turn pockets as part of temporary traffic management plans .num iii emergency contacts for advice and record to all emergency services of any planned event likely to cause delays with at least seven num days notice .
fire services tasmania ph num num num fax num num num ambulance ph num num num fax num num num police officer in charge ph num num num north fax num num num num num num south fax num num num num num num east fax num num num num num num west fax num num num the contractor is responsible for establishing boundaries between districts .
.num iv emergencies only num department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num occupational health and safety management num outline the management of occupational health and safety ohs by the contractor is a key requirement of the contract .
the objectives are to provide and maintain a safe work environment provide and maintain safe plant systems of work safe access and egress provide for safety and health in the use handling storage or transport of plant or substances provide suitable instruction training and supervision and provide and maintain adequate facilities .
num general where work under the contract is a construction project as defined in the work health and safety regulations num then for the purposes of chapter num of those regulations the principal a appoints the contractor as the principal contractor for the construction work performed on its behalf b authorises the contractor to manage or control the workplace to the extent necessary to discharge the duties imposed on a principal contractor under the regulations .
the contractor shall ensure compliance with its duties as a principal contractor under the work health and safety regulations num .
the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary approvals and for the coordination implementation and other arrangements associated with site safety .
the following paragraph applies where the work under this contract is federally funded to the extent that the national building code applies and the contract value is num million or more strikethrough for all other projects the contractor must maintain accreditation under the australian building and construction whs accreditation scheme the scheme established by the fair work building industry act num fwbi act while building work as defined in section num of the fwbi act is carried out .
the contractor must comply with all conditions of scheme accreditation .
num the health and safety coordination plan the quality plan for the works shall include the contractors requirements for the management of work health and safety during the various stages of the work under the contract .
the quality plan shall incorporate these requirements as a whs management plan whsmp in accordance with part num of the work health and safety regulations num that must demonstrate for each stage of the work under the contract as a minimum compliance with the requirements of the work health and safety act num its regulations and the requirements of this specification and the safety management plan checklist located in the appendices of this specification and shall include but not be limited to a procedures and responsibilities for the preparation implementation and verification of the hscp and thereafter for its monitoring and amendment including requirements to ensure appropriate consultation in accordance with part num of the work health and safety act num b procedures and responsibilities to ensure that all personnel involved with the preparation and implementation of the hscp are appropriately trained experienced and supervised department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth c procedures to ensure that the public is not exposed to any health or safety riskshazards as a result of the contractors operations d a procedure for securing and arrangements for managing the site and immediately reporting to the superintendent and worksafe any i accident or incident affecting health and safety of any person including but not limited to incidents prescribed under the work health and safety act num ii provisional improvement notice pin issued by an ohs representative e a procedure for immediately reporting to the superintendent any statutory notices directions or recommendations from worksafe including but not limited to field reports improvement notices infringement notices and prohibition notices f a procedure relating to work in the vicinity of services both overhead and underground .
the procedure shall include the following elements i underground services to be proved by appropriate methods which may include excavation ii a request for the appropriate service authorityowner to attend the site iii formats for the identification of the location of underground services g a list of names positions and responsibilities of all persons who will have specific responsibilities for health and safety including the name of a person directly responsible to the contractors senior management who has the defined responsibility for ensuring implementation of the hscp h emergency contacts including emergency services and other relevant authorities and procedures to ensure after hours attendance at the site in the event of an emergency i any site safety rules with the arrangements for ensuring that all persons at the workplace are appropriately supervised and informed of the site safety rules including a site induction and training plan to ensure that all site personnel including subcontractors are aware of how the hscp is to be implemented including any possible emergency response procedures .
the plan shall include personnel to be trained training objectives induction procedures and instruction on safe work method statements j the arrangements for ensuring that all persons at the worksite are appropriately trained and supervised k the arrangements for the coordination of the health and safety of persons engaged or employed in connection of the works l the arrangements to ensure that subcontractors comply with the requirements of the hscp m checklists to verify compliance with relevant standards and statutory requirements n the requirement for all personnel to wear fluorescent high visibility jackets and other appropriate safety equipment at all times on the site o procedures for trenching and excavation work when required .
num risk hazard assessments the contractor shall undertake a riskhazard assessment of each site work activity to determine the risks and treatments required to eliminate or significantly reduce so far as is reasonably practicable those riskshazards .
the details of the riskhazard assessment shall be recorded as safe work method statements highlighting statements that are for high risk construction work and copies are to be submitted with the hscp to the superintendent .
the safe work method statements and health and safety coordination plans shall be available department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth on site for the duration of the works to enable audit and surveillance to be conducted .
num health and safety coordination plan and declaration a hscp preparation the contractor shall be responsible for the preparation implementation and other arrangements associated with the health and safety coordination plan hscp .
the hscp shall include as a minimum the requirements of the hscp checklist as included in the appendices of this specification .
the hscp shall consider any other contract specific requirements identified elsewhere in the specification .
hp the contractor shall not less than num working days prior to commencing work submit to the superintendent i the health and safety coordination plan and ii a completed vicroads hscp checklist with contractors responses for each checklist item requirement .
num surveillance and audits by the superintendent the superintendent will arrange surveillance and audits to ensure that the contractor is complying with the health and safety coordination plan .
the contractor shall upon being given reasonable notice by the superintendent make or arrange to be available all facilities documentation records and personnel including those of any subcontractors that are reasonably required for surveillance and audits to be undertaken .
notwithstanding that the department of state growth may have previously undertaken audits andor surveillance of a subcontractors hscpsafe work method statement in connection with other work the contractor shall include the operations of all such subcontractors in the contractors health and safety coordination plan .
the department of state growth will carry out audit and surveillance of the work of all subcontractors as it sees fit in the same way that it may carry out audit and surveillance of all work done and materials supplied by the contractor .
the superintendent may for this purpose have recourse to audit and surveillance carried out for other department of state growth contracts .
copies of any such audit and surveillance reports used by the superintendent will be provided to the contractor .
num contractor signage at worksites a general in accordance with section num of the work health and safety regulations num the principal contractor for a construction project must ensure that signs are installed that i show the principal contractors name and telephone contact numbers including an after hours telephone number ii show the location of the site office for the project if any and iii are clearly visible from outside the workplace or the work area of the workplace where the construction project is being undertaken .
no separate payment will be made for the provision erection maintenance and removal of principal contractor signs .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth b sign design and materials the design and materials for principal contractor signs shall conform to and include the following black text on a white background background to be nonreflective or at most class num lettering in a series c font and complying with as num standard alphabets for road signs text size to be num to num mm high for freeways and num to num mm high for all other roads the company name or trading name the company phone number preceded by a pictorial representation of a phone or tel .
the display of a company logo which is optional and the sign size should be appropriate for the text size and contractor details .
c sign placement principal contractor signs shall be placed clear of traffic management devices and shall not interfere with other signage .
if there is a clear entry point to the work area these signs shall be located adjacent to said entry point if there is no clear entry point these signs shall be located at the start of the work area .
d sign display principal contractor signs shall be clearly visible and displayed for the duration of the works and maintained in good condition .
for works consisting of maintenance activities andor where work areas may be constantly moving principal contractor signs must be clearly displayed on work vehicles .
signs displayed on work vehicles need not comply with the sign design and materials specified above but should be clearly legible from a distance of num metres .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num examination and testing of materials and work roadworks num general this section covers some of the requirements for examination and testing of materials and work associated with road construction .
particular examination and testing requirements are separately specified in the relevant sections of the specification .
unless otherwise specified the cost of all testing shall be borne by the contractor .
num lot testing unless otherwise specified acceptance of material and work will be based on testing of the material or work in lots .
a lot will consist of a single layer batch or area of like work which has been constructed or produced under essentially uniform conditions and is essentially homogeneous with respect to material and appearance .
unless otherwise specified the extent of each lot shall not exceed one days production .
discrete portions of a lot which are nonhomogeneous with respect to material and appearance shall be excluded from the lot and shall be either treated as separate lots or reworked .
where the areas excluded from a lot as nonhomogeneous exceed num of the total lot area or at other specified percentages of the total lot area the whole of the lot shall be rejected .
num test rolling a general the contractor shall submit a test rolling procedure to the superintendent including the method of preparing an area for test rolling the extent of test rolling and a requirement to provide not less than num hours notice of the location and commencement time for the test rolling to the superintendent .
plant which is nominated for use in test rolling procedures shall comply with the following requirements i static smooth steel wheeled rollers shall have a mass of not less than num tonnes and a load intensity under either the front or rear wheels of not less than num tonnes per metre width of wheel .
ii pneumatic tyred plant shall have a mass of not less than num tonne and shall have a ground contact pressure under either the front or rear wheels of not less than num kpa per tyre .
the area over which this ground contact pressure shall be applied shall not be less than num mnum per tyre .
each layer should be test rolled immediately following completion of compaction but if test rolling is carried out at a later time the surface of the layer shall be watered and given a minimum of three passes with the test roller prior to commencement of test rolling .
b compliance compliance with the test rolling requirements shall be when an area withstands test rolling without visible deformation or springing .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num compaction and moisture content testing a general for the purpose of control of moisture content of material and for determination of compaction procedure the following definitions shall apply i material of nominal size num mm or less material which has num or less by wet mass retained on a num mm as sieve .
ii material of nominal size greater than num mm material which has more than num by wet mass retained on a num mm as sieve .
b definition of density ratio for asphalt and concrete pavement density ratio is defined as follows i asphalt pavement the percentage ratio of the field bulk density to the bulk density of the job design mix when compacted in the laboratory .
ii concrete pavement the percentage ratio of the field bulk density to the mean bulk density of cylinder specimens taken from the same lot .
c characteristic value of density ratio or moisture ratio the characteristic value of density ratio or moisture ratio of the lot shall be calculated as x nums for six tests per lot wherex and s are respectively the mean and the standard deviation of the individual density ratio or moisture ratio test values respectively for the lot .
the mean of density ratio or moisture ratio is defined by the standard deviation of density ratio or moisture ratio test values is defined by where xi inum num num n is the individual density ratio or moisture ratio test value and n is the number of tests per lot .
d testing small areas for earthworks and pavement construction any lot which has a surface area less than num mnum may be treated as a small area .
when testing a small area as a lot and where test requirements are based on characteristic values of density ratio andor moisture ratio acceptance of the lot shall be based on the mean values of num individual tests .
in this case the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the mean value of the individual tests exceeds by num or more the appropriate compaction scale requirement for the characteristic value of density ratio for a lot of six tests .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth e samples containing oversize material with a nominal size greater than num mm i assessment based on characteristic density ratio if the set of six samples includes no more than two samples having more than the permitted amount of num mm nominal size material the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the mean value of the individual tests exceeds the specified characteristic value of density ratio by num or more .
if there are less than num valid samples acceptance shall be based on the adoption of an acceptable compaction procedure and test rolling carried out in accordance with the requirement of this specification .
ii assessment based on mean density ratio if the set of three samples includes one or more samples having more than the permitted amount of material exceeding num mm in nominal size assessment shall be based on the adoption of an acceptable compaction procedure and test rolling carried out in accordance with the requirement of this specification .
f refilling test holes the contractor shall backfill test holes with material of similar quality to that removed from test holes during testing .
the backfill material shall be compacted in the holes in layers with a suitable compaction device .
g moisture ratio determination for material of nominal size greater than num mm moisture ratio shall be determined on that fraction of the material which passes the num mm as sieve .
for material of nominal size num mm or less moisture ratio shall be determined on the whole material taking into account any adjustment for oversize material as detailed in the relevant test method .
h acceptance testing all compaction testing of work carried out under this contract shall be deemed to be testing for acceptance unless written advice is provided to the superintendent prior to the commencement of the test that such testing is for inprocess monitoring only .
where the contractor provides prior written advice to this effect the results of such testing will not be allowable as testing for acceptance .
num testing of surface level of earthworks and pavement courses random level measurement procedure a general the requirements of this clause apply to the top of type b material in fills the cut floor level in cuts where type a material is specified the finished surface of the subgrade and pavement courses where scale a and scale b surface level is specified by the random level measurement procedure in accordance with the vicroads test method .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth b measurement of surface level measurement of surface level will be made using a level accurate to num mm per num m of reading distance with levels being recorded to the nearest num mm .
within each lot level measurements shall be compared with the corresponding design levels and individual departures from design xi shall be calculated as follows the mean of the departures from design levelx of n measurements will be determined to the nearest num mm as follows the standard deviation s will be determined as follows where xi measured level design level mm .
num testing of surface level of earthworks and pavement courses nonrandom level measurement procedure a general the requirements of this clause apply to the finished surface of the top of type b material in fills the cut floor level in cuts where type a material is specified the subgrade pavement courses where a nonrandom method of level assessment is permitted or where scale c level assessment is specified .
b earthwork formation the surface level of the finished earthwork formation including table drains verges the top of type b material in fills the cut floor level in cuts where type a material is specified and the prepared subgrade shall be checked longitudinally for conformity with the specified requirements at intervals not exceeding num m. level measurements shall be taken and recorded at all changes in gradient at the edges of prepared earthworks surfaces designated lane lines and at intervals not exceeding num m transversely across the prepared surfaces prior to placing type a material or pavement material .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth c pavement courses the surface level of each completed pavement course shall be checked longitudinally and transversely for conformity with the specified requirements at intervals not exceeding num m in the longitudinal direction .
at each location checked for longitudinal level conformity the surface level shall be checked in the transverse direction at all of the following locations i at the edges of the pavement ii at all changes of gradient across the pavement iii at intervals not exceeding num m across the pavement .
d pavement layer thickness in cases where drawings showing the finished surface level are not provided but the thickness of pavement courses or resheet is specified the contractor shall determine the thickness of pavement courses or resheet by taking the difference between the surface level measurements recorded in accordance with the requirements of clause numc .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num referenced documents for standard specifications for roadworks and bridgeworks num general this section provides a list of current companion documents referenced in the vicroads standard specifications for roadworks and bridgeworks .
the referenced documents in this section take precedent over any other referenced documents in other standard sections .
num department of state growth standard specifications for roadworks and bridgeworks sections the department of state growth standard specification series referred to in this section are as follows section num series general section num series formation section num series flexible pavements section num series asphalt and surface treatments section num series concrete pavements section num series bridgeworks section num series incidental construction section num series materials .
num hierarchy of documents the following hierarchy of documents shall be used if there is conflict between any referenced documents and the specification whereby the higher listed documents shall take precedence over lower listed documents acts of parliament and regulations federal victorian contract specific clauses standard section num all other standard specification sections vicroads codes of practice and bridge technical notes australian standards except test methods vicroads test methods australian standards test methods austroads test methods other standards and test methods vicroads technical bulletins austroads guideline documents and guides other publications department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num application and access to referenced documents acts of parliament these documents shall be obtained through the appropriate level of government either federal or victorian and are statutory requirements referred in standard sections .
a copy of the document can be viewed on the relevant government web site .
these documents are referenced in table num .
australian standards australian standards are commonly referenced to reduce the size of the specification document .
if only part of the australian standard is to apply the relevant standard section will specify particular andor alternative requirements .
whenever there is conflict between the australian standard and the standard section the standard section shall take precedent over the australian standard .
a list of current australian standards with a brief description of each can be viewed on the standards web site httpwww.standards.org.au .
these documents are referenced in table num .
australian standard test methods australian standard test methods are also listed in this section and are to be used unless there is an applicable vicroads test method listed .
the contractor is expected to become familiar with relevant australian standard test methods applicable to particular materials or groups of materials that are referenced by the australian standard or vicroads codes of practice .
where there is choice of more than one australian standard test method the test method to be used is specified in either vicroads code of practice num or num or by separate reference within this section .
australian standard test methods shall be obtained directly from standards australia gpo box num sydney nsw num .
a list of current australian standard test methods with a brief description of each can be viewed on the standards web site httpwww.standards.com.au .
these documents are referenced in table num .
vicroads codes of practice and bridge technical notes vicroads codes of practice and bridge technical notes are companion documents to the vicroads standard specifications and may or may not be referenced in the standard specifications .
the contractor is expected to obtain copies of the codes of practice or bridge technical notes to be read in conjunction with the standard specifications .
the relevant codes of practice or bridge technical notes as applicable to each standard section are specified in this section .
all current codes of practice and bridge technical notes can also be accessed from the vicroads website httpwww.vicroads.vic.gov.au .
these documents are referenced in table num .
vicroads test methods all testing laboratories are expected to become familiar with the contents of the vicroads manual of test methods .
the test methods to be used are specified in either vicroads code of practice num or num or by separate reference within this section .
vicroads test methods if applicable shall take precedent over all other test methods .
all current vicroads test methods can be accessed from the vicroads website httpwww.vicroads.vic.gov.au .
these documents are referenced in table num .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth austroads test methods austroads has produced a series of test methods for bituminous products .
the austroads test methods to be used will be either listed in this section or listed in vicroads code of practice num .
if there is to be a variation in the austroads method the variation will be described in code of practice num or in the relevant standard specification section .
the current austroads test methods can be obtained from the austroads web site httpwww.austroads.com.au .
these documents are referenced in table num .
vicroads technical bulletins vicroads has produced a number of technical bulletins .
these or parts of these documents may form part of this specification if referenced in the relevant standard section .
vicroads technical bulletins can be accessed from the vicroads website httpwww.vicroads.vic.gov.au .
these documents are referenced in table num .
austroads guides and specification framework documents austroads has produced a number of specification framework and guideline documents listed in this section .
these or parts of these documents may form part of this specification as specified in the relevant standard section .
austroads specification framework and guideline documents can be purchased from the arrb group num burwood highway vermont south .
these documents are referenced in table num .
other documents and international standards other referenced standards test methods and documents produced by organisations not mentioned above are also specified in this section e.g .
astm bs iso rta and apas .
these documents shall be obtained from australian standards or the relevant publishing authority responsible for the document .
these documents are referenced in table num standards and test methods and table num for other referenced documents .
num acts of parliament table num lists the acts of parliament that are applicable to the standard specification section contained in this specification .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num acts of parliament document standard specification section a new tax system goods and services tax act num num a new tax system goods and services tax act num num aboriginal relics act num num num aboriginal relics act num num num australian government building and construction occupational health and safety accreditation scheme num australian government building and construction occupational health and safety accreditation scheme num education act num num education act num num environmental management and pollution control act num num environmental management and pollution control act num num fair work building industry act num version incorporating amendments as at num november num num fair work building industry act num version incorporating amendments as at num november num num historic cultural heritage act num num num work health and safety act num num num num num num num num num num num num num work health and safety regulations num num num num num num num num num num num num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num australian standards table num lists the australian standards including test methods that are applicable to the standard specification section contained in this specification .
table num australian standards including test methods australian standard standard specification section as num series methods of testing concrete part num num sampling of fresh concrete part num num preparation of concrete mixes in the laboratory part num num num num rnum determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete part num num num determination of air content of freshly mixed concrete part num num num method of making and curing concrete compression indirect tensile and flexural part num num determination of the compressive strength of concrete specimens part num num num rnum determination of mass per unit volume of hardened concrete part num num determination of drying shrinkage of concrete for samples prepared in the field or in the laboratory part num num method for securing and testing cores from hardened concrete for compressive strength part num num determination of chloride and sulphate in hardened concrete and concrete aggregates part num num rnum determination of water absorption and apparent volume of permeable voids in hardened concrete num num num num num num num num num num num num as num num steel tubes and tubulars for ordinary service num num as num num graphical symbols for general engineering welding and non destructive examination num as num series iso metric hexagon bolts and screws part num num iso metric hexagon bolts and screws product grade c bolts part num num iso metric hexagon bolts and screws product grade c screws num num num num as num iso metric hexagon nuts part num num style num product grades a and b part num num style num product grades a and b part num num product grade c part num num chamfered thin nuts product grades a and b num num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num australian standards including test methods continued australian standard standard specification section as num series methods for sampling and testing aggregates part num sampling aggregates part num sampling rock spalls and boulders part num particle density and water absorption of coarse aggregate weighinginwater method part numamdt num num particle size distribution sieving method part num flakiness index part num voids in dry compacted filler part numamdt num num crushed particles part num rnum average least dimension nomograph part num wetdry strength variation part num los angeles value part num rnum degradation factor source rock part num secondary minerals content in igneous rocks part num ball mill value part num coarse aggregate quality by visual comparison num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num as num num bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements num num num as num num coldformed structural steel hollow sections num num as num series structural design actions part numamdt num permanent imposed and other actions part numamdt num wind actions num as num pt num to num numa to numb num num methods of test for hose made from elastomeric materials first group methods num num num numa numb num num as num pt numa to numd numf numg numj numa and numb num methods of test for hose made from elastomeric materials second group methods numa numb numc numd numf numg numj numa numb num as num numcor num polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe skived tape num as num numcor num polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe moulded sheet num as num num hotdip galvanized coatings on threaded fasteners iso metric coarse thread series num num num num num as num num series flat metal washers for general engineering purposes metric series part num num amdt num num plain washers for metric bolts screws and nuts for general purposes general plan part num num plain washers for metric bolts screws and nuts for general purposes tolerances num num asnzs num num high strength steel bolts with associated nuts and washers for structural engineering num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num australian standards including test methods continued australian standard standard specification section as num numamdt num num metric screw threads for fasteners num as num series methods of testing soils for engineering purposes part num moisture content oven drying part num moisture content hotplate part num amdt num num liquid limit std part num amdt num num liquid limit sub part num plasticity index part num grading part num rnum sand equivalent part num emerson class number part num ph value of a soil part num electrical resistivity part num standard compaction part num modified compaction part num assigned values of mdd and omc part num hilf density ratio and hilf moisture ratio part num field density and moisture content part num cbr part num shear strength of a soil using a shear box part num rnum permeability part num rnum permeability falling head num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num asnzs num num prestressing anchorages num as num num safety signs for the occupational environment num num asnzs num numamdt num num tolerances for flat rolled steel products num as num numamdt num num rigid cellular plastics sheets for thermal insulation rigid cellular polystyrene moulded rcps m num num as num numamdt num num specification and supply of concrete num num num num num num num num asnzs num num cup head bolts with iso metric coarse pitch threads num as num numamdt num num metallic materials tensile testing at ambient temperature num num as num numamdt num num steel sheet and strip coatings of zinc and zinc alloyed with aluminium and magnesium num as num num carbon steels and carbonmanganese steels coldfinished bars num num asnzs num numamdt num pvc pipes and fittings for pressure applications num as num num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout admixtures for concrete num num num num num num num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num australian standards including test methods continued australian standard standard specification section as num num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout methods of sampling and testing admixtures for concrete mortar and grout num num num num num num num asnzs num series structural steel welding code part num numamdt num num welding of steel structures part num numamdt num num stud welding steel studs to steel part num num welding of reinforcing steel part num num welding of steel structures subject to high levels of fatigue loading part num num welding stainless steels for structural purposes num num num num num num num num as num num scaffolding general requirements num as num series paints and related materials methods of test part num num dry film thickness paint inspection gauge part num num rnum consistency rotational viscometer part num numamdt num num nonvolatile content by mass part num num adhesion crosscut part num num adhesion pulloff test num num num num asnzs num num hotrolled steel flat products num num num num as num num precast reinforced concrete box culverts small culverts not exceeding num mm span and num mm height num as num num precast reinforced concrete box culverts large culverts exceeding num mm span and num mm height and up to and including num mm span and num mm height num as num series specification for preservative treatment series part num num sawn and round timber part num num reconstituted woodbased products part num num plywood part num num laminated veneer lumber lvl part num num glued laminated timber products num num as num series metal finishing part num num preparation and pretreatment of surfaces removal of oil grease and related contamination part num num power tool cleaning part num num preparation and pretreatment of surfaces abrasive blast cleaning of steel part num num pictorial surface preparation standards for painting steel surfaces num num num num num num num num num as num num elastomeric seals for waterworks purposes num as num num limes and limestones limes for building num num num num num num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num australian standards including test methods continued australian standard standard specification section as num series methods of test for elastomers part num num tension testing of vulcanized or thermoplastic rubber part num num determination of tear strength trouser angle and crescent test pieces part num num compression set of vulcanized rubber under constant deflection part num num durometer hardness num num as num timber structures part num numamdt num num design methods part num numamdt num num timber properties part num num fire resistance for structural adequacy of timber members num num as num num chainlink security fencing and gates num as num numamdt num num geotechnical site investigations num num num asnzs num num aluminium and aluminium alloys flat sheet coiled sheets and plate num as num series manual of uniform traffic control devices part num num general introduction and index of signs part num num traffic control for works on roads num num num num num num num as num num road signs specifications num num as num num standard alphabets for road signs num num as num num helical lockseam corrugated steel pipes superseded see asnzs num num as num num helical lockseam corrugated steel pipes design and installation superseded see asnzs num in part and asnzs num num in part num asnzs num series retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes part num num retroreflective materials part num num retroreflective materials non pavement application part num num raised pavement markers retroreflective and non retroreflective num num num num num num num num as num num welding of ferrous castings steel castings num as num num bitumen for pavements num num num num num asnzs num numamdt num num glass beads for pavement marking materials num asnzs num num buried corrugated metal structures design methods num asnzs num num buried corrugated metal structures installation num asnzs num num buried corrugated metal structures helically formed sinusoidal pipes num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num australian standards including test methods continued australian standard standard specification section as num series conduits and fittings for electrical installations part num num general requirements part num num rigid plain conduits and fittings of insulating material part num num rigid plain conduits and fittings of fibrereinforced concrete material part num num flexible plain conduits and fittings of insulating material part num num corrugated conduits and fittings of insulating material part num num profilewall smoothbore conduits and fittings of insulating material part num num rigid metal conduits and fittings part num num flexible conduits and fittings of metal or composite material num as num num nondestructive testing penetrant testing of products and components num as num num cast steels num as num num timber hardwood visually stress graded for structural purposes num as num num traffic signal lantern num as num num hot mix asphalt a guide to good practice num num num as num num cutback bitumen num num as num numamdt num num piling design and installation num num num num num num num as num numamdt num num calibration and classification of forcemeasuring systems num num num num num as num methods for destructive testing of welds in metal part num fillet break test part num macro metallographic test for cross section examination num num num as num num galvanic sacrificial anodes for cathodic protection num as num numamdt num num plywood and blockboard for exterior use num num asnzs num num glossary of paint and painting terms num num asnzs num num guide to the painting of buildings num num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num australian standards including test methods continued australian standard standard specification section asnzs num guide to the protection of structural steel against atmospheric corrosion by use of protective coatings part num num paint coatings part num num hot dip galvanising num num num num num num as num num rnum steel nails metric series num asnzs num series methods of testing bitumen and related road making products part num determination of dynamic viscosity by vacuum capillary viscometer part num determination of kinematic viscosity by flow through a capillary tube part num determination of dynamic viscosity by rotational viscometer part num determination of matter insoluble in toluene part num determination of the effect of heat and air on a moving film of bitumen rolling thin film oven rtfo test part num determination of penetration obsolescent part num rnum longterm exposure to heat and air part num determination of softening point ring and ball method num num num as num num pedestrian pushbutton assemblies num as num num coated steel wire fencing products for terrestrial aquatic and general use num as num series perforated plastics drainage and effluent pipe and fittings part num num perforated drainage pipe and associated fittings part num num perforated effluent pipe and associated fittings for sewerage applications num as num num colour standards for general purposes note each colour has its own standard requirement under as num num num num num num num as num num rnum methods of sampling and testing mortar for masonry constructions methods of sampling num as num num ambient air particulate matter determination of impinged matter expressed as direction dirtiness background dirtiness andor area dirtiness directional dust gauge method superseded see asnzs num num num as num num aggregates and rock for engineering purposes concrete aggregates num num num num num as num series cathodic protection of metals part num num pipes and cables part num num compact buried structures part num num fixed immersed structures part num num internal surfaces part num num steel in concrete structures num as num num timber softwood visually stress graded for structural purposes num as num num concrete kerbs and channels gutters manually or machine placed num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num australian standards including test methods continued australian standard standard specification section as num series methods of sampling and testing asphalt part num num sampling loose asphalt part num num sampling coring method part num num sampling asphalt from slabs part num num sample preparation mixing quartering and conditioning of asphalt in the laboratory part num num sample preparation compaction of asphalt test specimens using a gyratory compactor part num num binder content and aggregate grading reflux method part num num binder content and aggregate grading centrifugal extraction method part num num binder content and aggregate grading pressure filter method part num num determination of stability and flow marshall procedure part num num determination of maximum density of asphalt water displacement method part num num determination of maximum density of asphalt methylated spirits displacement part num num voids and density relationships for compacted asphalt mixes part num num determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt waxing procedure part num num determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt presaturation method part num num determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt mensuration method part num num moisture content of asphalt part num num degree of particle coating part num num determination of the resilient modulus of asphalt indirect tensile method part num num determination of field density of compacted asphalt using a nuclear surface moisturedensity gauge direct transmission mode part num num determination of field density of compacted asphalt using a nuclear surface moisturedensity gauge backscatter mode part num num determination of field density of compacted asphalt using a nuclear thinlayer density gauge part num num field density tests calibration of nuclear thinlayer density gauge using standard blocks part num num field density tests calibration of nuclear surface moisturedensity gauge backscatter mode part num num density ratio of compacted asphalt num num num num num num num num num num num num num asnzs num numamdt num num electrical installations known as the australiannew zealand wiring rules num num num num asnz num num electrical installations construction and demolition sites num as num num oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num australian standards including test methods continued australian standard standard specification section as num numamdt num num steel wire ropes product specification num as num series method for sampling and analysis of ambient air part num num determination of suspended particulate matter pmnum high volume sampler with size selective inlet gravimetric method part num num determination of suspended particulate matter dichotomous sampler pmnum coarse pm and pmnum gravimetric method part num num determination of suspended particulate matter pmnum continuous direct mass method using a tapered element oscillating microbalance analyser part num num determination of suspended particulate matter pmsubnumsub low volume sampler gravimetric method part num numamdt num num determination of suspended particulate matter pmnum beta attenuation monitors part num num rnum determination of particulate matter deposited matter gravimetric method part num num determination of particulate matter impinged matter gravimetric method num num as num series supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement part num numamdt num num fly ash part num num slag ground granulated iron blast furnace part num num amorphous silica num num num num num num num num num num num as num numamdt num num concrete structures num num num num num num num num as num num formwork for concrete documentation and surface finish num num num num num num asnzs num num structural steel hotrolled plates floor plates and slabs num num num num num num asnzs num series structural steel part num num hot rolled bars and sections part num num welded i sections num num num num num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num australian standards including test methods continued australian standard standard specification section as num num longspan corrugated steel structures materials and manufacture as num num longspan corrugated steel structures design and installation available superseded see asnzs num in part and asnzs num in part num as num num geotextiles identification marking and general data num num num num num as num series geotextiles methods of test part num num determination of tensile properties wide strip and grab method part num num determination of burst strength california bearing ratio cbr plunger method part num num determination of puncture resistance drop cone method part num num determination of poresize distribution drysieving method part num num determination of durability resistance to degradation by light heat and moisture num num num num num as num num potting mixes num as num series paints for steel structures part num num full gloss polyurethane twopack part num num organic zincrich primer part num num rnum epoxy primer twopack part num num rnum highbuild epoxy twopack part num num rnum inorganic zinc silicate paint part num num rnum moisture cure urethane singlepack systems num num num num num as num num liquid membraneforming curing compounds for concrete num num num num num num num asnzs num num road safety barrier systems num num as num series site testing of protective coatings part num num rnum determination of dry film thickness part num num rnum assessment of degree of cure part num num rnum determination of surface profile part num num rnum determination of residual contaminants part num num inspection report daily surface and ambient conditions part num num equipment report part num num inspection report coating part num num inspection report daily part num num inspection report daily painting num num as num num general purpose and blended cements num num num num num num num num num num num num num as num num nondestructive testing visual inspection of metal products and components num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num australian standards including test methods continued australian standard standard specification section as num series paints and related materials pavement marking materials part num num solventborne paint for use with surface applied glass beads part num num thermoplastic pavement marking materials for use with surface applied glass beads part num numamdt num waterborne paint for use with surface applied glass beads part num num high performance pavement marking systems num num asnzs num precast concrete pipes pressure and nonpressure num num as num numamdt num supp num num steel structures commentary num num as num num hand torque tools see iso num num as num numamdt num polyethylene pe pipes for pressure applications num num as num num methods of testing rocks for engineering purposes rock strength tests determination of point load strength index num as num num fibre reinforced concrete pipes and fittings num asnzs num num high pressure water jetting systems safe operation and maintenance num as num num pruning of amenity trees num num as num num soils for landscaping and garden use num as num numamdt num composts soil conditioners and mulches num asnzs num num masonry units pavers flags and segmental retaining wall units masonry units num asnzs num masonry units segmental pavers and flags methods of test part.num numamdt num sampling for test part num numamdt num determining compressive strength of masonry units num as num num test methods for limes and limestones lime index available lime num num num as num num zinc and zincaluminiumalloy coatings on steel wire num asnzs num num slip resistance measurement of existing pedestrian surfaces wet method num asnzs num numamdt num steel reinforcing materials num num num num num num asnzs num series steel prestressing materials part num num general requirements part num num testing requirements num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num australian standards including test methods continued australian standard standard specification section asnzs num numamdt num num earth retaining structures num asnzs num num hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num as num numamdt num num metal castings ferrous sand moulded num asnzs num num hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on ferrous open sections applied by an inline process num asnzs num num hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on ferrous hollow sections applied by a continuous or a specialized process num asnzs num num occupational health and safety management systems specification with guidance for use num as num num application specifications for coating systems single coat inorganic ethyl zinc silicate solventborne num as num series bridge design part num numamdt num num foundations and soil supporting structures part num numamdt num num bearings and deck joints appendix d part num numamdt num num bridge design concrete part num numamdt num num steel and composite construction as num supp num bridge design concrete commentary supplement to as num num as num supp num bridge design steel and composite construction commentary supplement to as num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num as num num methods for preparation and testing of stabilized materials cement content of cement stabilized materials num num num as num num methods for preparation and testing of stabilized materials unconfined compressive strength of compacted materials num num num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num vicroads codes of practice and bridge technical notes table num lists the vicroads codes of practice and bridge technical notes that are applicable to the standard specification section contained in this specification .
table num vicroads codes of practice and bridge technical notes vicroads codes of practice standard specification section vicroads rc num december num code of practice for source rock investigations num num num num num num vicroads rc num march num code of practice for registration of bituminous mix designs num num num num num num num num num vicroads rc num december num code of practice for registration of crushed rock mix designs num num num num vicroads rc num march num code of practice for acceptance of field compaction num num num num num num num num num num num num vicroads rc num december num code of practice for testing aggregates for sprayed bituminous surfacing num num vicroads rc num september num code of practice for surveillance and testing of materials and work num num num num vicroads rc num march num code of practice for selection of test methods for testing of materials and work num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num vicroads rc num march num code of practice for assignment of cbr strength and percentage swell to earthworks fill and pavement materials num num num num num num vicroads rc num march num code of practice for lime stabilised earthworks materials available lime content assignment of cbr and swell num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num vicroads codes of practice and bridge technical notes continued bridge technical notes standard specification section vicroads bridge technical note num vnum july num design of deck joints for road bridges num vicroads bridge technical note num vnum july num noise barriers num vicroads bridge technical note num vnum june num detailing of reinforced soil facing panels num vicroads bridge technical note num vnum january num design criteria for large rectangular precast r.c culvert units num num num num vicroads bridge technical note num vnum june num reinforcement of deck joints num vicroads bridge technical note num vnum june num procedures for testing pot bearings num vicroads bridge technical note num vnum march num design of laminated elastometric bearings num vicroads bridge technical note num vnum september num buried corrugated metal structures num vicroads bridge technical note num vnum november num design of steel cantilever and portal sign structures and high mast light poles num vicroads bridge technical note num vnum november num bending splicing and welding of grade num reinforcement num vicroads bridge technical note num vnum may num post flood management of bridges num vicroads bridge technical note num vnum october num bonded anchors num num vicroads bridge technical note num vnum september num use of fiber reinforced polymer frp composites for strengthening of bridge structures num num vicroads bridge technical note num vnum may num design parameters for driven piles num num num num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num vicroads test methods table num lists additional vicroads test methods to be used that are not mentioned in vicroads codes of practice num or num .
table num vicroads test methods vicroads test method standard specification section vicroads rc num march num slump flow tnum time and jring passing ability for self compacting concrete scc num vicroads rc num june num determination of the tensile bond strength of concrete repairs and strengthening systems num num vicroads rc num june num determination of aggregate moisture content and estimated free water using microwave or hot plate num vicroads rc num june num density ratio and moisture ratio lot characteristics vicroads rc num num selection of test sites within a test lot random stratified sampling method num num num num num num num num num vicroads rc num june num moisture ratio determination for assessment of dryback of granular pavement materials num vicroads rc num october num surface texture by sand patch vicroads rc num december num stripping of aggregate from sprayed seals num num num num num vicroads rc num december num cementitious binder and granular additive content for the stabilisation of pavement materials vicroads rc num march num determination of the maximum allowable working time for a cementitious binder vicroads rc num january num decay correction factor for granular materials stabilised with cementitious binder num num num num num vicroads rc num june num degradation factor fine aggregate num num num num num vicroads rc num june num coarse aggregate quality by visual assessment see as num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num vicroads rc num june num foreign materials in crushed concrete num num num vicroads rc num march num polished stone value based on bs en num num num num num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num vicroads test methods continued vicroads test method standard specification section vicroads rc num august num potential aggregatesilica reactivity accelerated mortar bar method num vicroads rc num june num alkali aggregate reactivity assessment using the concrete prism test num vicroads rc num november num skid resistance of a road pavement using scrim num num vicroads rc num june num pavement roughness inertial laser profiler method num vicroads rc num june num pavement roughness arrb tr walking profiler method num vicroads rc num june num measurement of surface levels of pavement layers a generic spreadsheet is supplied with this method num num num num num num vicroads rc num october num ride quality pavement construction arrb tr walking profiler method num vicroads rc num october num ride quality pavement construction static level method num vicroads rc num october num ride quality pavement construction inertial laser profiler method num vicroads rc num december num determination of retroreflectivity of pavement markings num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num austroads test methods table num lists austroads test methods to be used that may not be listed in vicroads codes of practice num or num .
table num austroads test methods austroads test method standard specification section austroads agpttnum march num vnum method of sampling pmbs polymers and crumb rubber num num num num num agpttnum june num vnum pretreatment and loss of heating of bitumen multigrade and polymer modified binders rolling thin film oven rtfo test num austroads agpttnum december num vnum particle size and properties of crumb rubber num austroads agpttnum march num vnum morphology of crumbed rubber bulk density test references arrb air num table num num austroads agpttnum may num vnum sampling of bituminous slurry num austroads agpttnum january num vnum deformation resistance of asphalt mixes by the wheel tracking test num austroads agpttnum january num vnum stripping potential of asphalt tensile strength ratio num austroads agpttnum june num vnum asphalt binder drain off num num num austroads agpttnum june num vnum asphalt particle loss num austroads agpttnum june num vnum binder film index num austroads agpttnum january num vnum ball penetration test num austroads agpttnum may num vnum determination of set and cure for bituminous slurry cohesion test num austroads agpttnum june num vnum determination of abrasion loss of bituminous slurry wet track abrasion test num austroads agpttnum may num vnum characterisation of flexural stiffness and fatigue performance of bituminous mixes num agpttnum may num vnum calibration of bitumen sprayers general introduction and list of methods agpttnum november num vnum volumetric calibration of bitumen pumps agpttnum november num vnum transverse distribution by fixed pit facility agpttnum november num vnumtransverse distribution by field mat agpttnum april num vnum transverse distribution by portable trough agpttnum november num vnum road speed calibration agpttnum november num vnum viscosity of test fluid num num num austroads agpttnum june num vnum field spread rate of cover aggregate num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num other standards and test methods table num lists standards and test methods other than vicroads australian standards or austroads published by other authorities or agencies and which are applicable to the standard specification section contained in the specification .
these include astm bs and rta test methods .
table num other standards and test methods document standard specification section standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater numnd edition water tests series num num conductivity joint publication ahpa american public health association awwa american water works association water environment federation num num num num num num num num asca snum num numrd edition installation requirements for customer cabling wiring rules num num australian technical infrastructure committee atic aticspnum september num fasteners for structural purposes num australian technical infrastructure committee atic aticspnum march num cementitious materials for concrete num australian paint approval scheme specifications series apas num november num inorganic zinc coating for protection of steel apas num may num polyurethane coating for protection of steel standard durability apas num june num organic zinc rich coating for protection of steel primers apas num december num single pack moisture cure urethane coating for the long term protection of steel apas num december num epoxy twopack durable primer for protection of steel in atmosphere apas num december num medium build twopack epoxy coating for the long term protection of steel in atmosphere num apas num october num road marking paint solvent borne apas num october num road marking paint water borne apas num june num glass beads for pavement marking paint num american concrete institute aci nummnum num specification for carbon and glass fiberreinforced polymer bar materials for concrete reinforcement num astm anumanummnumbc specification for chromium and chromiumnickel stainless steel plate sheet and strip for pressure vessels and for general applications .
num finishes specified in astm anumanummnum specification for general requirements for flatrolled stainless and heatresisting steel plate sheet and strip num astm anum standard practice for steel castings surface acceptance standards visual examination num astm anumanummnum standard specification for steel fibers for fiberreinforced concrete num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num other standards and test methods continued document standard specification section astm anumanummnum num standard specification for zinc alloy thermodiffusion coatings tdc on steel fasteners hardware and other products num astm bnum standard specification for titanium and titanium alloy strip sheet and plate num astm cnumcnummnum standard guide for petrographic examination of aggregates for concrete num astm cnum standard test method for extrusion rate and application life of elastomeric sealants num astm cnum standard test method for tackfree time of elastomeric sealants num astm cnum standard test method for effects of laboratory accelerated weathering on elastomeric joint sealants num astm cnuma standard test method for adhesionin peel of elastomeric joint sealants num astm c numa standard test method for expansion and bleeding of freshly mixed grouts for preplaced aggregate concrete in the laboratory num astm cnumcnummnumanum standard specification for fiberreinforced concrete num astm cnumcnummnum standard test method for obtaining average residualstrength of fiber reinforced concrete num astm cnumcnummnum standard test method for flexural performance of fiberreinforced concrete using beam with thirdpoint loading num astm dnumdnummnum test method for penetration of bituminous materials num astm dnumdnummnumenum standard test method for softening point of bitumen ringandball apparatus num astm dnumb standard test method for flash and fire points by cleveland open cup num astm dnumanum standard test methods for vulcanized rubber and thermoplastic rubbers and thermoplastic elastomers tension num astm dnum standard test methods for density and specific gravity relative density of plastics by displacement method a num num num astm dnumdnummnum standard test method for viscosity of asphalts by vacuum capillary viscometer num astm dnum standard test method for rubber property durometer hardness standard curing num num astm dnum standard specification for preformed polychloroprene elastomeric joint seals for concrete pavements num num astm dnumenum test method for apparent viscosity of petroleum waxes compounded with additives hot melts num astm dnum standard specification for lubricant for installation of preformed compression seals in concrete pavements num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num other standards and test methods continued document standard specification section astm dnumdnummnum standard test method for tensile properties of single textile fibers num astm dnum standard test method for ph of chemically cleaned or etched concrete surfaces num astm dnum standard test method for indicating moisture in concrete by the plastic sheet method num num astm dnum standard practice for measurement of wet film thickness by notch gages num num astm dnum standard test methods for sealants and fillers hotapplied for joints and cracks in asphaltic and portland cement concrete pavements num astm dnumdnummnum standard test method for tensile properties of fiber reinforced polymer matrix composite bars num bs num num testing concrete .
recommendations for the determination of the initial surface absorption of concrete num bs en num num products and systems for the protection and repair of concrete structures .
test methods .
testing of anchoring products by the pullout method .
num bs num testing of resin and polymercement compositions for use in construction .
part num num method for preparation of test specimens part num num method for measurement of compressive strength part num num methods for measurement of modulus of elasticity in flexural and flexural strength part num num method for measurement of tensile strength num num num bs num numanum stainless steel bars for the reinforcement of and use in concrete .
requirements and test methods num bs en num num tests for mechanical and physical properties of aggregate .
determination of the polished stone value see rc num num num bs en num stainless steels series part num num list of stainless steels part num num technical delivery conditions for sheetplate and strip of corrosion resisting steels for general purposes part num num technical delivery conditions for semifinished products bars rods wire sections and bright products of corrosion resisting steels for general purposes part num num technical delivery conditions for sheetplate and strip of corrosion resisting steels for construction purposes part num num technical delivery conditions for bars rods wire sections and bright products of corrosion resisting steels for construction purposes num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num other standards and test methods continued document standard specification section iso num quality management systems fundamentals and vocabulary iso num quality management principles asnzs iso numamdt num quality management systems requirements iso num environmental management systems iso num guidelines for auditing management systems num num num num num num num num num num iso num conformity assessment requirements for the operation of various types of bodies performing inspection standard governing nata inspection services num num num num isoiec numcor num general requirements for the competence of testing and calibration laboratories technical corrigendum num standard governing nata laboratories iso num corrosion of metals and alloys corrosivity of atmospheres classification determination and estimation num num num num num num num num num num num num num num iso num assembly tools for screws and nuts hand torque tools requirements and test methods for design conformance testing quality conformance testing and recalibration procedure see as num num num iso num zinc dust pigments for paints specifications and test methods iso num preparation of steel substrates before application of paints and related products visual assessment of surface cleanliness .
part num num rust grades and preparation grades of uncoated steel substrates and of steel substrates after overall removal of previous coatings .
part num num preparation grades of welds edges and other areas with surface imperfections .
iso num preparation of steel substrates before application of paints and related products test methods for nonmetallic blast cleaning abrasives determination of watersoluble contaminations by conductivity measurements .
num num iso num geosynthetics widewidth tensile test iso num geosynthetics tensile test for jointsseams by widewidth strip method iso num geotextiles and geotextilerelated products determination of tensile creep and creep rupture behaviour num num amssnumddecember num sealing compound temperature resistant integral fuel tanks and fuel cell cavities high adhesion mil s numf september num status cancelled .
num num ansimss spnum quality standard for steel castings for valves flanges and fittings and other piping components visual method manufacturers standardisation society of the valve and fittings industry num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num other standards and test methods continued document standard specification section rmsnsw tnum november num residue on sieving of bituminous material and bitumen emulsion num rmsnsw tnum november num nonvolatile content of concrete admixtures and curing compounds num rmsnsw tnum november num recording the infrared spectrum of materials num rmsnsw tnum november num adhesion of sealant num num rmsnsw tnum november num accelerated ageing of cured sealant num atic spec spnum num cementitious materials for concrete published by atic australian technical infrastructure committee and its immediate predecessor ccurg cement and concrete users review group num wtia technical note no .
num num flame cutting of steels num num num vicroads technical bulletins table num lists the vicroads technical bulletins either referenced in the standard sections or if not referenced documents that may be used to obtain additional information .
table num vicroads technical bulletins vicroads technical bulletin standard specification section vicroads tb num april num guide to the selection and design of geotextile reinforced sprayed seals num vicroads tb num december num pavement investigation guide to inspection and testing num vicroads tb num june num curing of concrete num num vicroads tb num april num bituminous sprayed surfacing manual num vicroads tb num november num guide to surveillance of structural steelwork num num num num num num vicroads tb num november num guide to surveillance of precast concrete tbnum amendment no .
numvnum num num num vicroads tb num november num guide to surveillance of protective coatings of structural steelwork num num department of state growth num austroads guides and specification framework documents table num lists all austroads guides and specification framework documents applicable to the standard section contained in this specification and other relevant austroads guides for further information .
table num austroads guides and specification framework documents austroads document standard specification section austroads agptnumbnum guide to pavement technology part numb asphalt num austroads agpttnum num specification framework for polymer modified binders num num num num austroads aptnum guidelines and specifications for bituminous slurry surfacing num austroads aptnum update of spray seal design num austroads aptnum update of doubledouble design for austroads sprayed seal design method num austroads agrs num guide to road safety part num road safety audit num num other reference documents table num lists all other documents applicable to the standard specification section contained in this specification or required for further information .
table num other reference documents document standard specification section aashto manual for assessing safety hardware mashnum num num aashto lrfd specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals numst edition num num catalogue no .
num producer price indexes table num num road and bridge construction victoria num sai global communications cabling manual volumes num and num may num volume num handbooks codes and regulations volume num standards copies of the standards asca snum installation requirements for customer cabling wiring rules and asca snumamdt num num requirements for customer cabling products .
may also be downloaded from the communications alliance ca website free of charge .
num num australian seed federation national code of practice for seed labelling and marketing september num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth document standard specification section australian and new zealand guidelines for fresh and marine water quality volume num the guidelines october num pimc and nrmmc volume num errata june num num table num other reference documents continued document standard specification section country fire authority cfa roadside fire management guidelines num num department of environment land water and planning formerly department of sustainability and environment native vegetation revegetation planting standards june num guidelines for establishing native vegetation for net gain accounting num department of environment land water and planning formerly department of sustainability and environment victorias native vegetation management a framework for action num repealed may num now permitted clearing of native vegetation biodiversity assessment guidelines september num num energy safe victoria esv publications and safety alerts num energy safe victoria esv office of chief electrical inspector code of practice for safe electrical work low voltage electrical installations num num energy safe victoria esv office of the chief electrical inspector electricity safety electric line clearance regulations num num engineers australia australian runoff quality a guide to water sensitive urban design wsud december num num num epa publication no .
num construction techniques for sediment pollution control may num num num epa publication no .
num bunding october num num num epa publication no .
num classification of wastes may num num num num epa publication no .
num guidelines for environmental management use of reclaimed water november num num num epa publication no .
num environmental guidelines for major construction sites february num international erosion control association best practice erosion and sediment control ieca num num num epa publication no .
num groundwater sampling guidelines april num num num epa publication no .
num guideline for environmental management spraying bituminous materials november num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth document standard specification section epa publication no .
num doing it right on subdivisions temporary environmental protection measures for subdivision construction sites october num num num florabank guidelines and codes of practice florabank model code of practice florabank guidelines nos num httpwww.florabank.org.au num table num other reference documents continued document standard specification section industrial waste resource guidelines iwrg sampling and analysis of waters wastewaters soils and waste iwrgnum june num replaces epa publication no num num num international erosion control association ieca australasia best practice erosion and sediment control bpesc num num melbourne water num water sensitive urban design engineering procedures stormwater num num nchrp report num trb num recommended procedures for the safety performance evaluation of highway features superseded by aashto manual for assessing safety hardware mashnum num num vicroads biodiversity guidelines num num num vicroads contaminated land planning construction and maintenance guidelines num num vicroads cultural heritage guidelines num num num vicroads integrated water management guidelines june num num num vicroads its group standard drawings and specifications num vicroads manual of standard drawings for road signs november num superseded by vicroads supplement to as num num road signs specification num vicroads road design guidelines standard drawings for roadworks final drawing presentation vicroads supplement to austroads guide to road design num num vicroads road design note numcamdt num may num the use of wire rope safety barriers wrsb num vicroads road design note numg may num accepted safety barrier products num vicroads road design note num october num accepted frangible post systems num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth document standard specification section vicroads road design note numc august num accepted guide posts num vicroads road design note numa august num accepted retroreflective sheeting materials num vicroads road management plan see road management act and codes on vicroads web site num vicroads roads structures inspection manual rsim june num num vicroads roadside handbook see road management act and codes on vicroads website num table num other reference documents continued document standard specification section vicroads safety requirements for traffic devices works on traffic signals and on road electrical and communication devices see also code of practice worksite safety traffic management and office of chief electrical inspector code of practice for safe electrical work num vicroads supplement to as num num num num num vicroads sustainability and climate change policy num num num vicroads technical guidelines noise guidelines construction and maintenance works num num num vicroads temporary sedimentation basin design tool vnum num num vicroads traffic engineering manual volume num signs and markings april num vicroads traffic engineering manual volume num chapter num edition num december num num num num num num vicroads water usage policy refer to sustainability and climate change policy num and sustainability and climate change strategy num num num victorian stormwater committee urban stormwater best practice environmental management guidelines published by csiro publishing num water services association of australia publication wsa num version num conduit inspection reporting code of australia num department of state growth section num environmental management this section specifies the minimum environmental management obligations relating to the work to be constructed under this contract .
additional contract specific requirements may be included in section num .
part a environmental management part b water quality part c air quality part d erosion and sediment control part e contaminated soils and materials part f waste and resource use part g fuels and chemicals part h noise part i flora and fauna part j cultural heritage part k reporting part a environmental management num.anum introduction works under the contract shall be undertaken so that impacts on the environment are avoided or minimised .
the contractor shall ensure that the environmental objectives and measures outlined in the relevant state and federal legislation are complied with .
where different objectives are nominated the more stringent requirement shall be adopted .
the contractor shall prepare a project specific environmental management plan for the management of activities that impact on the environment in accordance with the requirements of this section .
strikethrough the following paragraph where project is not identified as containing high environmental risk seek advice from environmental sustainability work under the contract includes activities which the department of state growth has assessed as having potentially high environmental risk .
the contractor shall ensure a strong focus on environmental management is maintained whilst executing the work under the contract including the provision of staff with environmental skills and experience to manage these risks .
num.anum definitions ancillary work area an area outside the limit of works that is used by the contractor to support the delivery of the project .
this may include but is not limited to the establishment of site compounds borrow areas and temporary sedimentation basins and temporary works .
contaminated material the presence of any chemical substance or waste that exists above the natural background level of the land or water and represents or potentially represents an adverse health or environmental impact .
cultural heritage protected objects and protected sites as defined in the aboriginal relics act num and heritage areas and places of historic cultural heritage significance as defined in the historic cultural heritage act num including but not limited to aboriginal artefacts department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth scarred trees burial sites and historic bridges and buildings .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth environmental management plan emp contractors document that provides an overview of the environmental management processes to be utilised for work under the contract including procedures to protect the beneficial uses of the environment and and details proposalsactions to be undertaken for the management of individual stages of work defined by work activity andor location that impact on the environment .
environmental incident an event which results in or has the potential to result in the environmental requirements in this contract being breached and occurs at any location where works under the contract are performed .
noise sensitive receptors dwellings that may be affected by construction noise during the day such as aged persons homes hospitals schools kindergartens libraries and other noise sensitive community buildings .
rain event when rainfall results in an offsite discharge andor when onsite construction activities are ceased due to rain andor rainfall that is equal to or greater than the rainfall intensity chart attached as attachment a to this section num .
waterway means a water resource as defined in the water management act num watercourse means a river creek or other natural stream of water whether modified or not flowing in a defined channel or between banks notwithstanding that the flow may be intermittent or seasonal or the banks not clearly or sharply defined and includes a a dam that collects water flowing in any such stream and b a lake through which water flows and c a channel into which the water of any such stream has been diverted and d part of any such stream and the floodplain of any such stream .
but does not include e a channel declared by the regulations to be excluded from this definition or f a drain or drainage depression in the contours on the land which only serves to relieve upper land of excess water in times of major precipitation .
num.anum environmental management plans the contractor shall be responsible for the preparation implementation and other arrangements associated with the environmental management plan emp .
the emp shall include as a minimum a a statement of scope purpose and environmental objectives b a schedule of environmental elements that are expected to be affected by the works under the contract including an outline of proposed mitigation treatments and proposed timeframes c the identification of work activities and an assessment of their potential impacts and associated risks to onsite and offsite environmental receptors e.g .
community land uses watercourses flora and fauna cultural heritage etc .
including times when the contractor is not on site including but not limited to matters covered in this specification d processes and responsibilities for the implementation onsite review and maintenance of emp and associated controls reporting and investigation of environmental incidents or complaints relating to any environmental issue under the contract an adaptive approach for the review and update of the emp as works progress andor following nonconformances complaints or previously unidentified issues after hours response including arrangements for containing environmental damage and attendance on site in the event of an emergency department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth e legal and other requirements details of approvals licences and permits necessary to meet statutory requirements and associated conditions f competence training and awareness an induction and training plan to ensure that all site personnel including subcontractors understand the emp and are aware how the emp is to be implemented in relation to the works including any possible emergency response procedures g operational control the emp shall document environmental procedures to manage all identified impacts and environmental protection requirements including the requirements where relevant in section num parts b h and any specific environmental requirements in section num .
these procedures shall include inspection and monitoring h scaled drawings that clearly show the location and extent of environmental controls modifications to existing control devices and monitoring locations i emergency preparedness and response an emergency response procedure shall include processes for managing any environmental emergency onsite such as contacting relevant stakeholders and cleanup of the site j nonconformity environmental incidents and corrective and preventative action procedures k audit a documented process for audit of the emp against the contract requirements including the effectiveness of onsite environmental protection measures .
the emp shall consider any other contract specific requirements identified elsewhere in the specification .
hp the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for review an emp not less than two weeks prior to the commencement of work .
work shall not commence until the superintendent is satisfied that the emp meets the requirements of the specification for that stage of work the controls detailed in the emp relevant to that stage of work are implemented .
control measures identified in the emp shall be installed prior to works commencing or at the programmed timing for their implementation .
control measures shall be maintained in working order for the duration of the associated works .
the superintendent will undertake surveillance of the contract and may arrange for audits of the emp and may issue a non compliance report .
if the contractor does not take action within seven days of receipt of a non compliance report remedial action may be arranged by the superintendent and the cost of such remedial work shall be deducted from money due to the contractor .
num.anum training prior to commencement of works onsite the contractor shall ensure that all personnel are informed of the environmental issues and specific risks associated with the project and the required management and mitigation measures to address these risks .
prior to commencement of works onsite the contractor shall ensure that personnel directly involved in the implementation of the emp and the installation and maintenance of control measures for this contract have demonstrated competence and suitable experience in environmental management in a construction environment or have successfully completed a nationally accredited training course which addresses management practices for erosion and sediment control green card or equivalent .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth num.anum permits the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary permits and approvals from the relevant authorities other than those already obtained by the department of state growth .
copies of all relevant documentation relating to permits and approvals obtained by the contractor shall be provided to the superintendent within one week of their receipt and prior to any works relating to the permit commencing .
copies of all permits and approvals will be kept on site .
the contractor shall be responsible for implementing any conditions identified in any permits whether obtained by the department of state growth or the contractor .
all permits and associated conditions shall be identified in the emp .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part b water quality num.bnum water quality a general the quality of water in watercourses shall not be detrimentally impacted by runoff from the site .
water quality and rainfall shall be monitored for the parameters identified in table num.bnum during all stages of construction to ensure that the water quality in the receiving waterways does not vary between the upstream and downstream limits of the works site during the period where upstream results become the background limits although a variation between results of no more than twice the measurement uncertainty of the instrument will be allowable or is as agreed between the contractor the superintendent and epa .
table num.bnum construction monitoring parameter method turbidity ntu measure with onsite meter electrical conductivity ec scm measure with onsite meter ph measure with onsite meter dissolved oxygen do mgl measure with onsite meter temperature c measure with onsite meter litter definition including solid inert waste visual prevent litter from entering waterways and drainage systems oils and greases visual no visible free oil or greases b monitoring monitoring shall be carried out in waterways andor drainage infrastructure upstream and downstream of the limits of the site for each rain event as follows within one hour of commencement of rain event during working hours every four hours for periods of continuous rain during working hours within num hours of a rain event outside working hours .
c dewatering water quality monitoring shall be undertaken when dewatering ponded water to receiving waterways .
the quality of ponded water to be dewatered to receiving waterways shall be not more than num greater than the turbidity of the water in the receiving waterways .
the ph of ponded water to be dewatered shall be within num ph unit of the receiving waterways and shall be within the range of num num num num. strikethrough the ph range that is not applicable as defined in epa publication num section num dewatering figure num department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part c air quality num.cnum dust all work under the contract shall comply with the following requirements dust generated from road construction activities shall not create a hazard or nuisance to the public disperse from the site or across roadways nor interfere with crops and stock or commercial or residential properties or other dustsensitive receptors emissions of visible smoke from construction plant and equipment shall be for periods no greater than ten consecutive seconds emissions of odorous substances or particulates shall not create or be likely to create objectionable conditions for the public materials of any type shall not be disposed of through burning materials that may create a hazard or nuisance dust shall be covered during transport .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part d erosion and sediment control num.dnum erosion and sediment control the contractor shall minimise the risk of soil erosion and sediment pollution of the site adjacent land and waterways by defining and implementing erosion and sediment controls measures as part of its emp .
the control measures shall be developed with reference but not limited to the environment protection authoritys publications including epa publication no .
num doing it right on subdivisions epa publication no .
num construction techniques for sediment pollution control epa publication no .
num environmental guidelines for major construction sites and the international erosion control association best practice erosion and sediment control ieca num .
the contractor shall inspect all erosion and sedimentation control works at least once per week with additional inspections during a rain event as follows within one hour of commencement during working hours every four hours for periods of continuous rain during working hours within num hours of a rain event outside working hours when runoff is leaving the site .
any defects andor deficiencies in control measures identified by monitoring undertaken shall be rectified immediately and these control measures shall be cleaned repaired and augmented as required to ensure effective control measures thereafter .
num.dnum stockpiles where soil is stockpiled on site it shall be located no less than num metres from watercourses .
where it is not possible to provide a clearance of num metres the stockpile shall be above the normal high water level of the watercourses and protection shall be provided to prevent stockpiled material entering the watercourses .
num.dnum mud on public roads the contractor shall take all steps necessary to prevent vehicles from trafficking and depositing mud and other debris on the surface of adjacent roads when entering and leaving the site .
the cleaning of plant and equipment shall not impact on any other element of the environment .
any mud deposited on the road shall be removed immediately .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part e contaminated soils and materials num.enum contaminated soils and materials all work under the contract shall comply with the following requirements soils or materials shall not be contaminated as a consequence of work under the contract materials imported to the site shall be free from contaminants contaminated materials shall only be reused on site through agreement and approval from the superintendent and relevant regulators contaminated materials to be reused onsite shall be temporarily stored and managed to minimise any impact on the site or surrounding environment the transport and disposal of contaminated soils or materials offsite shall be undertaken in accordance with relevant legislation and relevant approvals and permits .
contact with unexpected and potentially contaminated material shall cause works to cease immediately .
an exclusion zone shall be established and the superintendent notified .
refer to contract specific clauses for use of contaminated material in the works department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part f waste and resource reuse num.fnum waste and resource reuse a general the generation of waste materials shall be managed in accordance with the hierarchy of avoid reuse recycle or dispose of waste material .
the contractor shall be responsible for the management of any waste produced in performing the work under the contract .
solid inert wastes may be reused when approved by the superintendent .
the contractor shall also control the generation of wind blown litter or litter spread by birds and animals from disturbed material .
this may include limiting the disturbed area or recovering material .
all vehicles transporting waste shall be covered and appropriately licensed .
b monitoring the contractor shall monitor the whole site for instances of inappropriate waste management or disposal at intervals of not more every num days .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part g fuels and chemicals num.gnum fuels and chemicals a general any leakage or spillage of any fuels or chemicals shall not have detrimental environmental impact .
the contractor shall include specific procedures to mitigate the effect on the environment from fuels and chemicals including herbicides and pesticides .
such procedures shall include but not be limited to nominated fuel and chemical storage areas that comply with the requirements under the environmental management and pollution control act num the explosives act num and all applicable regulations made under those acts .
the refueling and fluid top up of vehicles and plant shall be undertaken at least num metres from any drainage point or watercourses provision of readily accessible and maintained spill kits for the purpose of cleaning up chemical oil and fuel spillages on the site at all times ensuring that personnel trained in the efficient deployment of the spill kits are readily available in the event of spillages a contingency plan that shall address the containment treatment and disposal of any spill .
b monitoring fuel and chemical storages and equipment fill areas shall be monitored for compliance at intervals of not more than num days .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part h noise num.hnum noise all work under the contract shall comply with the following requirements hours of work shall be between numam and numpm monday friday numam numpm saturdays and numam numpm sundays construction vehicles and equipment shall have appropriate measures fitted and be effectively maintained to minimise engine noise noisy equipment shall be enclosed where possible advise local residents in advance when unavoidable outofhours work will occur .
the contractor shall obtain the superintendents approval prior to undertaking works outside of the above hours .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part i flora and fauna num.inum flora and fauna a general all work under the contract shall comply with the following requirements avoid minimise and offset where appropriate the removal of native vegetation during construction avoid injury to fauna or damage to protected vegetation or habitat protect significant flora and fauna sites species or habitat not previously identified .
b permits and approvals permits from relevant authorities shall be obtained prior to disturbance of florafauna sites or relocation of native fauna affected by works under the contract .
works under the contract shall comply with all permits and approvals and associated conditions .
c protection of flora and fauna areas of existing vegetation and native fauna habitat identified to be retained shall be identified as nogo zones and protected by temporary fencing and signage .
no signage is to identify the nature of the nogo zone .
hp prior to removing any vegetation or habitat the contractor shall arrange an onsite inspection with the superintendent and other relevant authorities to confirm and clearly identify and mark trees vegetation or habitat to be removed .
any removal shall be consistent with the contract drawings and any relevant permits and shall fence and sign all sites nominated as nogo zones .
plant equipment material or debris shall not be placed or stored within the limit of the root zone of the tree or vegetation to be retained .
d soil compaction the contractor shall avoid trafficking and compacting or storing materials on soil in all areas that are currently vegetated and those areas to be revegetated .
e monitoring the contractor shall undertake monitoring of the condition of flora and fauna habitat sites and protective measures at the site every num days .
num.inum weed pest and disease management a general declared weeds pests and diseases also referred to as pathogens shall not be introduced to the site spread through the site or removed from the site as a consequence of work under the contract .
the contractor shall prevent the spread of declared weeds pests and diseases within the site and offsite through the implementation of controls that as a minimum shall include treatment of declared weeds prior to the commencement of any ground disturbing activities response to their identification through monitoring of the site management of weed and soil pathogen potential within imported materials department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth provisions for cleaning plant and equipment at the following times prior to arrival on site prior to departure from site prior to movement within the site from infested to noninfested areas .
b monitoring the site shall be monitored for the presence of weeds and pests .
at intervals of not more than num days num days other department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part j cultural heritage num.jnum cultural heritage a general cultural heritage sites and areas of cultural significance shall not be damaged disturbed or otherwise adversely impacted unless an appropriate authorisation has been obtained .
an unanticipated discovery plan is required to ensure appropriate response in the event that an item site or object of aboriginal cultural heritage is discovered that could not have otherwise been anticipated .
the following is a guide to the most common aboriginal cultural heritage site types in tasmania and will assist in identifying and managing the unanticipated discovery of aboriginal cultural heritage sites and objects .
stone artefact scatters a stone artefact is any stone or rock which has been modified by aboriginal people .
often this is the result of fracturing or flaking fine grained rocks to produce sharp cutting or scrapping implements .
the most common stone types utilised by tasmanian aboriginal people are silcrete and chert on account of their availability and excellent tool making properties .
however we also find hornfels chalcedony spongelite quartzite and other stone types where locally available .
in tasmania stone artefacts are typically recorded as being isolated i.e .
only one or in a scatter i.e .
two or more within a numm radius .
stone artefacts are found all over tasmania in all landscapes and situations and are the most basic indicator of aboriginal occupation .
shell middens middens are occupational deposits created through an accumulation of debris from human activity .
midden sites can range in size from large mounds to small scatters of shell .
the most common shellfish species found in middens in tasmania are abalone oyster mussel warrener and limpet however they can also contain other debris such as animal bone charcoal from campfires and discarded tools made from stone shell or bone these sites are usually found near waterways and coastal areas .
rockshelters caves and rock overhangs which bear signs of human activity are for the purpose of the aboriginal heritage register ahr collectively called occupied rock shelters .
aboriginal people utilised these places for shelter ceremony and other cultural practices leaving behind occupational deposits such as middens and hearths tools or in some cases rock markings .
rock shelters are usually found where the geology is conducive to the formation of caves and rock overhangs .
quarries or stone procurement sites a quarry is a place where material has been extracted from a natural outcrop by aboriginal people .
the two types of quarry recorded on the ahr are stone and ochre each typically being located wherever suitable ochre for painting and decoration or stone for toolmaking appear .
quarries can be recognised by evidence of human manipulation and by the debris left behind from processing the material .
quarries can be extensive or discrete depending on the size and quality of the outcrop and how often it was utilised and visited .
rock marking rock marking is the term used in tasmania to define markings on rocks which are the result of aboriginal practices .
rock markings come in two forms engraving and painting .
engravings are made by removing the surface of a rock through pecking abrading or grinding whilst paintings are made by adding pigment or ochre to the surface of a rock .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth burials burial sites are highly sensitive places .
they can occur anywhere and have previously been recorded in sand dunes shell middens and rock shelters b protection of values areas of nominated archaeological andor heritage values identified to be retained shall be identified as nogo zones and protected by temporary fencing and signage .
no signage is to identify the nature of the nogo zone .
hp prior to removing any vegetation the contractor shall arrange an onsite inspection with the superintendent and other relevant authorities to confirm and clearly identify the arears of nominated archaeological andor heritage values to be protected and shall fence and sign all nogo zones .
c unanticipated discovery plan the contractor shall as a minimum comply with the following procedures which are provided as a guide to meeting the obligations established under the aboriginal relics act num and the coroners act num in regard to dealing with unanticipated discoveries of aboriginal cultural heritage such as sites and objects .
the first section details the process to be followed should any aboriginal cultural heritage item site or object be discovered excluding skeletal remains burials while the second section details the process should skeletal remains burials be discovered .
discovery of cultural heritage items step num any person who believes they have uncovered aboriginal cultural heritage material should notify all employees or contractors that are working in the immediate area that all earth disturbance works must cease immediately .
step num a temporary nogo or buffer zone of at least numm x numm should be implemented to protect the suspected aboriginal cultural heritage site or relics .
no unauthorised entry or works will be allowed within this nogo zone until the suspected aboriginal cultural heritage relics have been assessed by a recognised aboriginal heritage practitioner .
step num aboriginal heritage tasmania aht in hobart ph num num needs to be notified and consulted as soon as possible and informed of the discovery .
aht will then provide further advice in accordance with the aboriginal relics act num .
discovery of skeletal material step num call the police immediately .
under no circumstances should the suspected skeletal remains be touched or disturbed .
the area must now be considered a crime scene .
it is a criminal offence to interfere with a crime scene .
step num any person who believes they have uncovered skeletal material should notify all employees or contractors that are working in the immediate area that all earth disturbance works must cease immediately .
step num a temporary nogo or buffer zone of at least numm x numm should be implemented to protect the suspected skeletal remains .
no unauthorised entry or works will be allowed within this nogo zone until the suspected skeletal remains have been assessed by the police and or coroner .
step num should the skeletal remains be determined to be of aboriginal origin the coroner will contact an aboriginal organisation approved by the attorneygeneral as per the coroners act num. d monitoring nogo zones are to be monitored at least weekly and immediately prior to and following activities with potential to impact the exclusion area .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth part k reporting num.knum reporting a general all environmental monitoring results and all nonconformance reports relating to environmental performance and current status shall be submitted to the superintendent .
the contractor shall submit to the superintendent copies of the datainformation listed in table num.knum .
this submission shall include both the data for the latest report and a summary of data collected to date under the contract .
table num.knum datainformation frequency pollution infringement notices or pollution abatement notices andor any notices of prosecution .
within num hours of receipt by the contractor .
statutory documents obtained by the contractor as part of the project e.g .
permits .
within one week of receipt by the contractor .
results of any air quality and water quality monitoring undertaken as part of the project .
monthly at completion of works other itemised fuel diesel unleaded and lpg use onsite by contractors and subcontractors .
quarterly at completion of works other b notice of authority inspections the contractor shall notify the superintendent immediately should a regulator seek to enter a worksite for any purpose .
num.knum environmental incidents in the event that an environmental incident occurs in relation to the work under the contract the contractor shall take immediate action to avoid continuance of the incident which may include cessation of work and to minimise the effect of the incident on the environment immediately notify the superintendent and epa pollution watch tel .
num num num or other responsible authorities of the incident or by numam the next working day if the incident occurs outside of working hours submit to the superintendent for review an incident report within num days of the incident .
the incident report shall include photographs where available and cover details of the incident and the proposed corrective action to avoid a reoccurrence .
department of state growth may num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num ride quality for pavements this section crossreferences section num which should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section relates to ride quality performance for pavement construction .
the locations specified in table num are exempt from lot testing under this contract .
num performance requirements the finished surface of the pavement shall have a smooth longitudinal profile and comply with the minimum ride quality requirements specified .
the upper limits for roughness at various locations are specified in table num .
num definitions continuous traffic lane a length of traffic lane which can be tested in a single test run uninterrupted by areas exempted from ride quality assessment .
international roughness index iriqc the international measure of ride quality measured and recorded by modern class num profile measuring devices in cumulative metres per kilometre in each wheel path and averaged together .
for the purposes of this specification roughness measurement is to be based on the iriqc quarter car model .
individual lane roughness value the mean value of the two wheel path iriqc values measured on a num m subsection of a traffic lane .
mean lane roughness value the mean of the individual lane roughness values within the lot as determined by the appropriate test method .
measuring device the device used for measurement of roughness shall be a capable of measuring the longitudinal road surface profile along one or both wheel paths at least every num mm with a precision in elevation of num mm over a wave band of num to num metres b calibrated according to the relevant test methods .
num measurement and reporting of ride quality a scope of testing unless noted otherwise in table num the surface of all pavement construction shall be tested for ride quality .
b lot testing all work shall be tested in lots of continuous traffic lane .
a lot shall be defined as the length and width of each continuous traffic lane constructed including any freeway ramps but excluding shoulders and turn lanes .
the contractor shall provide num hours notice to the superintendent of when ride quality testing will be undertaken and the limits for each lot .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth the maximum length of the lot shall be restricted to num km of continuous traffic lane .
the minimum length of the lot shall be the lesser of the total job length or num m. c measurement of ride quality the contractor shall measure the longitudinal road surface profile of each lot in accordance with the relevant test method applicable to the particular test equipment being used as listed in section num .
ride quality measurement shall be undertaken within three months after the application of the surfacing .
strikethrough if this paragraph not applicablefor contracts with a defects liability period of two years or more measurement of ride quality shall be repeated no earlier than three months or later than one month before the end of the defects liability period .
d reporting of test results results shall be processed and reported for each num m subsection .
any subsections less than num m shall be included with the subsection immediately preceding it and the individual roughness calculated over the longer subsection .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with a copy of all test results representing the final roughness survey of completed pavement together with the calculated values of the individual and mean lane roughness for each lot .
num performance standards the contractor shall comply with the requirements for both the maximum individual lane roughness and maximum mean lane roughness as follows a individual lane roughness where an individual lane roughness value in any num m subsection is greater than the specified maximum individual lane roughness value specified in table num the contractor shall rectify work within the subsection to comply with this requirement .
the minimum length of rectification work undertaken shall be num m. all rectified num m subsections shall be retested following completion of rectification work .
b mean lane roughness where the mean lane roughness value of a lot is greater than the mean lane roughness specified in table num the work shall be rectified unless the superintendent agrees to accept the work at a reduced payment .
where the lot is to be rectified the minimum length for any rectification work undertaken shall be num m. where the superintendent agrees to accept the lot at a reduced payment a deduction to the contract sum shall be made in accordance with clause num .
the contractor shall retest the lot following completion of any rectification work .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num payment deduction provisions where a deduction in payment is to be made for failure to comply with the specified maximum mean lane roughness for a lot the deduction shall be made in accordance with the following formula deduction to contract a x d x c num where a area of lot in square metres .
d percentage deduction as specified in table num c unit cost as specified in table num table numpercentage deduction for failure to comply with the specified maximum mean lane roughness value increase in iri deduction num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num rectify num payment retention where the contractor is required to carry out measurement of ride quality within three months of the end of the defects liability period retention of payment shall apply .
the amount of retention shall be calculated using the following formula retention num anum x cnum anum x cnum .
. . . . e whereanum the total area of pavement with the same unit cost as shown in table num cnum the appropriate unit cost from table num e an amount equal to the value of deductions calculated using clause num and the test results at practical completion department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num pavement rectification the contractor shall bear the full cost of any necessary rectification work including the cost of any additional work required to the underlying or adjacent pavement to comply with this section .
all rectification work shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements of the specification .
num schedule of details a the locations shown in table num are exempt from ride quality assessment .
table num locations exempted from ride quality requirement serial locations exempt from ride quality assessment include intersections widenings etc .
exempt from testing refer to guide notes b the ride quality to be achieved at each location is to be in accordance with table num .
table num standard of ride quality location maximum individual lane roughness value for any num m subsection maximum mean lane roughness value for lot insert location refer to table a of guide notes refer to table a of guide notes c the unit cost c to be used for calculation of any payment deduction made in accordance with the deduction provision specified in clause num shall be in accordance with table num .
table num basis of payment deduction location unit cost per sq m specify locations by pavement type refer to table b of guide notes department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num provision for adjustment of contract sum num description this section provides for the rise and fall adjustment of the value of the completed works valued on the basis of the contract sum using the indices specified in this section .
num contractors claims for payment unless otherwise agreed to by the superintendent a payment claim submitted by the contractor shall be for the full value of that part or parts of the works executed up to and including the last day of the month for which the payment claim applies .
num payments not subject to rise and fall adjustment notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein payments made to the contractor in respect of the following items will not be adjusted in accordance with this section a any variations ordered by the superintendent pursuant to clause num of the general conditions of contract except where the variations so ordered are valued at rates lodged with the tender b items paid for under a provisional sum item except where valued at rates lodged with the tender or as a prime cost item c payments made in regard to the return of retention money or security deposit d that portion of any payment which represents charges for the provision of goods or services provided by the department of state growth e payments made for rise and fall adjustments in accordance with this section .
num cost adjustment for materials in road and bridgework contracts the adjustment anum for the monthly progress payment for both roadworks and bridgeworks contracts including asphalt works sprayed bituminous surfacing and maintenance contracts shall be calculated from the following formula anum effective value ev x adjustment factor f x current construction index no .
base construction index no .
base construction index no .
a effective value ev the effective value in respect of each progress payment or final payment is the value of work included in the payment schedule less the value of any work included therein on the basis of actual cost or current prices the value of any work which is not subject to rise and fall adjustment in accordance with clause num the value of any work which is subject to rise and fall adjustment on a different basis from that provided in this section the effective value of previous progress payments and disregarding any previous increase or decrease in costs assessed under this section .
b adjustment factor f f is the adjustment factor for the type of contract concerned refer to clause num schedule of details .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth c construction index number the construction index number is the index published in the australian bureau of statistics publication catalogue no .
num producer price indexes table num num road and bridge construction victoria .
in respect of index numbers published by the australian bureau of statistics abs the first published index number whether or not it is described as preliminary shall be used and no recalculation shall be made on the basis of any subsequent revisions to the index number .
the above abs index is published quarterly .
for the purpose of calculating rise and fall payments the department of state growth will adopt to two decimal places a monthly index based on the third points of a linear interpolation between the published quarterly indices .
the construction index number so adopted shall apply across the whole of the month to which it refers .
d base construction index number is the index number of the month preceding the month in which tenders close .
e current construction index number is the index number applicable for the month immediately preceding the month during which the work is performed or where the work other than maintenance activities during the defects period is undertaken more than one month following the date of practical completion then it is the month in which the date of practical completion falls .
num price adjustment for bitumen for supply and placement of asphalt a description this clause provides for the adjustment of the contract sum for rise and fall in the price of bitumen for the supply and placement of asphalt component of contracts and separate supply and place asphalt contracts .
b asphalt bitumen price variation adjustment anum the contract sum shall be subject to adjustments for variations in the price of bitumen used in the asphalt to be supplied under the contract .
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the general conditions of contract any payments made under clause snum of the general conditions of contract which are in respect of asphalt supplied subsequent to such increased or decreased bitumen prices coming into effect shall be adjusted by an amount determined by the following anum pl pt x mass in tonne of bitumen derived from the approved job mix design where pt the price of class num bitumen applicable for the month immediately preceding the month in which tenders closed pl the price of class num bitumen applicable for the month immediately preceding the month during which the work is performed or the month in which the date of practical completion falls where the works are performed more than one month into the defects period .
the price of class num bitumen shall be the suppliers published selling price .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num price adjustment for bituminous materials for supply of bitumen for priming primersealing and sealing a description this clause provides for the adjustment of the contract sum for rise and fall in the price of bituminous material for supply of bitumen priming primersealing and sealing contracts and the priming primersealing and sealing component of contracts .
b sprayed bituminous material price variation adjustment anum anum the contract sum shall be subject to adjustments for variations in the price of bituminous material to be supplied under the contract .
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the general conditions of contract any payments made under clause snum of the general conditions of contract which are in respect of bituminous material supplied subsequent to such increased or decreased bituminous material prices coming into effect shall be adjusted by an amount of anum or anum as applicable determined by the following i where the price variation is in terms of mass and materials are supplied by mass anum pl pt x mass in tonne of bituminous material supplied ii where the price variation is in terms of mass and materials are supplied on the basis of volume at numc anum pl pt x volume in litres at numc of bituminous material supplied average density of bituminous material in litres per tonne at numc where pt the price of class num bitumen applicable for the month immediately preceding the month in which tenders closed pl the price of class num bitumen applicable for the month immediately preceding the month during which the work is performed or the month in which the date of practical completion falls where the works are performed more than one month into the defects period ..
the price of class num bitumen shall be the suppliers published selling price .
the term bituminous material includes bitumen primer primerbinder flux oil cutter and aggregate precoating oil .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num schedule of details the price adjustment in any monthly progress payment under this section will be the sum of adjustments anum anum anum and anum as applicable .
adjustments applicable to the contract types are as follows .
table num contracts in excess of num months duration strikethrough serial a to f below as appropriate if rise and fall applies it shall only be applicable after the first num months .
serial component of works applicable schedule num items subject to rise and fall adjustment factor f for calculation of anum a. roadworks num b. bridgeworks num c. roadworks and bridgeworks num d. asphalt works num e. sprayed bituminous surfacing num f. maintenance contracts num table num contracts involving bituminous surfacing of any duration strikethrough serial a andor b below as appropriate serial component of works applicable schedule num items subject to rise and fall price variation adjustment a. asphalt works anum b. sprayed bituminous surfacing anum or anum num indices published by australian bureau of statistics in the event that index numbers referred to in this section cease to be published by the australian bureau of statistics the superintendent will determine in consultation with the contractor an appropriate substitute published index for the calculation of rise and fall payments for the remaining works under the contract .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num site clearing num description this section covers the requirements for site clearing and grubbing and for the management of the materials generated .
num definition clearing and grubbing clearing and grubbing is the removal within specified limits of a vegetation such as trees tree stumps tree roots logs brush noxious weeds and decayed vegetable matter b refuse such as pole stumps rubbish dumps and sawdust piles resting on or protruding from the ground surface c obstructions such as concrete paving concrete edgings drainage pits foundations fences and disused structures but not underground obstructions such as drainage pipes service conduits and fuel tanks .
num limits of work unless otherwise specified the limits of clearing and grubbing shall be a the whole length between the following chainages restrict this entry to one typed line b the whole width between the outside edges of any batters including any roundings together with a further horizontal distance of num m beyond the outside edges of batters but not beyond the road reserve boundary or where catch drains are required to the outside edges of catch drains c not more than the width required for completion of the work under the contract .
num clearing unless otherwise specified the area within the specified limits shall be cleared of all vegetation refuse and obstructions down to natural surface .
the contractor shall not undertake any clearing work or any type of disturbance outside of the specified limits of work unless approved by the superintendent .
trees shall be brought down in such manner as to avoid danger to personnel and traffic or damage to other trees shrubs structures or property outside the area being cleared or designated to be retained within the area being cleared .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth tree branches extending over the carriageway shall be trimmed to provide a clearance of at least num m above the carriageway surface .
where whole branches are to be removed the contractor shall use the three cut method which requires a the under cut b the upper cut further away from the trunk than a above to remove the branch c the final trim cut which is to be cut close to the main trunk but outside the branch collar .
num grubbing in areas where excavation will be made all vegetation refuse and obstructions shall be totally grubbed or grubbed to a depth of not less than num m below the subgrade and batters whichever is the lesser treatment .
in areas to be covered by embankments all vegetation refuse and obstructions shall be grubbed to a depth of not less than num m below the stripped surface or not less than num m below the finished surface of the subgrade whichever is the lesser treatment .
in areas to be covered by embankments exceeding num m in height foundations may remain if located or cut off not more than num m above the natural surface but not less than num m below subgrade .
pits which are no longer required shall be removed or broken back to a depth not less than num m below the finished surface of the subgrade .
remaining pipe openings shall be sealed with concrete .
any remnants of pits shall be backfilled with material and compacted to a density ratio of not less than num .
the calculation of density ratio shall be based on standard compactive effort .
holes resulting from grubbing shall be backfilled with material similar to the surrounding material and compacted to the same degree as the surrounding material .
num clearing and grubbing at bridge and culvert sites unless otherwise shown on the drawings trees and stumps within num m of any portion of a proposed bridge or proposed culvert having a waterway area greater than num mnum shall be cleared and grubbed .
clearing and grubbing at bridge and culvert sites shall conform to the other relevant requirements of this section .
num disposal of materials a general unless otherwise specified any salvageable materials shall become the property of the contractor .
works under the contract shall be carried out to wherever possible reuse materials generated from clearing and grubbing operations within the works area .
any materials which can not be reused on site shall be removed from the site .
the contractor shall not dispose of any materials by burning on site .
burying of materials on site shall only be carried out when permitted by the relevant authorities and approved by the superintendent .
b trees tree trunks and large branches shall be removed from the site .
small tree branches shrubs and leaves excluding noxious weeds shall be disposed of by chipping and mulching to form mulch .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num survey marks during clearing and grubbing operations care shall be taken not to disturb any survey marks .
num damage to fences any damage to fences shall be repaired immediately by the contractor to a condition at least equal to that existing before damage and no additional payment will be made for this work .
num protection and removal of existing vegetation a protection of existing vegetation prior to commencement of any work the contractor and the superintendent shall conduct a joint inspection of the site to identify vegetation to be retained and protected .
existing trees shrubs native grasses and groundcovers and other areas of existing vegetation marked as to be protected andor retained on the drawings or as directed by the superintendent shall be protected by temporary fencing and incorporated into the works by the contractor .
no earthworks travel of equipment or storage compounds shall be established within num metres of the drip line of mature trees of trunk diameter greater than num mm .
construction of table drains within the drip line of roadside trees shall be undertaken with no disturbance beyond the line of the table drain and no damage to the canopy of the trees .
b protective fencing protective fencing shall consist of as a minimum star pickets with three strands of wire top middle and bottom and parawebbing .
num salvage of vegetation the contractor shall cooperate with the department of state growth and its agents by coordinating works under the contract with activities involving the salvage of plants and the collection of cuttings and available seed from areas of native vegetation on the site .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num earthworks this section crossreferences sections num num num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the requirements for forming and grading of earthworks including excavation placement and compaction of topsoil type a type b type c permeable oversize and unsuitable materials disposal of surplus materials the trimming of batters surface drains and formation and the preparation of the final earthwork surfaces and subgrade .
rock fills shall be constructed in accordance with section num .
geotextiles in earthworks shall be in accordance with section num .
lime stabilisation of earthworks shall be in accordance with section num .
section num details the relevant references to australian standards as test methods and codes of practice referenced in this section .
num definitions batter the uniform side slope of a cut or a fill .
batter point the intersection of the batter with the natural surface disregarding any batter rounding .
boxing the space above the subgrade to be occupied by the pavement bounded by the subgrade level and the inside faces of the constructed verges or unsealed shoulders .
capping a type a material layer of low permeability placed immediately below the pavement subbase or selected material to minimise changes in moisture content in the material below the capping layer .
where a capping layer is provided the top of this layer will typically be subgrade level .
catch drain an open cut surface drain above a cut batter or below a fill batter to intercept and divert surface water to drainage outlets .
cbr california bearing ratio .
cut excavation below the natural surface level after removal of topsoil .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth cut floor level the theoretical level of the formation in a cut after completion of excavation to the underside of any capping or selected material .
where no capping or selected material is required the cut floor level is subgrade level and the underside of pavement .
fill the compacted embankment placed above natural surface level after removal of topsoil .
fill material fill material includes type a material a superior quality material complying with the requirements of table num and used principally as capping selected material structural material andor verge material .
type b material a medium quality material that does not meet the requirements of type a material and is usually specified with a minimum cbr value .
type c material a lesser quality material that does not meet the requirements of type a or type b material which may be used in type c material zones of embankments as indicated on the drawings .
rock fill material a material comprised of larger rock and rock fragments which may be used within type b and type c material zones at lower levels of high embankments in accordance with section num .
permeable fill material self draining material typically sand or aggregate .
formation the horizontal and vertical extent of the surface of the formed earthworks .
the completed formation includes capping selected material verges batters batter roundings and table drains .
pavement pavement shall consist of subbase base and surfacing courses .
recycled material various products derived from resource recovery of construction and demolition waste from building waste reclaimed asphalt pavement rap from maintenance and rehabilitation activities and reclaimed glass from the glass disposal industry blended to produce type a type b and type c products .
rock subgrade the surface prepared at or below subgrade level by trimming the otherwise undisturbed in situ floor for the full width of the cutting in consistent medium to high or higher strength rock as defined in table anum of as num num geotechnical site investigations and which is free of soil and loose material .
areas shall not be considered as a rock subgrade where they do not extend the full width of subgrade and for a continuous length of at least num m of a carriageway .
selected material a type a material layer placed immediately below pavement subbase to provide greater strength to support the pavement .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth silt a material with properties below the a line on the plasticity index pi liquid limit ll graph per table anum in as num num .
structural material a zone of type a material that is placed at a bridge or a culvert structure or in other areas as specified andor as shown on the drawings .
subgrade subgrade is the trimmed or prepared portion of the formation on which the pavement including shoulders is constructed .
subgrade level the level of the prepared subgrade defined as follows on fills subgrade level is the level of the top of capping andor selected material or where no capping or selected material is to be placed the top of type b material .
in cuts subgrade level is the level of the top of cappingor selected material or where no capping or selected material is to be placed the cut floor level and the underside of pavement .
surface drain an open drain to collect and drain surface water to drainage outlets .
surplus material material which is surplus to the total quantity of material required .
table drain a surface drain adjacent to the shoulder or verge with an invert level designed to be lower than the top of the type b material or the cut floor level wherever possible .
topsoil the layer of fertile organic soil immediately below natural surface or placed to the finished formation level outside areas to be paved .
unsuitable material material that is soft excessively wet unstable or otherwise not suitable for the specified use .
verge the portion of the formation between the outer edge of the shoulder and the start of the batter slope or as detailed on the drawings .
num conformity with drawings earthworks shall be finished to conform to the levels lines grades and cross sections specified or shown on the drawings within the following limits a formation width and alignment the widths measured either side of the specified centreline or design line to the tops and toes of cut batters and fill batters shall be not less than the widths specified or shown on the drawings .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth b formation level and shape outside subgrade width excluding batters verges shall be constructed such that they match the finished surface level at the outer edge of shoulder or pavement or where installed the level of kerb and channel or concrete edgings .
both prior to and after completion of placement of topsoil the level at any point on the surface outside those areas to be paved shall not differ by more than num mm from the specified level and the surface shall be free from depressions capable of retaining water .
no point on these surfaces shall lie more than num mm below a num m straightedge laid on the surface .
c boxing width and alignment the boxing width shall not be less than specified or shown on the drawings and the edges of boxing shall not deviate by more than num mm from the designed offset from the centreline or design line .
d type a material the thickness width and shape of placed type a material shall not be less than the specified thickness width and shape at any point .
e type b material immediately below capping andor selected material where capping andor selected material is to be placed on type b material to subgrade level the level at any point on the surface of type b material immediately below capping andor selected material shall not differ by more than num mm above or num mm below the specified level unless assessment by random levelling is specified in which case the surface shall comply with clause numh and table num. f cut floor level where capping andor selected material is to be placed above the cut floor level to subgrade level the level at any point on the surface of the cut floor level immediately below capping andor selected material shall not differ by more than num mm above or num mm below the specified level unless assessment by random levelling is specified in which case the surface shall comply with clause numh and table num .
where capping andor selected material is not required the cut floor level shall be prepared to the appropriate tolerance for the subgrade .
g subgrade level and shape the subgrade shall be constructed to the surface level requirements of either scale a scale b or scale c as nominated in clause num .
where scale a or scale b is nominated the surface shall be assessed by random levelling and shall comply with the requirements of clause numh .
where scale c is nominated random levelling is not required however no point on the subgrade surface shall be more than num mm above or num mm below the specified level .
for either scale a b or c level tolerances the level at any point on the subgrade shall not lie more than num mm below a num m straightedge laid in any direction except across a crown and water shall not pond at any point .
where the scale of testing has not been specified scale a of clause numh shall apply .
h random level assessment scale a and b surface level requirements level measurements shall be taken at random locations over the area of the lot in accordance with section num examination and testing of materials and work roadworks .
the number of measurements taken within each lot shall not be less than the number specified in table num .
random level assessments of the surface shall be undertaken in lots not exceeding num mnum .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth the mean and standard deviation of the departures from the theoretical surface level within each lot shall meet the requirements of table num .
table num minimum number of level measurements and tolerances scale of surface level measurement minimum number of measurements per lot tolerance x range mm maximum s mm scale a num num to num num scale b num num to num num notes num. x is the mean value of all level readings taken in the lot num .
s is the standard deviation of all level readings taken in the lot num .
a negative value designates a measured departure below the design level and positive value designates a surface level above the design level i batter slope and shape at any cross section the batter slope shall be not steeper than the slope specified .
the batter face shall be finished to uniform shape .
j batter line cut batters shall be constructed so that the batter point is not more than num of the batter height outside the calculated batter line .
fill batters shall be constructed so that the toe of the batter is not more than num of the batter height outside the calculated batter line .
the dimensions of batter rounding shall be within num of the dimensions shown on the drawings .
on all sections beneath bridges and on other sections where it becomes necessary to confine the lateral spread of the earthworks to closer limits due to site constraints the tops of cut batters and the toes of fill batters shall be not more than num mm outside the calculated batter lines .
k surface drains surface drain invert levels and side slopes shall be finished to within num mm of the specified level at any point and shall be free from depressions capable of retaining water .
num materials testing of materials shall be undertaken in accordance with vicroads code of practice num .
materials shall meet the requirements described below a topsoil topsoil placed on formations and disturbed areas shall be capable of supporting healthy full cover of grass growth be friable contain organic material and unless further defined in section num shall be free from subsoil tree roots clay balls stones rocks rubbish contaminants weeds pathogens and toxic levels of any element with a ph in the range of num to num .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth b type a material type a material shall comply with the requirements of table num and shall be free of topsoil deleterious andor perishable matter .
hp material classified as silt either before or after compaction is not acceptable as type a material without stabilisation to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
table num location and use of type a material physical properties limits of grading passing by mass post compaction sieve size as mm pi x passing num mm post compaction max pi range post compactio n assigned cbr min num swell num permeability max ms num num num num num num capping layer num num num x num num num num num num selected material num num not applicable num num num num num verge material num num num x num num num num num num structural material num num not applicable num num num num num other type a material num num not applicable num num num num num notes num the assigned cbr and percentage swell values are to be determined in accordance with vicroads code of practice rc num .
sampling for cbr testing shall be undertaken after field compaction .
num the permeability value is to be determined in accordance with vicroads code of practice rc num .
the permeability value is to be determined on specimens manufactured from that fraction of material which passes a num mm as sieve compacted at optimum moisture content and num of maximum dry density as determined by testing using standard compactive effort for cbr and swell .
c type b material type b material shall be totally free of organic content topsoil deleterious andor perishable matter such as bricks concrete glass plastic timber steel or steel by products .
after compaction type b material shall have a maximum particle dimension of not more than i num mm within num mm of the top of type b material and ii num mm at depths greater than num mm below the top of type b material .
type b material shall have a minimum assigned cbr of num and assigned percent swell less than num which has been determined in accordance with vicroads code of practice rc num .
materials that exhibit swells greater than or equal to num shall be classified as expansive and shall only be used as type b material if approved by the superintendent .
where the highest quality type b materials are available they shall be reserved for placement in higher levels of the fills being constructed .
material within the top num mm of top of type b material shall have a swell less than num .
materials that exhibit swells of num or greater are not permitted .
sampling for cbr testing shall be undertaken after field compaction .
material classified as expansive or silt either before or after compaction shall not be used as type b material .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth d type c material type c material shall be capable of being spread in layers of not more than num mm and compacted as specified to achieve a stable condition .
e recycled materials blends of crushed recycled materials such as crushed concrete crushed brick reclaimed asphalt pavement rap slag and crushed glass may be used as type a b and c materials in earthworks applications .
the blend of recycled materials shall be manufactured in a controlled manner which ensures the blended product has consistent physical properties .
the registered blend of recycled materials shall meet all relevant requirements and properties as listed in clause num .
low density foreign materials such as plastic rubber plaster clay lumps and other friable material shall not exceed num by mass .
wood and other vegetable or decomposable matter shall be limited to a maximum of num by mass and assessed using test method rc num foreign materials in crushed concrete products shown in section num .
crushed glass used in any recycled material blends shall be crushed to a cubic shape and able to pass the num mm as sieve .
any blend of recycled materials shall be able to be classified as clean fill in accordance with environment protection authority victoria guidelines .
f permeable fill material permeable fill material shall be a mixture of hard durable clean sand gravel or crushed aggregate complying with the requirements of table num which is free of clay balls and perishable matter .
table num permeable fill material location type of permeable fill material against structures grade anum anum or anum num backfill for open jointed pipes grade anum anum or anum num drainage blanket material grade anum bnum num note num grading requirements are specified in section num. g oversize material oversize material shall have a maximum particle dimension after compaction not greater than that specified for the type of material and depth of layer being placed .
num stripping of topsoil topsoil shall be stripped for the full width of the formation a defined by the line through batter points extended to include any rounding and any surface and catch drains b by a means which avoids contamination with subsoil and does not increase the extent of unstable areas and c placed in stockpile or prepared areas .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth topsoil shall not be removed from the site unless approved by the superintendent .
the contractor shall treat and manage site topsoil before stripping and after spreading to remove andor minimise the spread of weeds and other pathogens and pest organisms throughout the site .
stockpiles shall be maintained in a neat well shaped state capable of shedding water .
topsoil shall be respread as soon as practicable .
stripped surfaces shall be graded to an even selfdraining surface .
num site excavation a general site excavation shall be excavation within the limits of the batters open and underground drainage and approved borrow areas from within the site and shall include the handling of excavated material to the point of disposal .
b catch drains and batter rounding the contractor shall construct catch drains where shown on the drawings or where required for the temporary collection and diversion of surface runoff or as otherwise agreed to by the superintendent .
permanent catch drains and batter rounding at the top of cut batters shall be constructed at the commencement of the cutting excavation .
c material category hp prior to commencing excavation in any area and during excavation work the superintendent and the contractor shall inspect each type of material encountered and subject to verification by appropriate laboratory testing agree on the category of the material in accordance with clause num. d excavation operations the contractor shall conduct its operations such that the area outside the limits of the excavation is not unduly disturbed .
any falls or slips of material that occur shall be removed and the area treated to prevent recurrence .
if any area on cut batters becomes unstable or unsafe the contractor shall install suitable measures to restrict access to the area e.g .
the erection of warning signs and fencing .
the affected area shall be inspected and assessed by a geotechnical engineer and made safe prior to excavation proceeding in the affected area .
oversize material shall be treated in accordance with clause num. e treatment of cuttings at cut floor level the material within num mm below cut floor level shall have an assigned cbr of not less than that specified for type b material and shall have a swell less than num. i in situ material below cut floor level having an assigned cbr less than that specified for type b material or a swell of num or greater shall be removed to a depth of num mm below cut floor level and replaced with conforming type b material to the underside of the capping or selected material layer or where no capping or selected material is required to subgrade level .
ii where removal and replacement of material below the cut floor level is not required the surface shall be loosened to a depth of num mm and recompacted to meet the specified requirements .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth where the cut floor on which capping or selected material or pavement is to be placed consists of soil and rocky materials meeting the specification requirements but is too rocky to trim to the tolerances specified in clause numf the material shall be ripped to a minimum depth of num mm loosened and broken down to a maximum particle size of num mm .
any rocks or boulders larger than num mm shall be removed and any resulting depressions shall be backfilled with type b material and such backfilling together with the loosened material shall be reworked and compacted as specified to the cut floor level .
f treatment of rock subgrade where rock exists in a cut below subgrade level but within the designed capping or selected material layer the material shall be excavated to a depth of not less than num mm below subgrade level in all areas on which pavement is to be placed and all loose material and soil shall be removed from the rock floor .
any resulting depressions lower than num mm below subgrade level shall be cleaned of loose material and backfilled with num mm class num num cement treated crushed rock and compacted as specified .
a regulating layer of class num num mm crushed rock shall then be placed above the rock to subgrade level in lieu of the specified capping or selected material in layers not exceeding a compacted thickness of num mm in accordance with section num .
hp prior to construction of the regulating layer the areas of rock subgrade shall be presented to the superintendent for acceptance .
the contractor shall submit details of any necessary amendments to the subsurface drainage design including transverse subsurface drainage at the interfaces to the superintendent for review .
no adjustment to the contract sum will be considered for the treatment of a rock subgrade or for the construction of the regulating layer in lieu of capping or selected material or for any modifications to the subsurface drainage .
g treatment of cut to fill zones all pavement and verge areas at cut to fill zones shall be excavated to a minimum depth of num mm below the cut floor level or top of type b material for a distance of not less than num m into the cut and num m under the fill from the cutfill line at the upper surface of type b material earthworks .
in sideling cut areas the cut shall be excavated to a depth of num mm below the cut floor level for the full cut width to be occupied by pavement and verge material .
the above excavations shall be backfilled in layers with type b material .
h groundwater hp where groundwater or seepage is encountered the contractor shall notify the superintendent and submit the proposed action to be taken to the superintendent for review .
the contractor shall submit any necessary approvals from relevant authorities for the treatment and disposal of this groundwater .
i surface finish of cut and fill batters the surface of cut and fill batters to be topsoiled shall be textured by scarifying or horizontal grooving .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num unsuitable materials a general excavation of unsuitable material shall be undertaken such that the extent of unstable areas is not increased .
material used to replace excavated unsuitable material shall be type b material .
b cuts where in situ material within num mm below capping selected material andor pavement has an assigned cbr less than that specified at that level or has a swell of num or greater it shall be treated in accordance with clause numei .
other unsuitable materials below the cut floor level on which pavement subbase capping or selected material is to be placed shall be either treated in situ or excavated and replaced with type b material .
all treated areas or replacement material shall be spread andor compacted to the specified density in layers not exceeding a compacted thickness of num mm .
where material i is unsuitable and does not exceed num mm in depth it shall be treated in situ or excavated and replaced and no additional payment will be made for this work ii is unsuitable and exceeds num mm in depth it shall be treated in situ or excavated and replaced .
separate payment if applicable i.e .
if the contract is a schedule of rates contract or the work is covered by a provisional item under a lump sum contract will be made for the volume of material below the cut floor level so treated or excavated and replaced iii has become unsuitable to any depth due to the contractors negligence or use of inappropriate methods it shall be treated in situ or excavated and replaced and no additional payment will be made for this work .
c areas upon which fill is to be placed after completion of clearing grubbing and stripping of areas upon which fill is to be placed any unsuitable material immediately below these areas shall be treated in situ or be excavated and replaced with suitable material which shall be spread and compacted as specified .
if the contract is a schedule of rates contract or the work is covered by a provisional item under a lump sum contract payment will be made for the full volume of material so treated or excavated and replaced except that where material has become unsuitable due to the contractors negligence or use of inappropriate methods no additional payment will be made for this work .
d treatment of unsuitable materials hp where unsuitable material is encountered the contractor shall submit the proposed in situ treatment or extent of excavation to the superintendent for review .
e fills unsuitable materials in fills shall be treated in situ or be excavated and replaced at the contractors cost .
f stockpiles material complying with the requirements of type a b or c material which is unsuitable for immediate use due to being over wet may be stockpiled for later use .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num surplus excavated material no material shall be transported offsite where such material can be used within the designed earthworks under the contract .
surplus material shall be disposed of off site at the contractors cost .
num borrow excavation borrow excavation shall be limited to the quantity of material necessary to complete the work under the contract and will not be permitted where sufficient suitable material is available from within the limits of site excavation .
the contractor shall obtain all necessary permits and approvals for borrow areas outside the road reservation .
borrow excavations within the road reservation will not be permitted without the prior approval of superintendent .
where the superintendents approval is obtained the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all other necessary permits and approvals prior to the commencement of borrow excavation .
num fill construction a general fill construction includes the preparation of areas upon which fills are to be constructed and the selection placement and compaction of material .
b areas upon which fills are to be constructed areas upon which fills are to be constructed shall be prepared for test rolling by the contractor .
the surface of the prepared area shall be test rolled in accordance with clause num .
any unstable areas detected by test rolling shall be rectified .
where the height of fill to be placed to top of type b material level over the stripped surface is less than num m material immediately below the surface exposed after stripping of topsoil or removal of existing pavements shall be scarified to a depth of not less than num mm and recompacted to the specified density ratio for the location and type of material being placed .
existing pavements under areas upon which fills are to be constructed that are not required to be salvaged shall be scarified to a depth of not less than num mm and compacted as specified .
if groundwater is encountered the requirements of clause numh shall apply .
hp the contractor shall not commence placing any fill on the prepared areas until the area has been reviewed by the superintendent .
c benching where a fill is to be constructed on steep sideling ground or against an existing embankment with side slope steeper than num horizontally to num vertically benches shall be progressively cut over the full area to be covered by new fill .
the width of each bench shall be such as to permit safe and effective operation of plant but shall be not less than num m. material excavated during benching may be used in construction of fills if it meets the requirements specified in clause num for the type of material being placed .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth d placing of fill i general fill material shall be placed and spread in uniform layers and shall be compacted to meet the specified requirements for the location and type of material being placed .
each layer of fill shall be keyed into the layer above by creation of a textured surface .
any rocky material present in a layer of fill shall be uniformly distributed throughout the layer and the whole shall be compacted to meet specified requirements .
during the placement of fill material the surface of each layer shall be kept generally parallel to the surface of the subgrade .
prior to the cessation of work each day the top of the fill shall be shaped and compacted to minimise damage resulting from wet weather .
the contractor shall establish a procedure to verify that compacted layers do not exceed the specified maximum thickness .
verification records must provide evidence of measurements taken at least every three layers in consistent locations across the filled areas and must be retained with the lot records .
ii type a material type a material shall be placed in locations shown on the drawings or if surplus type a material is available it may be used in locations specified for type b material .
type a material shall be spread and compacted in layers not exceeding a compacted thickness of num mm .
type a structural material shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of clauses num and num. iii type b material type b material shall be placed in locations shown on the drawings or if surplus type b material is available it may be used in locations specified for type c material .
the highest quality type b materials available shall be reserved for placement in the higher levels of type b fills being constructed .
type b material shall be spread and compacted in layers not exceeding a compacted thickness of num mm .
where type b material contains num or more of rock by volume which will not break down during compaction to meet the maximum particle dimension required for a num mm thick layer the loose thickness of each layer may equal num of the typical maximum particle dimension of the rock up to a maximum layer thickness of num mm .
any rock with a maximum particle dimension greater than num of the loose thickness of the layer shall be removed .
the material shall be placed and compacted such that voids are completely filled with fine material .
type b material containing rock with a particle dimension greater than num mm after compaction shall not be placed within num mm of the top of type b andor type c material zones .
iv type c material type c material shall be placed in locations shown on the drawings or in other areas approved by the superintendent .
type c material shall be spread and compacted in layers not exceeding a compacted thickness of num mm .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth where type c material contains num or more of rock by volume which will not break down during compaction to meet the maximum particle dimension required for a num mm thick layer the loose thickness of each layer may equal the maximum particle dimension of the rock up to a maximum layer thickness of num mm .
rocks with a maximum particle dimension of less than num mm may be placed in type c material zones as specified with sufficient spacing between larger rocks to enable full compaction of the type c material .
the material shall be placed and compacted such that voids are completely filled with fine material .
num fill at structures a general this clause covers the requirements for the placement and compaction of fill material adjacent to or preparatory to the construction of structures such as bridge abutments retaining walls wing walls crown units and culverts with an opening height greater than num mm .
such material shall be placed at locations as specified or shown on the drawings .
b fill at structures hp no fill shall be placed against or within num m of a structure until the foundation for the fill has been reviewed by the superintendent .
in addition to the placement of type a material at bridge abutments as structural material embankment material or backfilling within num metres of retaining walls wing walls all crown units and culverts with an opening height greater than num mm shall be material of at least type a material quality .
no material shall be placed against concrete within num days of casting .
unless a geocomposite drainage mat is specified as a drainage medium material to be placed within num mm of bridge abutments retaining walls wing walls or large culverts shall consist of permeable fill material which meets the requirements of clause num .
the permeable fill material shall be placed in conjunction with the adjacent fill in layers not exceeding num mm compacted thickness and compacted to refusal using hand held mechanical equipment .
the bottom of the permeable fill material or any geocomposite drainage mat shall be connected to suitable drainage outfalls by subsurface drainage pipes as shown on the drawings or as otherwise specified .
material to be placed adjacent to permeable fill material or geocomposite drainage mat within num m of the face of structures shall be type a structural material which meets the requirements of clause num .
such material shall be spread and compacted as specified in horizontal layers not exceeding num mm compacted thickness .
compaction plant shall not be operated within the minimum distances from structures shown in table num .
these minimum distances apply until the fill reaches the level above the top of the structure corresponding to the relevant specified minimum cover .
the difference in level of any fill being placed on opposite sides of a structure or structural component shall not exceed hnum or num mm whichever is the lesser where h is the height of the structure .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num fill at structures non vibrating rollers static weight tonne vibrating rollers total applied force kn minimum distance from compaction plant to side of structures m minimum distance from compaction plant to abutments retaining walls and wing walls m minimum cover over top of culverts m less than num less than num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num or height of structure whichever is greater num or height of structure whichever is greater num includes vibrating rollers operating in nonvibrating mode .
total applied force is the sum of the static weight and the vertical component of the centrifugal force .
c fill placed prior to erection of structures material placed within num m of any future structure shown on the drawings shall be type a structural material .
num test rolling areas upon which fills are to be constructed all layers of fill and material within num mm of the cut floor level in cuts shall be test rolled in accordance with section num .
the contractors quality plans and procedures shall include test rolling as a hold point .
the contractor shall provide for the superintendent to be present during all test rolling .
the superintendent reserves the right to direct the contractor to undertake further test rolling on any layer prior to it being covered by a successive layer .
no additional payment will be made for any requirement to carry out such further test rolling .
num testing and acceptance of compaction and moisture content fills shall be compacted to either compaction scale a scale b or scale c as nominated in clause num .
where the compaction scale has not been specified compaction scale a shall apply .
testing for compaction shall be undertaken in accordance with vicroads code of practice num. a test lots a test lot shall be as defined in section num .
the lot size for type a type b and type c material shall be as specified in table num .
the calculation of density ratio and moisture ratio shall be based on laboratory values determined using standard compactive effort .
for work to be tested for compliance with scale a or scale b compaction requirements the number of tests per lot shall be six unless the lot is to be treated as a small lot in accordance with section num .
for work to be tested for compliance with scale c compaction requirements the number of tests per lot shall be three .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth b compaction i material of nominal size num mm or less after compaction fill material and material within num mm of the cut floor level having a nominal size after compaction of num mm or less shall be compacted to comply with the requirements of table num .
each lot to be tested for compaction shall be test rolled in accordance with section num .
any unstable areas shall be excluded from the lot and shall be rectified by the contractor and assessed separately .
if the total area of the excluded areas exceeds num of the area of the lot the whole of the lot shall be rejected .
table num compaction requirements material type and location scale a scale b scale c minimum characteristic value of density ratio minimum characteristi c value of density ratio minimum mean value of density ratio all type a material num num num type b material placed within num mm of top of type b material ripped and recompacted material below cut floor level type b material placed more than num mm below top of type b material num num num the top num mm of areas where fill is to be constructed type c material num num num ii material of nominal size greater than num mm after compaction all fill material and ripped and recompacted material in cuts below cut floor level with a nominal size after compaction greater than num mm shall be compacted using a grading mixing watering and rolling procedure as agreed by the superintendent .
the superintendent may require that trial sections be constructed to verify that the proposed compaction routine is acceptable .
no additional payment will be made for any requirement to construct trial sections .
all fill material and material below the cut floor level shall be compacted at minimum moisture ratio of num .
the moisture ratio shall be determined using the material which passes the num mm sieve where the material contains less than num oversize material .
if the material contains more than num oversize material the moisture ratio shall be determined using an alternative method in accordance with the appropriate test method or code of practice .
acceptance of work for compaction will be based on compliance with the accepted placement and compaction procedure and test rolling carried out in accordance with section num .
any unstable areas detected by test rolling shall be rectified .
where unstable areas exceed num of the area being test rolled the whole of the area shall be ripped recompacted as specified above and represented for test rolling .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth c treatment of expansive materials all material with a percentage swell equal to or greater than num shall be considered as expansive and shall be treated in accordance with clause numei and clause numdiii .
all layers of type a material placed over expansive type b or expansive in situ material shall be maintained at a characteristic moisture ratio of not less than num for the period between completion of compaction and placement of the overlying layer .
expansive material shall be placed at a characteristic moisture ratio of num to num during compaction maintained through test rolling and up to placement of the overlying layer .
the contractor may nominate a lesser characteristic moisture ratio for agreement of the superintendent if it can demonstrate that complying with the above requirement will result in the material being unstable under a test roll performed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
where the nominal size of material after compaction is greater than num mm the moisture ratio shall be determined on that material which passes the num mm sieve otherwise the moisture ratio shall be determined on the material passing the num mm sieve or num mm sieve taking into account oversize material as required by the test method .
num frequency of testing the contractor shall carry out testing at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that the materials and work supplied under the contract complies with the specified requirements .
notwithstanding this requirement testing shall be undertaken at either scale a or scale b level of testing at a frequency not less than that specified below .
where the scale of testing has not been specified scale a shall apply .
a material properties testing scale a i cbr and percentage swell materials shall be tested to demonstrate compliance with the material property requirements specified in clause num .
where scale a is specified the following frequency of testing shall apply .
the initial lot of each material type shall be tested to determine the assigned cbr strength and percentage swell of the material and shall be carried out in accordance with vicroads code of practice rcnum .
unless otherwise approved by the superintendent sampling for cbr testing shall be undertaken after field compaction of the initial lot .
if either the assigned cbr value or percentage swell value does not meet the requirements specified in clause num the lot shall be rejected and all subsequent material from that source will be considered as non conforming for that use .
where both the assigned cbr and percentage swell values meet the requirements of clause num the material will be considered to be conforming subject to it complying with other specified requirements and the contractor may seek the superintendents agreement to undertake future testing for cbr and percentage swell at the reduced frequency specified in table num .
the continued acceptance of assigned cbr and percentage swell will be assessed against the cbr and percentage swell values of a single cbr test and a single percentage swell test .
provided that the single cbr test value is greater than the specified assigned cbr value and that the percentage swell value is less than the specified percentage swell value the lot shall be accepted for cbr and percentage swell .
should either the single cbr value be less than the specified assigned cbr or the percentage swell value be greater than the specified swell value the lot shall be retested for assigned cbr and percentage swell values .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth the values obtained from the new assigned cbr and percentage swell tests shall comply with the requirements of clause num and shall be considered to be the new assigned cbr and percentage swell values .
subject to compliance to clause num single test verification of the assigned cbr and percentage swell shall continue at the reduced testing frequency .
should either the verification tests for the assigned cbr andor percentage swell value not comply with the requirements of table num the material from that source will be considered as non conforming and the lot and any subsequent lots from that source will be rejected .
ii gradings pi ll permeability and particle dimension testing for grading pi ll permeability and maximum particle dimension shall be undertaken at the initial testing frequency specified in table num until three consecutive lots of like material and work have achieved the specified requirements .
after satisfying this requirement the contractor may seek the superintendents agreement to reduce the frequency of testing of subsequent lots to the reduced testing frequency specified in table num .
if the contractor has obtained the superintendents agreement to reduce the frequency of testing and any lot fails to achieve the specified requirements all testing of all subsequent lots shall be undertaken in accordance with the initial testing frequency in table num until three consecutive lots of like material and work have achieved the specified requirements in the first test .
after satisfying this requirement the contractor may again reduce the frequency of testing to the reduced testing frequency specified in table num .
if a material source changes or the properties of a material differ from the material initially tested a new testing regime shall be established in accordance with this clause .
table num frequency of testing for material properties material properties material initial testing reduced testing frequency minimum cbr and percentage swell type a material num lot test to determine assigned cbr and swell single cbr test to confirm assigned cbr and swell per every num lots type b material num lot test to determine assigned cbr and swell single cbr test to confirm assigned cbr and swell per every num lots in situ material in cuts within num mm below cut floor level num lot test to determine assigned cbr and swell single cbr test to confirm assigned cbr and swell per every num lots grading type a material num test for each lot tested for compaction num test for every second lot tested for compaction permeable fill material num test per lot num test per every num lots pi and calculation of pi x passing num mm type a material num test per num lots num test per every num lots ll and comparison of pi against ll identification of silt type a material type b material num test per num lots num test per every num lots permeability capping and verge materials and other type a material num test per num lots num test per every num lots maximum particle dimension num type a material type b and type c material containing rock greater than num mm every lot every lot every lot every lot note num visual inspection assessment and measurement of larger rock particles .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth b material properties testing scale b where scale b is specified in table num the first lot of each material type shall be tested to demonstrate compliance with the material property requirements specified in clause num .
where the first lot of each material type satisfies the material property requirements in clause num as applicable to that material type no further testing will be required for that material except where changes to the physical properties of the material are observed or where directed by the superintendent .
where the first lot of each material type does not satisfy the material property requirements in clause num as applicable to the material type the lot will be rejected .
c compaction and moisture content testing frequency every lot shall be tested initially to demonstrate compliance with the requirements for compaction and moisture content .
testing of every lot shall continue until three consecutive lots of like material and work have achieved the specified requirements in the first test .
after satisfying this requirement and establishing a compaction procedure to the satisfaction of the superintendent the contractor may seek the superintendents agreement to reduce the frequency of testing of subsequent lots to the minimum requirements specified in table num .
if the contractor has obtained the superintendents agreement to test for compaction and moisture content at the minimum testing frequency and any lot fails to achieve the specified requirements testing of all subsequent lots shall be undertaken until three consecutive lots of like material and work have achieved the specified requirements in the first test .
after satisfying this requirement the contractor may submit changes to the compaction procedure for the superintendents review and may again seek approval to reduce the frequency of testing to the minimum requirements .
for the purposes of this subclause small areas as defined in section num shall not be included in the initial consecutive lots tested for compliance nor any subsequent set of consecutive lots .
table num minimum frequency of testing for compaction and moisture content material acceptable lot size in a single layer of work minimum testing frequency type a material one days production or num mnum whichever is the lesser every second lot of like material and work type b material ripped and recompacted below cut floor level one days production or num mnum whichever is the lesser every second lot of like material and work placed within num mm of top of type b material one days production or num mnum whichever is the lesser every second lot of like material and work placed more than num mm below top of type b material one days production every third lot of like material and work type c material one days production every sixth lot of like material and work department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num preparation and maintenance of final earthwork surfaces and subgrade the top of the type b material cut floor level and subgrade surfaces shall be prepared to level and shape within the tolerances specified in clause numg to produce a smooth hard tightly bound surface free from depressions capable of holding water .
material within num mm of subgrade shall be maintained such that its moisture content is not less than num of optimum moisture content prior to the placement of any pavement layer .
num schedules for tolerances material properties and compaction testing table num nominates the level of testing required for acceptance of surface level measurement as specified in clause num for acceptance of material properties as specified in clauses num and num and for acceptance of compaction as specified in clause num .
table num schedule for surface tolerance material properties and compaction testing road name chainage location scale of surface level measurement a b or c scale of material property testing a or b scale of compaction a b or c freeway m roads within limits of works a a a arterial a roads within limits of works a b a arterial b roads within limits of works b b b arterial c roads within limits of works c not applicable c note where no level of testing is nominated scale a applies .
num topsoiling topsoiling shall not be placed over cut and fill areas until the contractor has verified that such areas comply with the requirements in clause num all unpaved cut and fill areas within the limits of the batters including batter roundings but excluding cut batters steeper than num to num horizontal to vertical and any other area disturbed by the contractors operations shall be topsoiled to the following thicknesses measured normal to the slope a batters with slopes of num to num horizontal to vertical or steeper num mm minimum b tree and shrub plantation bed areas other than a above num mm minimum c verges in areas without kerb and channel or concrete edging strips the depth of topsoil shall vary uniformly from num mm deep at the outside edge of verge to num mm deep within num mm of the edge of seal or asphalt surface treatment d all other areas num mm minimum .
topsoil shall be placed and levelled but not compacted except for verge areas which shall be compacted .
topsoil on batters shall be placed so as to prevent rilling .
the surface level of topsoil shall match the finished surface level or level of back of kerb or concrete edging as appropriate .
state growth supplement to sec num earthworks the following information should be considered by project managers road designers and contract administration staff when soft subgrades are identified during geotechnical investigations or are encountered during the construction phase of a road project .
soft subgrade material the following hierarchy of controls should be implemented when soft subgrades or other unsuitable materials are encountered on road projects excavation and replacement of the soft material with suitable select fill material stabilisation of the subgrade with suitable stabilisation agents use of geotextiles geofabrics and geogrids note these products are not to be used to modify the thickness of proposed pavements in all of the options above critical attention to drainage is required .
the following types of drainage systems are applicable surface drainage subsurface drainage drainage blankets drainage blankets have a particular application in the construction of road pavements and road embankments .
drainage blankets drainage blankets should be utilised in locations subject to high ground water levels where other drainage alternatives and formation features are ineffective in intercepting or managing free water .
in this situation the use of a rock blanket as a lower subbase layer may be the most effective means of removing the free water from beneath the pavement or embankment .
drainage blankets should only be used for their intended purpose and should not be used as general solution for subgrade improvement regardless of actual site conditions .
reference documents additional information relating to this topic can be found in the following reference documents austroads guide to pavement technology part num pavement structural design num type here type here april num state growth supplement to sec num earthworks austroads guide to pavement technology part num pavement construction num austroads guide to pavement technology part num subsurface drainage num type here type here april num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num rock fill this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the requirements for the use of rock fill in embankment construction .
this section should be used taking into account the requirements of section num .
num definitions fill the compacted embankment placed above natural surface level after removal of topsoil .
rock fill a material comprised of larger fragments of hard sound durable rock containing only a small amount of fine particles which when placed and compacted produces an embankment deriving its stability from the mechanical interlock of the coarser rock particles and not from the compaction of finer material .
num materials a rock fill material material for rock fill embankment construction shall be obtained from excavations within the works .
rock fill shall be comprised of sound rock fragments having not less than two broken or angular faces .
not less than num individual randomly selected rock samples with dimensions greater than num mm shall be tested for each nominated point load test .
not less than num of rock fragments with dimensions greater than num mm shall have a point load strength isnum of num mpa or greater .
prior to placement rock fill material shall have no particle dimension exceeding num mm and minimal fine material .
after placement and compaction rock fill material including rock fill cover layer material shall comply with postcompaction gradings in table num .
table num postcompaction grading of rock fill material rock fill type limits of grading passing by mass post compaction as sieve size mm num num num num num maximum particle size num mm num num num maximum particle size num mm num num num maximum particle size num mm num num num maximum particle size num mm num num maximum particle size num mm num b geotextile fabric geotextile fabric required for the construction of rock fills shall have a g robustness rating of greater than num and shall be supplied handled and placed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num site excavation a general site excavation of rock fill material shall be within the limits of batters open and underground drainage and approved borrow areas from within the site and shall include the handling of excavated material to the point of disposal .
b material category hp prior to the use of excavated rock material as rock fill the superintendent and the contractor shall inspect the material encountered and subject to verification by appropriate testing agree on the suitability of the material for rock fill as described in clause num. c excavation operations if excavated rock is to be used in the construction of rock fill embankment the working methods employed in the excavation of cuttings must be adjusted so as to produce rock fill material of the size and grading and rock strength specified in clause num .
such working methods generally must include screening and if necessary secondary processing .
d oversize rock oversize rock produced as a consequence of rock fill production shall be used or disposed of only in areas specified or shown in the drawings or approved by the superintendent .
hp the superintendents approval shall be obtained to the use or disposal of oversize rock with a maximum particle dimension greater than the requirements for type b fill material in type c fill areas in accordance with section num .
num rock fill embankment construction a areas upon which rock fills are to be constructed areas upon which fills are to be constructed shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of section num .
topsoil and material classified as silt shall be removed prior to construction of any rock fills .
where a rock fill is to be constructed on steep sideling ground or against an existing embankment with side slope steeper than num horizontally to num vertically benches shall be progressively cut over the full area to be covered by new fill .
the width of each bench shall be such as to permit safe and effective operation of plant but shall be not less than num m. material excavated during benching may be used in construction of earthworks in accordance with section num .
foundations under rock fills must be shaped to ensure that drainage is maintained and treated to ensure that erosion of the foundation will not occur .
b placement and compaction of rock fill prior to placement of the first layer of rock fill a geotextile fabric shall be placed as a separation layer .
the rock fill material shall be placed and compacted in layers in accordance with the accepted placement and compaction procedure and table num .
rock fill shall be placed and compacted to ensure rock particle to particle contact between coarser rock particles is maintained and to achieve stability of the layer .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth interlock between successive rock fill layers shall be ensured by limiting the placement of finer particles over the surface of the rock fill layer to that necessary to achieve interlock between the courser rock particles .
where earthworks fill material is to be placed over or adjacent to a rock fill cover layers of rock fill material shall first be placed in accordance with table num .
a geotextile separation fabric with a g robustness rating of greater than num shall then be placed over the top of the rock fill layers and extended to cover the longitudinal edge of the top layer .
a minimum layer of num mm of type b fill material with a maximum particle dimension of num mm shall then be placed on top of the geotextile fabric above which the earthworks fill layer can then be constructed .
table num thickness of rock fill material layers rock fill type maximum thickness of each compacted layer minimum distance below subgrade level thickness of rock fill cover layers bottom layer maximum particle size num mm middle layer maximum particle size num mm top layer maximum particle size num mm total thickness of rock fill cover layers maximum particle size num mm num mm num m num mm num mm num mm num mm maximum particle size num mm num mm num m not required num mm num mm num mm maximum particle size num mm num mm num mm not required not required num mm num mm maximum particle size num mm num mm num mm not required not required num mm num mm c rock fill around structures at structures including abutments retaining walls wingwalls and culverts rock fill and rock fill cover material shall not be placed within any specified type a fill zone or within num m of any structure .
d level control each layer of rock fill including cover layers shall be surveyed to confirm that placement is in accordance with the following tolerances intermediate layers of rock fill shall be placed to a tolerance of num mm .
the surface level tolerance of the top of final layer of rock fill or zone shall be finished to a tolerance of num mm num mm .
num acceptance of placement and compaction hp the first lot shall be placed as a trial section for review by the superintendent .
the contractor shall then develop a material grading mixing watering and rolling routine based on the construction and testing of trial section for review by the superintendent .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth as a minimum trial sections shall be carried out both for the initial layer of rock fill over in situ material and then for the subsequent second layer of rock fill and each trial section shall have an area of not less than num mnum be thoroughly watered prior to applying roller passes be compacted by the application of not less than num roller passes or more if consolidation is still occurring be surveyed for level changes in surface levels after each roller pass at not less than num predetermined monitoring points be assessed to determine the point at which effective refusal occurs be inspected and tested for compliance with this section num .
where any monitoring point has been in the opinion of the superintendent destroyed or significantly damaged by crushing or rock break down the survey level result for that point shall be disregarded for that roller pass and a replacement monitoring point established for monitoring of subsequent roller passes .
the accepted compaction routine shall provide not less than three additional passes of the compaction plant above the number of passes identified from the compaction trials as having no further consolidation of rock particles and the compactive effort shall be not less than the equivalent of num passes of a vibrating pad foot roller which can transmit a minimum force to the ground through the surface of the drum of num kn per metre of drum length when operated at the maximum frequency of vibration .
the frequency of vibration of the roller shall be between num and num hz and the travel speed shall not exceed num m for every three seconds .
the superintendent may require that further trial sections be constructed to verify that the proposed placement and compaction routine is acceptable where there is a change in the type or quality of the material being placed .
assessment of placement and compaction will include visual inspection of inspection trenches excavated to the full depth of the rock fill layer and test rolling carried out in accordance with clause num .
assessment of placement and compaction shall also include monitoring the level of rock particles at the surface of the layer to identify the point at which no further consolidation of the rock particles occurs when subject to three additional passes of the compaction plant .
the number and location of monitoring sites shall be to the satisfaction of the superintendent but shall not be less than num locations for each lot monitored .
acceptance of work for compaction will be based on compliance with the accepted placement and compaction procedure testing and inspection as specified and the confirmation by survey level monitoring that effective refusal has be achieved for the rock fill layer .
for the purpose of this clause effective refusal is where the average cumulative deflection over the last three roller passes is no greater than num mm .
num test rolling all layers of rock fill shall be test rolled in accordance with section num .
prior to any layer being covered by a successive layer the superintendent may require further test rolling to confirm that the layer is stable .
any unstable areas detected by test rolling shall be rectified .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num minimum frequency of testing a material properties materials shall be tested to demonstrate compliance with the material property requirements specified in clause num .
testing shall be undertaken at the frequency specified in table num .
table num minimum frequency of testing for material properties material properties minimum frequency of testing rock strength point load index isnum each source prior to the commencement of work and every num m of production .
grading prior to compaction prior to the commencement of work and at other times when in the opinion of the contractor or the superintendent the nature andor physical properties of the material have changed .
after compaction grading for each trial section and for every third lot and at other times when in the opinion of the contractor or the superintendent the nature andor physical properties of the material have changed .
consolidation measurement of rock fill layers survey monitoring for all trial sections and each layer of rock fill including cover layers .
test rolling all layers of rock fill including cover layers .
b compaction the contractor shall initially test each trial section to verify the adequacy of placement and the compaction procedure to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
once a placement and compaction routine is established each lot shall be placed in accordance with this procedure .
every layer shall be tested for stability by test rolling and every third lot shall be monitored to verify that no further consolidation is occurring .
should the rock fill in any layer be found to be continuing to consolidate within the past three roller passes the placement and compaction procedure shall be reviewed to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
num asconstructed records the location and extent of all rock fill zones and cover layers constructed shall be surveyed and shown in asconstructed drawings .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num geotextiles in earthworks this section crossreferences sections num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for the supply handling and placing of geotextiles as listed below or used as a separation layer or as a separation and filtration layer in earthworks at locations shown on the drawings or specified .
a woven geotextile b nonwoven geotextile .
num supply of materials the contractor shall supply the geotextiles as specified in clause num and as shown on the drawings .
the physical and mechanical properties of the geotextiles shall be provided in accordance with clause num .
after delivery of the geotextiles to site the contractor shall ensure that the geotextiles are kept clean and undamaged and stored away from direct sunlight until covered .
any damaged or improperly stored geotextiles shall be replaced by the contractor .
num properties of geotextiles a general the geotextile shall consist of woven or nonwoven fabric manufactured from synthetic fibres of a long chain polymer such as polypropylene polyethylene polyester or similar .
woven geotextiles shall have filaments interlaced in two sets mutually at right angles .
one set shall be parallel to the longitudinal direction of the geotextile .
non woven geotextiles shall have filaments bonded by needle punching heat or chemical bonding processes .
b robustness the geotextile shall have a robustness geotextile strength rating g complying with the requirements of table num .
table num classification robustness g moderately robust num num robust num num very robust num num extremely robust greater than num determination of robustness g shall be in accordance with vicroads test method rc num calculation of robustness of geotextile material as listed in section num .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth c equivalent opening size where specified in clause num as a separationfiltration material both woven and nonwoven geotextiles shall have an equivalent opening size between num and num microns .
the equivalent opening size determination shall be carried out in accordance with as num determination of pore size distribution dry sieving method as listed in section num. d uv radiation stabilisation the geotextile shall be stabilised against deterioration due to ultraviolet radiation such that when tested in accordance with as num the geotextile must have retained strength of at least num after num days of test exposure .
after forming the geotextile shall be processed so that the fibres retain their relative positions with respect to each other .
the geotextile shall be free from defects or flaws which adversely affect its physical and mechanical properties .
e testing all testing shall be performed by laboratories with third party accreditation to isoiec num by a signatory to the international laboratories accreditation cooperation ilac scheme e.g .
by nata national association of testing authorities australia or by a laboratory accredited to isoiec num through natas mutual recognition arrangement mra network process .
test certificates shall be in the english language .
sampling shall be in accordance with as num and testing shall be in accordance with the relevant part of as num including the determination of the material properties specified in clause numb c and d. test certificates shall be submitted for each delivery of geotextile supplied to the works .
test certificates for the same material produced and tested within num months prior to the proposed use will be accepted except for geotextile material used in structural applications as detailed in table num below .
where no test certification is provided test samples from each roll of geotextile shall be selected and the test results reported in accordance with the relevant part of as num .
tests shall include the determination of the material properties specified in clause numb c and d of the geotextile for the consignment delivered .
table num frequency of testing for geotextile material properties geotextile use test test frequency general use as num as num as num as num as num as num as num as num rc num annual geotextile used in structural fill applications as num as num as num as num as num as num as num rc num test results on the test certificate shall include at least one set of results for each month of geotextile manufacture .
as num annual department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num preparation prior to placing any geotextiles the contractor shall excavate the surface material to the depth shown on the drawings or specified .
the area shall then be trimmed to provide a uniform surface freely draining to points clear of the road formation .
where the surface having been trimmed becomes unstable for whatever reason the contractor shall treat in situ or remove and replace the unstable material to the condition that the surface has the required strength to support the weight of construction traffic and plant and no additional payment shall be made for this work .
num placing geotextiles and backfilling hp the placement of geotextile is not permitted without the written approval of the superintendent .
a general the contractor shall place the specified geotextile to the limits as shown on the drawings or specified .
the geotextile shall be subject to a visual inspection by the contractors geotechnical consultant during placing .
a certificate of compliance shall be provided by the contractors geotechnical consultant to verify that the coverage and ground preparation for placement of the geotextile have been executed in accordance with the drawings and this specification .
the geotextile shall be placed without punctures or tears and if these occur they shall be rectified or the entire roll of geotextile replaced prior to covering .
any rolls with imperfections shall not be used .
geotextiles used in subsurface drains shall be placed to conform approximately to the shape of the excavation .
the geotextile shall fully envelop the drainage material in the excavation .
all joints shall be overlapped or sewn in accordance with requirements specified in clause num .
geotextiles shall be covered by filling within num hours of placement .
b type b material the contractor shall supply and place over the geotextile type b material of maximum particle size of not more than num mm and moisture ratio of not less than num as determined by test using the standard compactive effort .
the initial layer of type b material shall be placed and compacted to the maximum density practicable without causing further instability in the underlying materials upon which the geotextile has been placed .
subsequent layers of type b material shall also be placed to the maximum density practicable until stability is achieved and a layer satisfies the test rolling requirements specified in section num as applicable .
any remaining layers of fill to be placed above the stable layer shall be placed and compacted in accordance with the requirements of section num as applicable .
c permeable fill material where shown on the drawings or specified the contractor shall supply and place permeable fill material of the depth specified in clause num over the geotextile .
the geotextile shall be of the type of filtration and separation classification .
the permeable fill material shall comply with the requirements of clause num and have a moisture content compatible with achieving maximum density practicable .
the initial layer of permeable fill material shall be placed and compacted to the maximum density practicable without causing further instability or loss of shape to the trimmed surface upon which the geotextile has been placed .
any subsequent layers of permeable fill material shall also be placed to the maximum density practicable until the full depth of permeable fill material specified has been placed .
following placement of the specified depth of permeable fill material a second layer of geotextile filtration and separation shall be placed as specified to completely enclose the permeable fill material before placement of type b material commences .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num supply of permeable fill material strikethrough a or b for the purpose of this section permeable fill material shall a comply with the requirements of section num b consist of hard durable and clean sand or gravel or crushed stone from a source rock with a los angeles abrasion loss of not more than num c have maximum particle size not exceeding num mm and a permeability not less than num nummsec when compacted to a density ratio value of num based on standard compactive effort .
num schedule of details a supply of geotextiles clause num .
classification overlap requirements type i separation only mm ii separationfiltration mm b permeable fill material clause numc depth m. department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num lime stabilisation of earthworks materials this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the requirements for lime stabilisation of earthworks materials within the formation .
the requirements relate to preparation of the formation to be stabilised quality of lime spreading mixing and compaction of the stabilised earthworks material .
this section is not applicable for lime pretreatment of pavement layers .
for lime pre treatment of pavement layers standard section num insitu stabilisation of pavements with cementitious binders shall be used .
num definitions available lime the amount of calcium oxide cao or calcium hydroxide caohnum contained in quicklime or hydrated lime respectively .
available lime index ali the calcium oxide or calcium hydroxide content of quicklime or hydrated lime respectively expressed as a percentage of the total mass of lime determined in accordance with as num .
design distribution rate of available lime the spread rate of pure calcium oxide or calcium hydroxide .
fly ash a fine powder of pozzolanic material extracted from the flue emissions produced from the burning of black coal .
lime lime is either hydrated lime calcium hydroxide or quicklime calcium oxide .
hydrated lime hydrated lime is a powdered form of lime consisting primarily of calcium hydroxide also referred to as slaked lime .
lime spreading rate the required spread rate of lime determined from the design distribution rate of available lime corrected for the ali of the lime to be used .
quicklime quicklime is a fine granulated powder consisting primarily of calcium oxide that can be readily slaked by the application of water after it has been evenly spread to form calcium hydroxide .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth slag ground granulated blast furnace slag ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs is a pozzolan produced by fine grinding of slag produced as a byproduct from the smelting of iron ore. num conformity with drawings lime stabilised layers shall be finished to conform within the following limits to the levels lines grades thicknesses and cross sections specified or shown on the drawings a surface level surface level measurement shall be undertaken in lots not exceeding num m num in accordance with the procedures specified in section num examination and testing of materials and work roadworks .
unless otherwise specified in other standard sections or elsewhere the surface level of the lime stabilised layer at subgrade level at any point shall not differ by more than num mm above or num mm below the specified level .
b depth of stabilisation the depth of lime stabilised material as specified in clause numa or b shall not at any point be less than the depth as specified in clause num by more than num mm and the average depth of the lot shall be not be less than the specified depth .
c alignment lime stabilised earthworks carried out in a boxed formation shall extend to the full width of the boxing .
where there is no boxed formation the edges of the lime stabilised material shall not be more than num mm inside the specified offset from centreline or design line .
d width the width of the lime stabilised material shall not be less than that specified width by more than num mm .
e shape where the finished surface of the lime stabilised material is at subgrade level no point on the surface of the lime stabilised material shall lie more than num mm below a num m straightedge placed in any direction on the surface except on the part of the cross section designed with a crown .
num materials materials supplied under the contract shall comply with the following properties a lime quicklime and hydrated lime shall meet the requirements of asnum as listed in section num .
all quicklime and hydrated lime supplied to the job shall be provided with delivery docket showing an assigned ali at the start of each production week .
the assigned ali shall be determined by averaging the six most recent test results for ali .
a test certificate for determination of the ali shall be made available on request lime shall be stored in a moisture free environment and shall be retested for compliance with as num limes and limestones part num limes for building if stored for more than num days after receipt from the manufacturer .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth b cementitious binders i slaglime blends slag and hydrated lime may be used in blended combination as a stabilising additive .
the requirements for hydrated lime shall be as specified in clause numa above .
slag used shall be ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs meeting the requirements of as num supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement part num slagground granulated iron blast furnace as listed in section num .
the contractor shall nominate the type brand and source of the ggbfs to be used .
slaglime shall be blended uniformly in the ratio of num slag to num hydrated lime unless laboratory testing indicates that superior strength of the stabilised mixture is achieved by using a different ratio .
if the blend is to be varied the proportion of lime shall not be less than num .
the contractor shall provide evidence that the blend ratio has been met for all material supplied to the job .
slaglime blend shall have a mortar bar num day compressive strength of num mpa and num day compressive strength of num mpa .
the test shall be the same test specified in as num method num unconfined compressive strength of compacted materials for portland and blended cements listed in section num except that the cement to water ratio shall be adjusted to match the consistency of mortar produced for the compressive strength test for gb cement in accordance with the relevant australian standard .
ii slow cementitious blends incorporating alkali activated slag or fly ash special blends of slow setting cementitious stabilising agents incorporating alkali activated slag or fly ash which are not produced to meet the requirements of a gb cement may be used subject to the blend satisfying the mortar bar test requirement specified in clause numbi above and the specified mix requirements .
the maximum binder working time shall be determined in accordance with the vicroads test method rc num determination of the maximum allowable working time for a cementitious binder as listed in section num to confirm that the binder is a slow setting binder .
fly ash shall be supplied to meet the requirements of as num supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement part num fly ash as listed in section num. c water water added to the material shall be clear and substantially free from sediments and detrimental impurities such as oils salts acids alkalis and vegetable substances .
water supplied from sources where dissolved salts are known or likely to be present shall be tested for electrical conductivity prior to use .
the electrical conductivity shall not be more than num scm and the amount of chloride and sulphate in any water used shall each be no greater than num ppm .
water sources classified by the relevant water authority as potable water shall be exempt from this requirement .
num investigation and determination of design lime spreading rate where the design distribution rate of available lime is not specified in clause numb the contractor is required to carry out the site investigation and perform laboratory testing to determine the design distribution rate of available lime in accordance with vicroads code of practice rc num code of practice for lime stabilised earthworks materialsavailable lime content assignment of cbr and swell .
the design distribution rate so determined shall satisfy all the requirements for the stabilised material as specified in clause numa .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num commencement of work hp the contractor shall not commence work until the lime spreading rates have been presented to the superintendent for review .
if the contractor is required to determine the design distribution rate of available lime evidence shall be produced to show that the material properties specified in clause numa have been met .
num construction plant the contractor shall provide construction plant meeting the following requirements and capability .
a lime spreader a purpose built mechanical spreader capable of accurately regulating the discharge of lime directly to the roadbed shall be used such that the design distribution rate of available lime is uniformly met in accordance with the requirements of clause num. b mixing machine a purpose built machine mixing machine designed for insitu stabilisation of roadworks shall be used to pulverise and uniformly mix the earthworks formation material with water and lime for the specified depth of stabilisation .
rotary hoes and other types of agricultural machinery shall not be used .
after pulverisation and mixing all stabilised material other than isolated hard rock particles up to a nominal size of num mm shall be capable of passing a num mm sieve .
c watering plant watering plant or any purpose designed watering system incorporated within the mixing machine shall be capable of uniformly distributing sufficient water to hydrate quicklime and if required add more water to increase the moisture content to aid compaction .
d compaction plant compaction plant shall be of such mass as to be capable of compacting the stabilised layer to the minimum density ratio throughout the depth of the layer .
num construction a general construction includes the preparation of the earthworks formation spreading of lime slaking of quicklime mixing compaction trimming and curing of the stabilised material .
b pretreatment of earthworks the material to be stabilised shall be pretreated by scarifying or pulverising to the specified depth to provide an even surface capable of being trimmed to meet the requirements of clause num .
any hard rock particles larger than num mm shall be removed from the scarified soil .
c spreading of lime spreading of lime shall not be carried out at times when lime could become airborne or dispersed in such a way as to become a nuisance or a hazard to persons property or livestock .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth lime shall be spread uniformly over the prepared surface at the lime spreading rate calculated using the appropriate formula i or ii below .
i where hydrated lime has been used in the laboratory testing to determine the design distribution rate of available lime and it is proposed to use quicklime at the job site the lime spreading rate shall be determined from lime spreading rate num x design distribution rate of available lime ali of lime to be used ii where the same type of lime hydrated lime or quicklime is to be used at the job site as has been used in the laboratory tests to determine the design distribution rate of available lime the lime spreading rate shall be determined from lime spreading rate design distribution rate of available lime ali of lime to be used under no circumstances shall the design content of available lime be less than num by mass as determined under vicroads code of practice num code of practice for lime stabilised earthworks materialsavailable lime content assignment of cbr and swell .
immediately following completion of spreading of lime the contractor shall check and record the average lime spreading rate and the uniformity of spreading rate in accordance with clause num .
if the required lime spreading rate exceeds num kgmnum it shall be spread in two equal spreading runs with material from the first spread run being fully mixed into the earthworks material prior to the second spreading run being undertaken .
d slaking of quicklime quicklime shall be slaked with sufficient water to allow full hydration to take place .
full hydration will be deemed to have been achieved when all quicklime that has been spread has changed from a cream coloured granulate to a fine white powder and there is a cessation of rising vapours .
e mixing where quicklime is used mixing shall not commence until full hydration has been achieved .
all lime shall be mixed to the specified depth within num hours of spreading regardless of the number of spreading and mixing runs required .
if lime stabilised material contains nonfriable wet clay lumps with a nominal size in excess of num mm after the initial mixing run the lime stabilised material shall be allowed to stand for up to num hours to allow sufficient time for clay lumps to dry out and react with the lime .
once the lime stabilised material is friable it shall be remixed prior to compaction .
remixing shall proceed until all stabilised material other than isolated hard rock particles up to a nominal size of num mm is capable of passing a num mm as sieve and a minimum of at least num is capable of passing a num mm sieve when shaken without forcing material through the openings .
the stabilised material shall be visually inspected for uniform mixing by excavating test holes for the full depth of the loose material at six random locations within each compaction test lot as defined in clause numa .
the number of mixing runs undertaken after spreading of lime shall not be less than two department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth f final trimming the surface may be further trimmed before or during compaction to meet the requirements of clause numa and e. g compaction compaction shall not commence until the requirements of clause nume are met .
prior to compaction additional moisture may be added if required to achieve the specified density ratio .
compaction shall commence within num hours and be completed within num hours after completion of mixing .
num preliminary trial if specified in clause numc the contractor shall carry out a preliminary trial of the proposed stabilising operation .
the trial shall determine a the effectiveness of the construction plant b the number of passes of the stabilisation machine necessary to achieve uniform pulverisation and mixing c the field moisture content required to achieve specified compaction requirements d the rolling routine required to meet specified compaction requirements .
the trial section shall be located within the works area .
the length of the trial section shall be between num and num metres over the full width of the area proposed for stabilisation .
hp lime stabilisation shall not proceed outside the trial section until the superintendent has reviewed all aspects of the work .
the outcome of the superintendents review will be provided to the contractor within three working days after completion of the trial .
if the specification requirements are not met for the trial the superintendent may direct that another trial be undertaken or that the work be restabilised and presented for reassessment .
num test rolling all lime stabilised material shall be test rolled in accordance with section num of the specification .
if the superintendent considers that a completed stabilised earthworks layer has been affected by rain or damaged in some way before a successive layer is placed further test rolling shall be carried out by the contractor on the layer immediately prior to being covered by a succeeding layer .
num requirements for acceptance of compaction a general density testing shall be undertaken within num hours after completion of compaction .
remoulding of compacted specimens for determination of the laboratory reference density at each test site shall be completed within num hours after extraction of samples of stabilised material .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth the work shall be assessed for compliance with scale a or scale b requirements for acceptance of compaction of the lot as specified in clause num .
the calculation of the characteristic or mean density ratio shall be based on standard compactive effort .
a lot shall consist of a single layer of like material and work compacted on the same day up to a maximum area of num mnum .
for work to be tested for compliance with scale a requirements the number of randomly selected test sites per lot shall be six .
for work to be tested for compliance with scale b requirements the number of randomly selected test sites per lot shall be three .
if the depth of stabilisation or any compacted layer exceeds num mm the contractor shall measure and assess the field density in two sublayers in accordance with vicroads code of practice num. b scale a requirements for acceptance of compaction the work represented by the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the characteristic value of density ratio of the lot is not less than num .
if the characteristic density ratio is less than num the material shall be immediately reworked andor re compacted as specified in clause numg to meet specification requirements .
c scale b requirements for lot acceptance of compaction the work represented by the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the mean density ratio for the lot is not less than num .
if the mean density ratio is less than num the material shall be immediately reworked andor recompacted as specified in clause numg to meet specification requirements .
num requirements for testing and acceptance of lime spreading rate a mat or tray system the average lime spreading rate shall be ascertained by dividing the mass of lime used by the area over which the lime has been spread .
where the average lime spreading rate is less than specified additional lime shall be spread over the surface to bring the average lime spreading rate up to at least the specified rate .
the contractor shall check the uniformity of the spreading of lime at the frequency specified in table num by placing a minimum of three mats or trays with a plan area not less than num mnum in the path of the spreading vehicle at an equal spacing of not less than num of the length of the spreading run .
the lime spreading rate over each mat or tray shall be calculated by dividing the mass of lime deposited on each mat or tray by the plan area of the mat or tray .
where the lime spreading rate so determined for any mat or tray is less than the specified rate by more than num additional lime shall be spread over the part or all of the area over which the lime has been spread .
b continuous weighing system the mass of lime spread over the pavement surface may be measured and recorded by a spreader fitted with a fully calibrated computerised electronic weigh scale system capable of continuously measuring and recording the mass of lime at intervals of not more than num m of forward travel .
if requested by the superintendent the contractor shall produce the print out of the actual lime spreading rate .
the contractor shall have a current certificate of calibration for the computerised spreading equipment and shall produce evidence of the actual running spread rate when requested by the superintendent .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num minimum testing frequency a general the contractor shall carry out testing at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that the materials and work supplied under the contract complies with the specified requirements but which is not less than that shown in table num. b frequency of density testing for assessment of compaction the contractor shall initially test every lot for acceptance of compaction in accordance with the requirements of the specification .
density testing of every lot shall continue until three consecutive lots of like material or work have achieved the specified standard when tested for the first time .
the contractor may reduce the frequency of density testing to the minimum testing requirements specified after satisfying the above requirement .
if the contractor has satisfied the above requirement and is density testing lots at the minimum test frequency and any lot fails to achieve the specified standard the contractor shall test all subsequent lots until three consecutive lots of like material or work have achieved the specified standard at which time the frequency of density testing may again be reduced to the minimum frequency .
for the purposes of this subclause acceptance of compaction for small areas as defined in section num will not be regarded as satisfying the initial testing requirements stated above .
table num frequency of testing test minimum frequency of testing available lime available lime index one test per production day at the point of manufacture .
uniformity of spreading rate a mat or tray test minimum of three mats or trays as specified in clause numa for each separate continuous spreading run except where calibrated load cell computerised spreading devices are fitted with a system to continuously monitor the lime spreading rate every num m. average lime spreading rate each continuous spreader run with no breaks or pauses in spreading .
uniformity of mixing for each compaction lot visual inspection of six random test holes excavated for the full depth of the loose material after mixing of the binder prior to commencement of compaction .
characteristic or mean density ratio every second lot subject to the qualifying period as defined in clause numb .
num curing and protection of compacted layers the surface of the compacted layer shall be kept continually moist and free from contamination until the succeeding layer is placed .
if the stabilised material overlies an expansive material with a percentage swell exceeding num the stabilised material shall be maintained at a minimum characteristic moisture ratio of num .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num schedule of details a job details and design requirements strikethrough this clause if the design distribution rates of available lime are to be specified in clause numb job details and design requirements are shown in table num .
table num job details contractor design delete all symbols .
limit after symbol may be changed or deleted if not required road location minimum cbr strength maximum swell maximum permeability msec minimum depth of stabilisation mm compaction assessment scale a or b from to num num x num b job details and design distribution rates strikethrough this clause if the contractor is to determine the design distribution rate of available lime from the job details and design requirements specified in clause numa above job details and design distribution rates of available lime are shown in table num .
table num design distribution rates of available lime department of state growth design insert values as appropriate and delete all symbols road location design distribution rate of available lime kgmnum minimum depth of stabilisation mm compaction assessment scale a or b from to this figure is to be used to determine the lime spreading rate in the formula given in clause numc once the available lime index of the lime to be used on the job is known .
in the paragraph below strikethrough inapplicable words c a preliminary trial isis not required .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num unbound flexible pavement construction this section crossreferences sections num num num num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent include the option to use crushed concrete as a specified alternative to the use of class num or class num pavement materials manufactured from virgin rock shown on the drawings as necessary num description this section covers the requirements for the placement of gravel sand soft or ripped rock crushed rock crushed scoria or crushed concrete pavement materials for the construction of unbound flexible pavement layers .
num definitions unbound flexible pavement a pavement consisting of an unbound granular base and subbase materials with a thin asphalt or sprayed bituminous seal surfacing .
pavement course for the purpose of this specification the pavement base upper subbase and lower subbase shall each be termed a pavement course .
a pavement course may comprise one or more layers .
base one or more layers of material usually constituting the uppermost structural element of a pavement on which the surfacing may be placed which may be composed of crushed rock or other materials as specified in clause num .
typically base is the top num mm of the pavement or the pavement base thickness as specified or shown on the drawings .
subbase the pavement material constructed on the subgrade to the underside of the base either for the purpose of making up the additional pavement thickness required or to provide a working platform .
the subbase may be constructed of the same material type or may comprise two different material types as follows a upper subbase the better quality material immediately below the base and b lower subbase the lower quality material immediately above the subgrade .
if only a single layer of subbase is specified or shown on the drawings the specified requirements for subbase material shall conform to the requirements of an upper subbase material .
subgrade subgrade is the trimmed or prepared portion of the formation on which the pavement including shoulders is constructed .
segregated area an area of a pavement layer which does not comply with the grading requirements of clause num .
typically this is where the finer material is either not present or has settled to the bottom of the layer leaving the coarser materials at the surface .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num materials the contractor shall be responsible for the procurement of sufficient specified material to complete the work .
the contractor shall supply details demonstrating compliance of the materials with section num and the following sections as relevant strikethrough whichever is not relevant section num gravel sand and soft or ripped rock for pavement base and subbase section num crushed rock for pavement base and subbase section num crushed scoria for pavement base and subbase section num crushed concrete for pavement subbase and light duty base .
where a crushed product is specified in accordance with sections num num num and num mixes registered by the department of state growth as general may be used in the construction of roadworks .
mixes registered as conditional may be used provided the conditions are complied with .
mixes registered as experimental shall only be used with the written permission of the superintendent .
water added to the pavement material shall be clean and substantially free from detrimental impurities such as oils salts acids alkalis and vegetable substances .
water shall contain a maximum of num mgl of suspended solids .
water supplied from sources where dissolved salts are known or likely to be present shall be tested for electrical conductivity prior to use .
the electrical conductivity shall not be more than num scm .
water sources classified by the relevant water authority as potable water shall be exempt from this requirement .
num subgrade preparation prior to placing subbase material the subgrade shall meet the requirements of section num .
num delivery dockets where material is scheduled for measurement by loose volume in delivery vehicles or by mass a delivery docket for each load shall be issued to the superintendent at the point of delivery .
where material is measured by other means and for lump sum contracts the contractor shall make delivery dockets available for inspection on request by the superintendent .
delivery dockets shall show a name of the supplier and location of quarry pit or plant b docket number c name of user d project name and location or contract number e registered number or fleet number of the vehicle f date and time of loading g nature and source of material h empty and loaded masses of the vehicle where material is scheduled for measurement by mass i loose volume in delivery vehicle where material is scheduled for measurement by loose volume j suppliers stockpile identification number if applicable and k legible signature of person receiving the material at the point of delivery .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num conformity with drawings all pavement courses shall after compaction be finished to smooth and uniform surfaces free of segregated areas and conforming to the limits for level line grade thickness and cross section shown on the drawings or as specified .
any material that has been compacted and then trimmed from the compacted surface to conform to the correct level or thickness as shown on the drawings shall not be reused in the pavement construction without the approval of the superintendent .
a width and alignment the width of each side of the pavement shall not be less than the specified offset width or more than num mm outside the specified offset width when measured at right angles from the centre line or design line .
b surface level of pavement courses the surface level of the pavement courses shall be measured in accordance with the requirements of section num and every test lot shall meet either scale a b or c requirements as specified in clause num .
the maximum lot size for measurement and assessment of surface level shall be num mnum but may be increased to match the maximum lot size for assessment of compaction specified in table num .
where pavement is to be constructed to the lip level of kerb and channel it shall be constructed flush with the lip of the channel or not more than num mm above .
i scale a and b surface level requirements each level measurement shall be taken at random locations over the area of the lot in accordance with the vicroads test method and the number of measurements taken within each lot shall not be less than the number specified in table num .
the mean and standard deviation of the departures from the design surface level for the pavement courses at their respective levels within each lot shall meet the requirements of table num .
table num minimum number of level measurements per lot scale of surface level measurement minimum number of measurements per lot scale a num scale b num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num surface level tolerances for the pavement courses scale of level measurement lower subbase upper subbase base x range mm max .
s mm x range mm max .
s mm x range mm max .
s mm scale a num to num num num to num num num num scale b num to num num num to num num num num notes num. x is the mean value of all level readings taken in the lot num .
s is the standard deviation of all level readings taken in the lot num .
a negative value designates a measured departure below the design level and positive value designates a surface level above the design level where the surface does not meet the relevant surface tolerance in table num the contractor shall undertake further work to bring the surface into the specified tolerance and shall resurvey the test lot in accordance with this clause .
the contractor shall accept all costs associated with the necessary additional works and survey .
for scale a and scale b level requirements the superintendent may agree to accept a lot which does not conform with the limits of table num at a reduced payment subject to the lot not exceeding either of the limits specified in table num .
where the superintendent agrees to accept the lot payment for the work will be reduced as shown in table num .
the value of the lot of work shall be reduced as calculated from the percentages specified in table num and the unit rates for pavement construction as specified in clause numb .
table num payment deduction for surface level variation payment reduction mean x exceeding the specified limit up to a maximum of num of the permitted range num plus num reduction for each num mm of x outside the tabulated limit standard deviation s exceeding the specified limit up to a maximum of num of the permitted range num plus num reduction for each num mm of s greater than the tabulated limit if both x and s vary by more than the specified limit the payment reduction shall be the sum of the payment reductions for both x and s. ii scale c surface level requirements surface level measurement shall be undertaken in accordance with the procedure specified in section num .
the surface level of the pavement courses shall comply with the requirements of table num .
table num level tolerances at the surface of pavement courses lower subbase mm upper subbase mm base mm num to num num to num num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c thickness of pavement layers in addition to complying with pavement layer surface tolerances specified in clause numb the following tolerances shall apply to the thickness of any pavement layer i the subbase course shall be not less than the specified thickness by more than num mm ii the base course shall be not less than the specified thickness by more than num mm and the average thickness of base over every num m section over the full carriageway width shall be not less than the specified thickness iii the combined thickness of subbase and base courses shall be not less than the specified thickness by more than num mm .
where the contract does not require design finished surface level control but specifies a pavement composition or a minimum resheet thickness only the contractor shall construct the pavement to comply with the requirements of thickness of each pavement layer as specified in this subclause .
the tolerance requirements of clause numb shall not apply .
d shape no point on the surface of any pavement layer shall vary by more than num mm from a num m straight edge or num mm from a num m straight edge placed in any direction .
at no location shall water pond on the surface of any pavement layer .
e rideability note to specification author include this clause and section num where rideability targets are required note that if a rideability requirement is included the tolerance requirements of clause numb may not apply and can be struck out in addition to the above requirements for surface tolerance the finished surface shall satisfy the requirements specified in section num .
num jointing the layout of joints shall conform to the following requirements a material shall be spread in such a manner as to minimize the number of joints b for all pavement layers transverse joints in adjoining paver runs shall be offset by not less than num m c transverse joints shall be offset from one layer to the next by not less than num m d longitudinal joints shall be offset from one layer to the next by not less than num mm e longitudinal joints shall be located within num mm of the planned position of traffic lanes lines or within num mm of the centre of a traffic lane .
the exposed end of each lot and the exposed edges of any part width construction shall be kept moist until spreading and compaction has been completed over the entire layer .
num requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction a general pavement lots shall be tested for compliance with the specified compaction scale at the frequency specified in clause num using the appropriate test methods listed in section num and vicroads code of practice rcnum .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num material during compaction shall have a moisture content of not less than num of optimum .
after completion of compaction of a layer the moisture content of the material in the layer shall be maintained at a moisture content of not less than num of optimum until test rolling has been completed .
all segregated areas shall be rectified as construction proceeds prior to the completion of compaction and in such a way as to mitigate the potential for segregation to reoccur .
b material of nominal size num mm or less material shall be spread and compacted such that the material is properly mixed both transversely and longitudinally to produce a homogeneous material for each lot .
material having a nominal size after compaction of num mm or less shall be compacted to comply with the following requirements i the calculation of density ratio shall be based on tests performed using modified compactive effort .
the work shall be assessed for compliance with scale a scale b or scale c requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction as specified in clause num and as provided in tables num and num. ii a lot shall consist of a single layer of work and its size shall not exceed that given in table num. iii for work to be tested for compliance with scale a or scale b requirements the number of tests per lot shall be six .
for work to be tested for compliance with scale c requirements the number of tests per lot shall be three .
iv all pavement layers shall be compacted to withstand rolling and shall be test rolled in accordance with section num prior to acceptance of the layer .
for pavement construction any lot that has a surface area less than num mnum may be treated as a small area and tested in accordance with section num .
the contractor shall provide for the superintendent to be present during all test rolling .
v the maximum thickness of any pavement base layer shall not exceed num mm and the maximum thickness of any subbase layer shall not exceed num mm .
vi the minimum thickness of any pavement layer shall be num times the nominal size of the material .
table num acceptance limits for scale a and scale b standards of compaction compaction scale characteristic density ratio six tests lower subbase layers upper subbase layers base layers layer directly beneath the bituminous surfacing other layers a not less than num not less than num not less than num not less than num b not less than num not less than num not less than num not less than num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num acceptance limits for scale c standard of compaction compaction scale mean value of density ratio three tests subbase layers base layers c not less than num not less than num c material of nominal size greater than num mm the first lot shall be placed as a trial section .
following acceptance of the trial section the contractor shall then confirm the moisture control and compaction procedure and submit the procedure to the superintendent for review and record .
the superintendent may require that further trial sections be constructed to verify that the proposed compaction routine is acceptable .
no additional payment will be made for any such request .
acceptance of work as far as compaction is concerned will be based on compliance with the accepted moisture control compaction procedure and test rolling carried out in accordance with section num .
hp the contractor shall provide for the superintendent to be present during all test rolling .
unstable areas identified by test rolling shall be rectified by the contractor .
prior to any layer being covered by a successive layer the superintendent may require further test rolling to confirm that the layer is sound .
num maintenance of compacted layers the surface of any compacted pavement layer or prepared subgrade shall be maintained in such a way as to minimise dust prevent ravelling erosion deformation or any other damage to the layer resulting from environmental conditions traffic or construction activities .
the layer shall be kept free from contamination until any subsequent pavement work under the contract is commenced or the superintendent accepts and takes responsibility for that part of the works .
num post compaction requirements for pavement material if specified in clause numc or clause numd following completion of compaction material shall be tested for postcompaction grading or plasticity index pi at the frequency specified in clause num for the appropriate scale of testing specified in clause numa .
the test samples to be used for postcompaction grading and pi tests shall be a combined sample made up from six randomly selected increments extracted from the lot of pavement construction being assessed .
a assessment of postcompaction grading assessment of postcompaction grading shall be based on a sieve analysis on a subsample of the combined sample .
the postcompaction grading shall comply with the requirements of tables num or num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b assessment of postcompaction plasticity index pi the assessment of postcompaction pi shall be based on the mean value of a pair of test results determined from two single results from separate subsamples taken from the combined sample .
the mean pi shall comply with the limits on pi specified in table num or such value as approved by the superintendent to meet the permeability requirement specified in section num. in c and d below delete symbols and strikethrough inappropriate phrases c postcompaction grading testing is required is not required refer to clause numc where postcompaction grading testing is required the sample shall be taken from the same sample site as the compaction testing .
d postcompaction plasticity index testing is required is not required refer to clause numc where postcompaction plasticity index testing is required the sample shall be taken from the same sample site as the compaction testing and the postcompaction grading testing if required .
table num postcompaction grading requirements for crushed materials sieve size mm postcompaction grading limits passing by mass class num or class num crushed rock crushed scoria base class ccnum crushed concrete class num crushed rock crushed scoria upper subbase crushed concrete class ccnum nominal size mm nominal size mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num postcompaction grading requirements for gravel sand and soft or ripped rock base and subbase materials in the table below delete all symbols even where no value is to be specified sieve size mm postcompaction grading limits passing by mass base upper subbase natural sands or gravel ripped rock natural sands or gravel ripped rock num num num num num num num num num num num table num postcompaction requirements for plasticity index in the table below delete all symbols limits after symbols may be changed if required material plasticity index minimum maximum class num crushed rock num num class num crushed rock num num class num crushed rock num num gravel sand or ripped rock base material num num gravel sand or ripped rock upper subbase material num num num minimum frequency of testing a general the contractor shall carry out compaction density testing and postcompaction grading and pi testing at a frequency sufficient to ensure that work performed under the contract complies with the specified requirements but shall not be less than that shown in table num .
the minimum test frequency specified in table num shall not apply to small areas as defined in section num .
in this case every lot shall be tested separately for compliance with the specified requirements .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num if the nature of material in any lot being placed has visibly altered when compared to previous lots placed the superintendent may require additional testing to be undertaken to confirm that the lot complies with the specified requirements for postcompaction grading and pi .
no additional payment will be made for this testing .
b compaction the contractor shall initially test every lot for acceptance of compaction in accordance with the requirements of the specification .
testing of every lot shall continue until three consecutive lots of like material andor work have achieved the standards specified in clauses num and num when tested for the first time .
the contractor may reduce the frequency of compaction testing to the minimum test frequency as specified in table num after satisfying this requirement .
the contractor may continue to test at the minimum frequency until such time as a lot fails to achieve the specified requirements .
all subsequent lots shall be tested until three consecutive lots of like material and work have achieved the specified standard at which time the frequency of testing may revert to the minimum test frequency .
if the contractor is testing at the minimum frequency and any test lot does not meet specification requirements the superintendent may require any previous untested lots between the last lot to be tested and the failed lot to be tested .
this testing shall be carried out at no additional cost to thestate growth .
c postcompaction grading and plasticity index pi i scale a requirements for post compaction grading and pi testing where testing is specified in clause numc or d and clause num requires it to be scale a all pavement layers shall be tested for postcompaction grading and pi at the frequency specified in table num .
the first lot of each pavement layer shall be tested for postcompaction grading and pi .
if the lot satisfies the requirements specified in clause numa and b as applicable the contractor may test at the minimum frequency as specified in table num .
the contractor shall immediately notify the superintendent of any lot that does not meet the specified requirements and any subsequent lot shall be tested as if it were the initial lot .
if any lot meets the specified requirements but is reworked to comply with the specified compaction requirements it shall be retested for compliance with specified requirements .
if the contractor is testing at the minimum frequency and any test lot does not meet specification requirements the superintendent may require the testing of the post compaction grading and pi of all lots constructed after the last tested lot .
this testing shall be carried out at no additional cost to state growth .
ii scale b requirements for post compaction grading and pi testing where testing is specified in clause numc or d and clause num requires it to be scale b the first lot of each pavement course shall be tested for postcompaction grading and pi .
if the first lot each pavement course satisfies the specified post compaction requirements in clause numa and b as applicable no further postcompaction testing will be required for that pavement course .
if the first lot does not meet the requirements specified in clause numa and b the contractor shall then seek approval from the superintendent before work proceeds .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num iii scale c requirements for post compaction grading and pi testing post compaction grading and pi testing is not required .
table num maximum lot size and minimum frequency of testing for compaction postcompaction grading and pi after passing the minimum number of qualifying lots in the table below the limit after symbol may be changed if required in the table below at the symbol strikethrough if further pi testing is not required after the first lot is accepted for pi pavement layer maximum allowable lot size for a single layer of work minimum frequency of testing for compaction minimum frequency of testing for scale a postcompaction grading minimum frequency of testing for scale a postcompaction pi upper base layer the lesser of num mnum or one days production one per num lots one per num lots one pair per num lots lower base layer the lesser of num mnum or one days production one per num lots one per num lots one pair per num lots upper subbase the lesser of num mnum or one days production one per num lots one per num lots one pair per num lots lower subbase the lesser of num mnum or one days production one per num lots num schedules of details a requirements for testing and acceptance of surface level measurement compaction and postcompaction gradings and pis clauses num num num and num in the table below delete all symbols and insert required information table num testing levels roadway road chainage location scale of surface level measurement a b or c scale for assessment of compaction a b or c scale for assessment of postcompaction grading and pi a b or c to where for any location a specific scale has not been nominated scale a shall apply .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b basis for price reduction for departure from specified surface level clause numbi in the table below delete all symbols and insert required information table num rates for price reduction location pavement course unit price mnum upper subbase lower subbase base upper subbase lower subbase base department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num cementitious treated pavement subbase this section crossreferences sections num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent .
delete this note from final document .
include the option to use crushed concrete as a specified alternative to the use of class num or class num pavement materials manufactured from crushed rock .
show on the drawings as necessary .
delete this note from final document num description this section covers the requirements for the delivery spreading and compaction of plant mixed crushed rock and recycled crushed concrete for the construction of pavement subbase treated with cementitious binder to produce a modified or bound subbase .
this section is to be read in conjunction with the following sections section num cementitious treated crushed rock for pavement subbase section num cementitious treated crushed concrete for pavement subbase .
num definitions cementitious binder a cementitious material capable of being uniformly mixed into a granular pavement material to bind the particles together to increase its strength .
cementitious binders include portland cement type gp or blended cement type gb hydrated lime quicklime or a blend of ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs hydrated lime fly ash alkali activated slag or other pozzolanic material supplied in accordance with this specification .
maximum allowable working time the maximum allowable working time for the cementitious binder as specified or as determined in accordance with the relevant test method or code of practice .
pavement design modulus the presumptive modulus used as the basis for the mechanistic design of a bound pavement with a bound cementitious treated crushed rock or crushed concrete subbase .
working time the time required to transport place compact and trim the pavement layer after the cementitious binder is added at the mixing plant .
num conformity with drawings pavement subbase shall be finished to a smooth and uniform surface and shall after compaction conform within the following limits to the levels lines grades thicknesses and cross sections as specified or shown on the drawings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num a width and alignment the width of pavement measured on each side of the centreline or design line shall not deviate by more than num mm from the designed offset when measured at a right angle .
b surface level of subgrade and pavement the surface level of the subgrade and pavement courses shall be measured in accordance with the requirements of section num and every test lot shall meet either scale a b or c requirements as specified in clause num .
the maximum lot size for measurement and assessment of surface level shall be num mnum .
i scale a and b surface level requirements each level measurement shall be taken at random locations over the area of the lot in accordance with the vicroads test method and the number of measurements taken within each lot shall not be less than the number specified in table num .
the mean surface level and the variation in surface level for the subgrade and pavement courses within each lot shall meet the requirements of table num .
table num minimum number of level measurements per lot scale of surface level measurement minimum number of measurements per lot scale a num scale b num table num average surface level tolerances for the subgrade and cementitious treated subbase scale of level measurement subgrade cementitious treated subbase x range mm max .
s mm x range mm max .
s mm scale a num to num num num to num num scale b num to num num num to num num notes num. x is the mean value of all level readings taken in the lot num .
s is the standard deviation of all level readings taken in the lot num .
a negative value designates a measured departure below the design level and positive value designates a surface level above the design level .
for scale a and scale b level requirements the superintendent may accept a lot which does not conform with the limits of table num at a reduced payment in which case payment for the work will be reduced as shown in table num .
the value of the lot of work shall be calculated from the unit rates for pavement construction as specified in clause numb .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num payment deduction for surface level variation payment reduction mean x exceeding the specified limit up to a maximum of num num plus num reduction for each num mm of x outside the tabulated limit standard deviation s exceeding the specified limit up to a maximum of num num plus num reduction for each num mm of s greater than the tabulated limit note if both x and s vary by more than the specified limit the payment reduction shall be the sum of the payment reductions for both x and s. ii scale c surface level and thickness requirements surface level measurement shall be undertaken in accordance with the procedure specified in section num examination and testing of materials and work roadworks .
the surface level of the subgrade and subbase shall comply with the requirements of table num .
table num level tolerances at the surface of subgrade and subbase subgrade mm subbase mm num to num num to num c shape no point on the prepared surface of the subgrade shall lie more than num mm below a num metre straight edge placed on the pavement in any direction .
no point on the surface of the cementitious treated subbase layer shall vary by more than num mm from a num metre straight edge or num mm from a num metre straight edge placed in any direction .
water shall not pond on the surface of the cementitious treated subbase .
num materials the contractor shall supply all materials required to construct the cementitious treated pavement subbase .
the supply of cementitious treated crushed rock or cementitious treated crushed concrete shall comply with the requirements of sections num and num respectively .
num moisture content the moisture content of the material at the time of spreading and compaction expressed as a percentage by mass shall be within plus num and minus num from the modified optimum moisture content .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num water except for the purpose of curing no water shall be added to the cementitious treated material .
water shall be clean and substantially free from detrimental impurities such as oils salts acids alkalis and vegetable substances .
water sources shall be tested for electrical conductivity and ph in accordance with the current australian standards as listed in section num referenced documents for standard specifications for roadworks and bridgeworks prior to use .
the electrical conductivity shall not be more than num scm and ph within the range of num to num unless otherwise approved .
water sources classified by the relevant water authority as potable water shall be exempt from this requirement .
water sources shall be tested at a maximum of twelve monthly intervals or when the nature of the water source has changed .
the use of reclaimed water will require the approval of the superintendent and shall conform to the vicroads guidelines for reclaimed water as listed under other referenced documents in section num .
num delivery a delivery vehicles delivery vehicles shall have bodies fitted with covers of a suitable material to prevent loss of moisture during transport .
vehicles used for delivery of material to the hoppers of pavers shall have bodies or discharge equipment which will enable the load to be discharged direct into the hopper without spillage and in such a way that segregation will be minimised .
b delivery dockets delivery dockets shall show i name of the supplier and location of plant ii docket number iii name of user iv project name and location or contract number v registered number or fleet number of the vehicle vi date and time of loading vii nature and source of material viii empty and loaded masses of the vehicle where material is scheduled for measurement by mass ix loose volume in delivery vehicle .
where material is scheduled for measurement by loose volume in delivery vehicles or by mass a delivery docket for each load shall be issued at the point of delivery .
where material is measured by other means and for lump sum contracts the contractor shall make delivery dockets available for inspection on request .
num jointing the layout of joints shall conform to the following requirements unless otherwise approved by the superintendent a material shall be spread in such a manner as to minimise the number of joints b in any layer transverse joints in adjoining paver runs shall be offset by not less than num m department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c transverse joints shall be offset from one layer to the next by not less than num m d longitudinal joints shall be offset from one layer to the next by not less than num mm e longitudinal joints shall be located within num mm of the planned position of traffic lane lines or within num mm of the centre of a traffic lane .
if approval is given to depart from the joint location specified in numa to e the contractor shall record of the location of these joints .
the edge of any paver run shall be kept moist until spreading and compaction have been completed in adjacent paver runs .
longitudinal and transverse joints shall be made where specified or at the end of each days work or where spreading operations have been halted for a period in excess of the maximum allowable working time for the binder as specified in clause num and table num .
if the binder is not one of the binders listed in table num the allowable working time for the binder shall be determined in accordance with the vicroads test method .
joints shall be made in a careful manner and shall be prepared immediately prior to the recommencement of spreading operations by cutting back the edge of previously laid material to a clean vertical face in compacted material of the full specified layer thickness .
longitudinal joints shall be constructed parallel to the centre line of the carriageway and transverse joints at right angles to the centre line .
material cut during the preparation of joints shall be removed from site .
the faces of all joints shall be thoroughly wetted immediately before spreading new material .
the level and shape of the surface at all joints shall be within the limits specified in clause num .
num compaction procedure and requirements for testing and acceptance a general the cementitious treated subbase material shall be placed trimmed to level and fully compacted within the maximum allowable working time specified in table num depending on the binder type and the time of year the subbase is being placed .
hp if the contractor proposes to use an alternative cementitous binder to those included in table num laboratory test results shall be produced to the superintendent showing that the binder satisfies the required working time determined in accordance with the vicroads test method .
in addition the cementitious treated material using the alternative binder shall meet specified strength requirements .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num maximum allowable working time after mixing for common cementitious binders cementitious binder maximum allowable working time hours construction between october and april num construction between may and september rapid setting type gp cement num num medium setting type gb cements cementslag blend num to num cement content cementfly ash blend num to num cement content cementslagfly ash blend num to num cement content num num slow setting slaglime blend and other slow setting supplementary cementitous blends num num note num if the ambient temperature within the period from october to april on any day is less than numc the may to september maximum allowable working times may be applied .
on completion of compaction any segregated areas shall be rectified .
the calculation of density ratio shall be based on modified compactive effort .
the work shall be assessed for compliance with scale a or scale b requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction as specified in clause num and as provided in clauses numb and c. for work to be tested for compliance with scale a requirements the number of tests per lot shall be six .
for work to be tested for compliance with scale b requirements the number of tests per lot shall be three .
a lot shall consist of a single layer of pavement material placed on the same day and all lots shall be tested for compliance with the requirements of this section .
the maximum lot size shall not exceed num mnum .
b scale a requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction the work represented by the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the characteristic value of density ratio of the lot is not less than num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num if the characteristic value of density ratio of the lot is less than num but greater than or equal to num the work represented by the lot may be accepted but the method of rectification or redesign of the pavement shall be approved by the superintendent .
alternatively the superintendent may accept the work at a reduced payment calculated using the formula p numrc num in which rc is the characteristic value of density ratio of the lot and p is the percentage of the value of work represented by the lot that will be paid provided that the value of p shall not exceed num .
for the application of this formula the value of work represented by the lot shall be calculated from the unit rate of payment specified in clause numb .
if any small lot less than num mnum is to be assessed under section num of this specification where only three tests are required to be undertaken and assessed on the basis of meeting a mean density ratio of num the reduced payment shall be calculated using the formula p numrm num c scale b requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction the work represented by the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the mean density ratio for the lot is not less than num .
if the mean of the individual density ratio test values for the lot is less than num but greater than or equal to num the work represented by the lot may be accepted but the method of rectification andor redesign of the pavement shall be approved by the superintendent .
alternatively the superintendent may accept the work at a reduced rate calculated using the formula p numrm num in which rm is the mean of the individual density ratio test values for the lot and p is percentage of the value of work represented by the lot that will be paid provided the value of p shall not exceed num .
for the application of this formula the value of work represented by the lot shall be calculated from the unit rate of payment specified in clause numb .
num test rolling test rolling may be carried out in accordance with the requirements of section num on the cementitious treated pavement subbase layer within the maximum allowable working time for the relevant binder and time of year as specified in table num .
num curing and protection of compacted layers unless there are special design and construction conditions specified for placing of multiple layers cementitious treated subbase with a pavement design modulus exceeding num mpa shall be placed in a single layer .
the minimum compacted thickness shall be not less than num mm and the maximum compacted thickness shall be no more than num mm and constructed within the tolerances specified in clause num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num a pavement design modulus of num mpa or where no pavement design modulus is specified the surface of each compacted layer shall be kept moist for a period of seven days unless covered at an earlier stage with the succeeding layer or with an approved curing membrane .
construction or other traffic shall not use a compacted layer within num hours of placement without the approval of the superintendent .
the subbase shall be kept in good order and condition and free from contamination .
b pavement design modulus of num mpa in addition to meeting the requirements of clause numa above the contractor shall i cure the cementitious treated subbase by maintaining the surface in a moist condition for seven days ii prevent construction plant from using the pavement during the seven day curing period apart from that required to maintain and cure the surface and iii after the seven day curing period restrict all construction traffic to vehicles with a maximum axle group load of num tonnes until asphalt base and intermediate courses are placed priming primersealing and asphalt placement activities excepted .
c pavement design modulus of num mpa in addition to meeting the requirements of clause numa above the contractor shall i apply a size num crs standard grade emulsion primerseal at a rate of application of num litres per square metre num litres per square metre of residual binder to the cementitious treated subbase within num to num hours after completion of compaction .
if after num hours ambient conditions are such the material has not dried back to less than num of the modified optimum moisture content the primerseal shall be delayed until such time as the moisture content has reduced below num of optimum .
subject to approval by the superintendent and if weather conditions during the period from october to april inclusive suit priming a light or very light cut back bitumen primer may be applied to the surface of the of the cementitious treated material in lieu of the emulsion primerseal .
the rate of application of primer shall be a minimum of num litres per square metre and shall deliver a minimum of num to num litres per square metre of residual bitumen to the surface .
hp requests by the contractor to vary the rates of application shall be submitted in writing to the superintendent for review .
primersealing shall not be carried out within num hours of forecast rain and priming if approved for use shall not be carried out within num hours of forecast rain .
hp the contractors environmental management plan shall include procedures to minimise all risks of damage to the environment associated with priming and primersealing .
ii allow the cementitious treated subbase to cure for seven days without trafficking except for the application of a prime or primerseal iii prevent construction plant from using the pavement during the seven day curing period apart from that required to maintain and cure the surface and iii after the seven days curing period restrict construction traffic to vehicles with a maximum axle group load of num tonnes until asphalt base and intermediate courses are placed priming primersealing and asphalt placement activities excepted .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num schedule of details a requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction clause num location and chainage pavement design modulus mpa scale of surface level measurement a b or c compaction scale a or b b unit rate of payment to be used to calculate the value of the work represented by the lot for application of payment deduction formulae specified in clauses numbi numb and numc shall be mnum .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num in situ stabilisation of pavements with cementitious binders this section crossreferences sections num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the requirements for in situ stabilisation of existing pavements by addition of cement blended cement lime or other supplementary cementitious materials .
the requirements relate to mix design preparation of existing pavement materials lime pretreatment of pavement materials with high plasticity supply of cementitious binders construction plant and spreading mixing and compaction of pavement layers .
refer to section num for lime stabilisation of earthworks materials in cases where lime stabilisation is required to improve the strength or reduce the swell potential of an earthworks material .
num definitions available lime the amount of calcium oxide caonum or calcium hydroxide caohnum contained in quicklime or hydrated lime respectively .
available lime index ali the calcium oxide or calcium hydroxide content of quick lime or hydrated lime respectively expressed as a percentage of the total mass of lime determined in accordance with as num .
cementitious binder a cementitious material capable of being uniformly mixed into a granular pavement material to bind the particles together to increase its strength .
cementitious binders include portland cement asnum type gp or blended cement type gb or a blend of ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs asnum hydrated lime asnum fly ash asnum alkali activated slag or other pozzolanic material supplied in accordance with this specification .
deeplift stabilisation pavement stabilisation carried out in a single layer in excess of num mm thick .
typically deep lift stabilisation requires a high spread rate of slow setting cementitious binder and heavy compaction equipment to produce a fully bound pavement layer .
density decay correction factor a factor derived to calculate the field density ratio from a laboratory determined reference density where compaction of the test sample has occurred after the maximum allowable working time has expired .
design distribution rate of available lime the spread rate of pure calcium oxide or calcium hydroxide .
fly ash a fine powder of pozzolanic material extracted from the flue emissions produced from the burning of black coal .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num hydrated lime hydrated lime is a powdered form of lime consisting primarily of calcium hydroxide also referred to as slaked lime .
lime lime is either hydrated lime calcium hydroxide or quick lime calcium oxide .
lime spreading rate the required spread rate of lime determined from the design distribution rate of available lime corrected for the ali of the lime to be used .
maximum allowable working time the maximum allowable working time for the cementitious binder as specified or as determined in accordance with the relevant test method or code of practice .
pozzolan a siliceous or aluminosiliceous material when finely ground can be mixed with lime or portland cement to form a cementitious material .
quicklime quicklime is a fine granulated powder consisting primarily of calcium oxide that can be readily slaked by the application of water after it has been evenly spread to form calcium hydroxide .
reference density the reference density is the maximum dry density or the peak converted wet density determined in accordance with the appropriate test method but adjusted for oversize material as appropriate .
slag ground granulated blast furnace slag ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs is a pozzolan produced by fine grinding of slag produced as a byproduct from the smelting of iron ore .
working time the time required to mix fully compact and trim the stabilised pavement layer after the addition of cementitious binder .
num conformity with drawings completed stabilised base and subbase layers shall conform within the following limits to the levels lines grades thicknesses and cross sections shown on the drawings or specified or directed by the superintendent .
a surface level base surface level measurement shall be undertaken in lots not exceeding num mnum in accordance with the procedures specified in section num examination and testing of materials and work roadworks .
unless otherwise specified in other standard sections or elsewhere the surface level of the stabilised layer at subgrade level at any point shall not differ by more than num mm above or num mm below the specified level .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num subbase if the cementitious stabilised material forms a subbase for an unbound flexible pavement or an asphalt pavement the requirements for surface level of the subbase layer shall be as specified in sections num or num unless specified otherwise .
b depth of stabilisation the depth of cementitiously stabilised material as specified in clause numa shall not at any point be less than the specified thickness by more than num mm and the average thickness of the lot shall be not be less than the specified thickness .
c alignment the edges of the stabilised layer shall be not more than num mm inside and not more than num mm outside the specified offset from centreline or design line .
d width the width of the stabilised material shall not be less than the specified width by more than num mm .
e shape no point on the surface of the stabilised layer shall lie below a num m straightedge placed in any direction on the surface by more than num mm for the base and num mm for subbase .
num materials a cementitious binders i cement blended cement type gb or for special purposes general purpose portland cement type gp complying with as num shall be supplied by the contractor .
the contractor shall nominate the type brand and source of cement proposed .
hp if type gp is proposed the superintendent shall be first notified and evidence provided to show that the in situ stabilised material can be mixed and compacted to the specified density within the maximum allowable working time for type gp cement .
hp the use of any additive to the cement to change its properties shall be subject to prior approval by the superintendent .
ii lime quicklime and hydrated lime shall meet the requirements of as num .
all quicklime and hydrated lime supplied to the job shall be provided with delivery docket showing the manufacturers reference number for the production lot and an assigned ali for each production week .
the assigned ali shall be determined by averaging the six most recent test results for ali .
test certificates for determination of the ali shall be made available on request .
lime shall be stored in a moisture free environment and shall be retested for compliance with as num if stored more than num days after receipt from the manufacturer .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num iii slag lime blends slag and hydrated lime may be used in blended combination to produce a slow setting cementitious binder .
the requirements for hydrated lime shall be as specified in clause numaii above .
slag used shall be ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs meeting the requirements of as num .
the contractor shall nominate the type brand and source of the ggbfs to be used .
unless otherwise specified slaglime shall be blended uniformly in the ratio of num slag to num hydrated lime .
if the blend is to be varied the proportion of lime shall not be less than num but may be increased above num for materials with high plasticity provided that the minimum ucs requirements are met as specified in table num .
the contractor shall provide evidence that the blend ratio has been met for all material supplied to the job .
an num slag to num lime blend shall have a mortar bar num day compressive strength of num mpa and num day mortar bar compressive strength of num mpa .
the test shall be the same test specified in as num except that the cement to water ratio shall be adjusted to match the consistency of mortar produced for the compressive strength test for gb cement in accordance with the relevant australian standard test method .
iv slow cementitious blends incorporating alkaliactivated slag or fly ash special blends of slow setting cementitious stabilising agents incorporating alkaliactivated slag or fly ash which are not produced to meet the requirements of a gb cement may be used subject to the blend satisfying the mortar bar test requirement specified in clause numiii above and the specified mix requirements .
the maximum binder working time shall be determined in accordance with the vicroads test method to confirm that the binder is a slow setting binder as defined by table num .
fly ash shall be supplied to meet the requirements of as num. b water water added to the material shall be clear and substantially free from sediments and detrimental impurities such as oils salts acids alkalis and vegetable substances .
water supplied from sources where dissolved salts are unknown or likely to be present shall be tested for electrical conductivity prior to use .
the electrical conductivity shall not be more than num scm and the amount of chloride and sulphate in any water used shall each be no greater than num ppm .
water sources classified by the relevant water authority as potable water shall be exempt from this requirement .
c pavement the in situ pavement material to be stabilised shall be the existing surfacing and pavement material and any additional material placed over the existing pavement for mixing with the pavement below .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num pavement materials investigation and mix design a general unless otherwise specified in clause numd and e the contractor shall produce a mix design for the in situ stabilised pavement material in accordance with vicroads code of practice num and referenced vicroads test methods .
the aim of the mix design procedure is to improve the material grading if necessary reduce the plasticity and to optimise the type and amount of cementitious binder required having regard to the chemical and physical properties of the in situ material .
the in situ stabilised pavement material is required to meet the specified grading plasticity and strength requirements and contain a cementitious binder which will allow sufficient working time to mix place compact and trim the material before the initial set takes place .
b grading and plasticity index the final grading of the material to be stabilised after addition of any additional granular material to correct the grading or to increase the thickness of the pavement shall be within the limits specified in table num .
if the plasticity index pi exceeds the limits specified in table num the material shall be pretreated with lime or modified with additional granular material using the design procedure described in the test method .
if the material is to be pretreated with lime to lower the pi the quantity of lime additive used shall not be less than num by mass .
table num grading and plasticity index requirements sieve size mm num num num num num num pi max base passing by mass num num num num num num num num num num num num subbase and sealed shoulders passing by mass num num num num num num num num num num num num num c maximum allowable working time the type of cementitious binder added shall be selected on the basis of the maximum allowable working times specified in table num and the minimum working time considered necessary to properly mix the material trim and shape the surface to level and fully compact the layer to the specified density ratio .
hp if the contractor proposes to use an alternative cementitous binder to those included in table num laboratory test results shall be produced to the superintendent showing that the maximum allowable working time for the cementitious binder as determined in accordance with the vicroads test method satisfies the required working time and the cement stabilised material using the alternative binder meets specified strength requirements .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num maximum allowable working times after mixing for various cementitious binders cementitious binder maximum allowable working time hours construction between october and april num construction between may and september slow setting slaglime blends alkali activated slag and other supplementary cementitious blends num num medium setting type gb cements cementslag blend num to num cement content cementfly ash blend num to num cement content cementslagfly ash blend num to num cement content num num rapid setting type gp cement num num lime hydrated lime and quicklime num num d cementitious binder content and unconfined compressive strength ucs table num specifies the limits for the minimum and maximum content of cementitious binder and the target ucs to be used to select the optimum cementitious binder content from test specimens prepared at a minimum of three different binder contents varying by not less than num by mass in accordance with referenced test methods .
table num target ucs to be used to select the optimum content of cementitious binder num days type of work cementitious binder content by mass target num day ucs at modified compactive effort mpa min max slow setting medium setting rapid setting material modification num num num num num fully bound deeplift stabilisation num num num num not applicabl e bound subbase for deep strength asphalt pavements where assigned design modulus is not more than num mpa num not applicabl e num num num the superintendent may agree to a cementitious binder content of less than num but at least num by mass if the ucs requirement at a binder content of num is more than num above the target ucs .
if less than num by mass of cementitious binder is permitted a minimum of two mixing runs shall be undertaken after spreading of cementitious binder and the minimum density ratio specified in clause num shall be increased by one percentage point .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num commencement of work hp the contractor shall not commence work until all mix design details have been presented to the superintendent showing compliance with the requirements of clause num and approval has been given for stabilisation work to proceed .
num construction plant the contractor shall provide construction plant meeting the following requirements and capability .
a spreader for cementitious binder mechanical equipment specifically designed for the spreading of cementitious binder directly on to the prepared roadbed shall be used .
the spreader shall be capable of accurately regulating the discharge of the cementitious binder such that the requirements of clause num are met .
b mixing machine a purpose built mixing machine designed for in situ stabilisation of roadworks shall be used to pulverise the existing pavement material and uniformly mix the material together with water and cementitious binder to the specified depth of stabilisation .
rotary hoes and other types of agricultural machinery shall not be used .
after pulverisation and mixing all base material shall be capable of passing a num mm sieve and all subbase material shall be capable of passing a num mm sieve .
c watering plant watering plant or any purpose designed watering system incorporated within the mixing machine shall be capable of uniformly distributing sufficient water to hydrate any quicklime used for lime pretreatment and if required add more water to increase the moisture content to aid compaction .
d compaction plant compaction plant shall be of such mass as to be capable of compacting the stabilised layer to the minimum density ratio throughout the depth of the layer .
where compaction is to be accepted on a procedural basis rather than by lot testing the superintendent and the contractor shall agree on the number and minimum mass of rollers and the compaction routine to be used .
if the compacted depth of layer exceeds num mm the following items of compaction plant shall be used as a minimum requirement a vibrating pad foot roller for initial compaction a vibrating steel flat roller for densification a multi wheel roller for finishing and sealing off the surface prior to trafficking .
num construction a general construction includes the pulverisation of any seal or asphalt surfacing premixing of in situ materials supply and spreading of any additional granular material supply spreading and mixing of cementitious binder into the in situ pavement material and compaction trimming and curing of the stabilised layer .
unless otherwise specified stabilisation work undertaken each day shall be completed across the full pavement width .
stabilisation operations may continue during light rainfall if the moisture content of the in situ pavement material can be maintained below modified optimum moisture content .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num only sufficient area of pavement is to be pulverised that can be mixed and fully compacted in one day .
for stabilised patching work which is to be trafficked or sealed immediately after completion of compaction only sufficient pavement area shall be opened up to enable work to be completed within the maximum allowable working time specified in table num. b preparation of the existing pavement the existing pavement shall be pulverised and mixed to the proposed depth of stabilisation prior to spreading of the cementitious binder .
if significantly different in situ materials are present across the width of pavement to be stabilised the contractor shall use a system for cross blending materials as necessary to produce a uniform material prior to addition of cementitious binder .
in locations where a pavement has been pretreated with lime to dry the material out or lower the plasticity index addition of further cementitious binder and remixing shall not commence until the following day .
the contractor shall remove or repulverise lumps of asphalt or seal which would otherwise be retained on a num mm sieve .
the volume any large size material removed from the site shall be replaced with an equivalent volume of suitable granular pavement material .
c lime pretreatment if the material to be stabilised is to be first pretreated with lime to lower its plasticity lime shall be spread uniformly over the prepared surface at the lime spreading rate calculated using formula i or ii below .
i where hydrated lime has been used in the laboratory testing to determine the design distribution rate of available lime and it is proposed to use quicklime at the job site the lime spreading rate shall be determined from lime spreading rate num x design distribution rate of available lime ali of lime to be used ii where the same type of lime hydrated lime or quicklime is to be used at the job site as has been used in the laboratory tests to determine the design distribution rate of available lime the lime spreading rate shall be determined from lime spreading rate design distribution rate of available lime ali of lime to be used if quicklime is used it shall be slaked with sufficient water to allow full slaking to take place prior to mixing .
full slaking will be deemed to have been achieved when all quicklime that has been spread has changed from a cream coloured granulate to a fine white powder and there is a cessation of rising vapours .
mixing of quicklime into the pavement material shall not commence until full slaking has been achieved .
d spreading of lime or cementitious binder spreading shall not be carried out at times when lime or cementitious binder could become air borne or dispersed in such a way as to become a nuisance or a hazard to persons property or livestock .
immediately following completion of spreading the contractor shall check and record the average spreading rates and the uniformity of spread in accordance with clause num .
if the required spreading rate for lime or cementitious binder exceeds num kgmnum it shall be spread in two equal spreading runs with material from the first spread run being fully mixed into the pavement material prior to the second spreading run being undertaken .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the prepared pavement shall not be trafficked until the cementitious binder has been mixed into the pavement material .
e mixing in cementitious binder mixing shall commence as soon as practical after spreading of the cementitious binder and shall continue until all pavement materials and cementitious binder are uniformly blended throughout the full depth of the stabilised layer .
the moisture content of the pavement material prior to addition of the cementitious binder shall be within the range num to num of the modified optimum moisture content .
additional water shall be added to hydrate the cementitious binder .
for modified or deeplift stabilisation a minimum of two mixing runs shall be carried out .
for deeplift stabilisation approximately half of the cementitious binder shall be spread in advance of each run .
unless otherwise specified the depth of stabilisation or compacted layer thickness for stabilisation shall not exceed num mm .
f compaction compaction of the stabilised layer shall commence immediately after mixing .
compaction equipment shall work as close as practicable behind the mixer to maximise the time available for compaction .
compaction and trimming shall be carried out in a continuous operation .
all compaction shall be completed within the times specified in table num after addition of the cementitious binder .
where necessary during compaction the contractor shall water the material to maintain the moisture content within num to num modified optimum moisture content .
g trimming on completion of initial rolling the stabilised material shall be trimmed to the specified surface tolerances .
light applications of water may be applied during this operation to replace evaporated moisture and to assist in rapid achievement of a tightly knit surface .
all surface irregularities which do not conform to the requirements of clause num shall be rectified by the contractor within the maximum working time for the cementitious binder used as specified in table num .
rectification beyond the maximum working time for the cementitious binder shall be carried out by replacing material with freshly stabilised material as necessary .
the material trimmed off shall be either cut to waste and if necessary removed from site or alternatively it may be transported to another location to be incorporated into a stabilised layer .
num jointing longitudinal joints shall be avoided by completing a full carriageway width each day .
if a longitudinal joint is required because of rain or traffic control requirements it shall be located at a lane line or in the centre of the carriageway .
transverse joints shall be formed where stabilisation operations have been halted for more than the time specified in table num and at the end of each days work .
joints shall be formed by cutting back into the fully compacted previously stabilised material by a minimum of num mm which shall be remixed into the new work .
additional stabilising agent shall be added to the area of previously stabilised material to be remixed .
placement of additional cementitious binder shall be deemed to be part of the joint construction .
the level and shape of the surface at all joints shall be within the limits specified in clause num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num num test rolling stabilised layers shall pass test rolling in accordance with section num prior to acceptance of the layer .
any unstable areas detected by test rolling shall be rectified .
num maintenance of the stabilised surface prior to surfacing or overlay the contractor shall keep the stabilised pavement surface moist and protected from damage by traffic or construction activities until either a further pavement layer or the bituminous surfacing is applied .
num preliminary trial if directed by the superintendent the contractor shall carry out a preliminary trial of the proposed stabilising operation .
the trial shall determine a the effectiveness of the construction plant b the number of passes of the stabilisation machine necessary to achieve uniform pulverisation and mixing c the field moisture content required to achieve specified compaction requirements d the rolling routine required to meet specified compaction requirements .
the trial section shall be located within the works area .
the length of the trial section shall be between num and num metres over the full width of the area proposed for stabilisation .
hp stabilisation work shall not proceed outside the trial section until the superintendent has reviewed all aspects of the stabilising operation .
the superintendents review of the stabilising plant and procedures will be provided to the contractor by the end of the next working week day after the trials completion .
if the specification requirements are not met for this trial section the superintendent may direct that another trial section be stabilised or the rejected section be restabilised and presented for reassessment .
num requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction and strength a general i lot testing requirements where a scale anum anum or scale b compaction standard is specified in table num compaction is to be accepted by density testing in lots of similar material and work .
unless otherwise specified the maximum lot size shall be the area of work completed on the same day up to num mnum provided that the whole of the lot is essentially a uniform material similar to material used for the relevant mix design applicable to the lot .
if the maximum binder working time requires the area or work to be completed in one day to split into subsections each subsection shall be treated as a separate lot .
if the material is too variable to be able to assign a single maximum dry density for the lot a separate reference density shall be determined for each test site .
if a compaction scale is not specified in table num the scale c compaction procedure shall be adopted .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the calculation of density ratio shall be based on modified compactive effort of the laboratory prepared sample containing the design rate of cementitious binder .
the work shall be assessed for compliance with scale anum or anum scale b or scale c requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction as specified in clauses numb c and d and clause num. ii determination of the density ratio if it is not possible to transport extracted samples of mixed material to an established laboratory for determination of the reference density within the maximum working time of the cementitious binder and the superintendent agrees that establishment of a site laboratory for this purpose is not warranted the following procedure shall be used to determine the density ratio num. measure field density on completion of compaction num. extract samples and transport to an offsite laboratory num. determine the reference density for the laboratory compacted samples as soon as practicable but not exceeding num hours num. determine the density ratio dr from dr drt x ddcf where drt density ratio calculated using the reference density determined at time t ddcf density decay correction factor determined from table num corresponding to time t the binder type and the time of year construction is being undertaken .
table num density decay correction factors time t from addition of binder to completion of laboratory compaction hours cementitious binder construction between october and april cementitious binder construction between may and september slow setting medium setting rapid setting slow setting medium setting rapid setting num to num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num for individual jobs more than num mnum where the material to be stabilised is of a similar nature throughout the contractor shall determine and apply a job specific ddcf determined in accordance with the relevant test method specified in vicroads code of practice num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b scale anum and anum requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction i scale anumassessment shall be used where the in situ material is sufficiently consistent to be assigned a maximum dry density for the lot .
if a single maximum dry density can be assigned to the lot the work represented by the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the characteristic value of density ratio obtained from six randomly selected test sites within the lot is not less than num .
if the characteristic value of density ratio of the lot is less than num but greater than or equal to num the work represented by the lot may be accepted as far as compaction is concerned but payment for the whole of such work will be made at a rate calculated using the formula p numrc num where rc is the characteristic value of density ratio of the lot and p is the rate of payment expressed as a percentage of the value of work represented by the lot provided that the value of p shall not exceed num .
for the application of this formula the value of the work represented by the lot shall be calculated using the unit rate specified in clause numb .
ii scale anum assessment shall be used where in situ material is too variable to assign a maximum dry density to the lot .
if the material is too variable to assign a single maximum dry density to the lot and requires separate maximum dry densities to be determined for each test site the work represented by the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the mean value of the density ratio obtained from three randomly selected test sites within the lot is not less than num with no individual value being less than num .
if the mean value of density ratio of the lot is less than num but greater than or equal to num the work represented by the lot may be accepted but payment for the whole of such work will be made at a rate calculated using the formula p numrm num where rm is the mean value of density ratio of the lot and p is the rate of payment expressed as a percentage of the value of work represented by the lot provided that the value of p shall not exceed num .
for the application of this formula the value of the work represented by the lot shall be calculated using the unit rate specified in clause numb .
work which has a mean value of density ratio of less than num shall be rejected and the contractor shall submit a proposal to rectify the work to the superintendent for approval .
c scale b requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction the work represented by the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the mean of the individual density ratio test values from three randomly selected test sites for the lot is not less than num .
if the mean of the individual density ratio test values for the lot is less than num but greater than or equal to num the work represented by the lot may be accepted as far as compaction is concerned but payment for the whole of such work will be made at a rate calculated using the formula p numrm num where rm is the mean of the individual density ratio test values for the lot and p is the rate of payment expressed as a percentage of the value of work represented by the lot provided that the value of p shall not exceed num .
for the application of this formula the value of the work represented by the lot shall be calculated using the unit rate specified in clause numb .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num d scale c requirements for acceptance of compaction the superintendent may direct the contractor to construct a trial section of stabilised pavement as specified in clause num .
acceptance of work will be based upon on compaction plant to be used compaction routine and a density monitoring procedure using a nuclear gauge and proof rolling as specified or agreed between the superintendent and the contractor .
any unstable areas within limits of work and depth of stabilisation detected by test rolling shall be rectified by the contractor and represented for test rolling .
e assessment of compaction for thick layers for compacted layers in excess of num mm thick the contractor shall measure the field density of the layer in two sublayers of equal thickness in accordance with the relevant test method .
at each test site the sublayer with the lower of the two density test results shall be used in the calculation of the characteristic or mean density ratio for assessment of compaction in accordance with clause num .
num requirements for testing and acceptance of spreading rates a mat or tray system the average spreading rate of lime or cementitious binder shall be ascertained by dividing the mass of cementitious binder spreading by the area over which the cementitious binder has been spread .
where the average spreading rate is less than the specified or design spread rate additional cementitious binder shall be spread to bring the average rate up to at least the design spread rate .
the contractor shall check the uniformity of spreading rate of lime or cementitious binder at the frequency specified in clause num by placing a minimum of three mats or trays with a plan area not less than num mnum in the path of the spreading vehicle at an equal spacing of not less than num of the length of the spreading run .
the spreading rate over each mat or tray shall be calculated by dividing the mass of lime or cementitious binder deposited on each mat or tray by the plan area of the mat or tray .
where the spread rate so determined for any mat or tray is less than the specified rate by more than num additional cementitious binder shall be spread over the part or all of the area over which the lime or cementitious binder has been spread .
b continuous weighing system the mass of lime or cementitious binder spread over the pavement surface may be measured and recorded by a spreader fitted with a fully calibrated electronic weigh scale system capable of continuously measuring and recording the mass of lime or cementitious binder at intervals of not more than num m of forward travel .
the contractor shall have a current certificate of calibration for the computerised spreading equipment and shall produce evidence of the actual running spread rate when requested by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num minimum testing frequency the contractor shall test the materials and the stabilised pavement layer at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that the materials and work under the contract comply with the specified requirements but not less than the frequency specified in table num .
table num test minimum frequency of testing available lime available lime index one test per production day at the point of manufacture .
uniformity of spreading rate of lime or cementitious binder a mat or tray test minimum of num mats or trays as specified in clause numa for each separate continuous spreading run except where calibrated load cell computerised spreading devices are fitted with a system to continuously monitor the spread rate every num m. average spread rate of lime or cementitious binder each continuous spreader run .
based on the total tonnage used for the run kg divided by the area covered m .
uniformity of mixing for each compaction lot visual inspection of six random test holes excavated for the full depth of the loose material after mixing of the binder and prior to commencement of compaction .
characteristic or mean density ratio every lot as defined in clause numa .
num schedule of details a job details table num road location layer num type of work modification bound subbase or deep lift compacted thickness of stabilised layer mm num depth of additional granular material mm requirements for acceptance of compaction scale anum anum b or c from to notes on table num num .
describe as modification material modification bound subbase fully bound subbase for a deep strength asphalt pavement deep lift fully bound deep lift stabilisation department of state growth vicroads december num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num num .
the amount of additional granular material to be spread and mixed in with the in situ material expressed as an equivalent compacted depth .
b unit rate for assessment of payment deduction the unit rate to be used to calculate the value of the work represented by the lot for application of payment deduction formulae specified in clauses numb and c shall be sq m refer to guide notes .
c stabilised mixture design strikethrough this clause if the design of the stabilised mixture has already been undertaken and spread rates for binder and any additional granular material is to be specified in clauses numd and e below the determination of the design distribution rate of cementitious binder and the grading of any additional granular material required to correct the grading of the material to be stabilised shall be determined in accordance with clause num. d details of stabilised mix design and spreading rates strikethrough this clause if the contractor is required to design the stabilised mixture and determine spread rates under clause numc above table num road location design distribution rate for lime pretreatment kgmnum type of cementitious binder spread rate for cementit ious binder kgmnum spread rate for additional granular material kgmnum from to e grading and plasticity requirements for additional granular material strikethrough this clause if additional granular material is not required or the contractor is to determine the grading of additional granular material to satisfy mix design requirements table num material percentage passing by mass pi max num num num num num num num num department of state growth section num preparation of granular pavements for bituminous surfacing this section crossreferences section num .
if section num is relevant it should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the requirements for preparation of unbound granular pavements including in situ cementitious and bituminous stabilised pavements for sprayed bituminous surfacing or asphalt surfacing .
num pavement preparation the contractor shall prepare for bituminous surfacing the lengths widths and areas specified or shown on the drawings for bituminous surfacing plus an additional num m on sides where there is no concrete edging .
the surface of the shoulders and verges shall be matched to the finished surface of the prepared pavement .
construction practices that produce a slurry or pasting of fine material at the surface are not permitted .
the addition of fine material to the surface is not permitted .
where the superintendent considers the prepared surface to have excessive fines the pavement layer shall be rectified to a condition acceptable to the superintendent .
the pavement shall be prepared to produce a surface that is a constructed to meet specified shape and level requirements b homogenous and consistent with the material in the pavement base layer c uniform in texture d free of tearing and scabbing e free of lamination on or within num mm of the finished surface f level with adjacent sealed areas and edgings at the joints g a hard dense and tight surface capable of being swept with a rotary road broom or similar h free of loose and foreign materials i dried back to the moisture content and embedded requirements specified in clause num .
any imperfections as listed above shall be corrected in a manner acceptable to the superintendent .
where this involves the reworking of the material the full layer depth shall be reworked .
the total area of the work shall be presented to the superintendent for acceptance for surfacing as one lot .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num drying back of pavement base prior to bituminous surfacing a pavement dryback the uppermost pavement layer after preparation of the surface and prior to priming or primersealing shall be allowed to dry back so the moisture content of the layer meets the requirements of table num for each test lot .
the mean moisture ratio shall be determined from six randomly selected sites as a percentage of the optimum moisture content based on modified compactive effort and determined in accordance with vicroads test method rc num moisture ratio determination for assessment of dryback of granular pavement materials as listed in section num. b pavement embedment pavement embedment shall be assessed by ball penetration testing when required as detailed in table num .
ball penetration testing shall be undertaken on the prepared surface in accordance with austroads test method agpttnum ball penetration test at six randomly selected sites .
no individual test result shall exceed the maximum penetration detailed in table num .
table num requirements for pavement dryback and embedment testing scale pavement dryback pavement embedment mean moisture ratio maximum of any individual result ball penetration maximum individual result a less than num num num mm b less than num num not required less than num num num mm c less than num num not required c testing schedule the contractor shall carry out testing for pavement dryback and embedment in accordance with table num .
the maximum lot size to be presented for testing under this provision shall be num m and testing shall be undertaken no more than num hours before priming or primersealing .
test sites for assessing conformance with table num shall be selected in accordance with vicroads test method rcnum selection of test sites as listed in section num .
where both dryback and embedment testing are required both tests shall be undertaken at the same test site within the same square metre .
where the pavement moisture content has increased during the period between dryback testing and the proposed time of bituminous surfacing the superintendent may require pavement dryback and embedment to be reassessed in accordance with this clause .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num testing schedule for pavement dryback and embedment complete table below and delete all symbols refer to guide notes for appropriate levels road locationchainage testing scale to num maintenance prior to bituminous surfacing following the acceptance of the prepared surface and until bituminous surfacing is completed the contractor shall maintain the pavement in the accepted condition until surfacing works are completed .
should the pavement condition deteriorate before surfacing works are completed the contractor shall reprepare the pavement and represent the pavement for acceptance .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num removal of pavement by cold planing this section crossreferences section num .
if section num is relevant it should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for removal of pavement by cold planing including the cleaning up removal and disposal of the excavated materials .
num cold planing cold planing shall be carried out in a manner as to leave a uniform surface on a plane parallel with the ultimate finished surface of the pavement as shown on the drawings .
cold planing machines have the following cutting drum characteristics standard cutting drum with cutting tool spacing of num mm horizontally and fine tooth drum with a cutting tool spacing of num mm or less horizontally .
the nominal depth and width of pavement to be removed shall be as specified in clause num .
after planing no point on the planed surface shall lie more than num mm below a num m straightedge placed on the planed surface in any direction .
in locations where removal and replacement of asphalt or pavement is required on the same day the rate of cold planing including clean up shall be at a rate consistent with the asphalt replacement process to minimise the pavement area closed to traffic .
num cleaning up and disposal of excavated material the planed surface shall be swept clean of all loose material prior to either diverting traffic onto the planed surface or placing asphalt .
the excavated material removed from the road shall either become the property of the department of state growth or the property of the contractor as specified in clause num .
if the material becomes the property of the department of state growth the contractor shall load transport and stockpile material into a neat pile at the nominated stockpile area as specified in clause numd .
if the material becomes the property of the contractor the contractor shall remove all such material from the site .
prior to opening to traffic placing asphalt or leaving the site the contractor shall present a clean planed surface .
num asphalt replacement where work under the contract includes replacement of excavated material with asphalt supplied and placed under section num the following requirements shall apply a exposed granular pavement material shall be watered recompacted and where specified primed or heavily tack coated or for larger areas given a bitumen emulsion primerseal prior to placing asphalt .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth b prior to opening to traffic excavated areas shall be filled with hotmix asphalt .
all transverse and longitudinal joints shall be constructed as cold joints in accordance with clause num and new asphalt shall be compacted flush with the existing pavement in accordance with the requirements of clause numa .
c in the event of a breakdown in the supply or placing of asphalt in areas to be opened to traffic the contractor shall temporarily backfill or ramp down the cold planed area with cold mix asphalt or other suitable material which will support traffic loading and provide for the safe passage of traffic .
material so placed shall be removed prior to placing new asphalt as specified and the placing and removal of temporary backfilling shall be at the expense of the contractor .
temporary ramping shall be carried out to the standards specified in clause num .
num temporary ramping a longitudinal edges any exposed longitudinal edges within the trafficked area shall be ramped down at a slope no steeper than num horizontal to num vertical by constructing a temporary wedge of hot mixed or cold mix asphalt .
b transverse edges any exposed transverse edges within the trafficked area shall be ramped down by constructing a temporary wedge of hot or cold mix asphalt .
temporary ramping shall not be steeper than num horizontal to num vertical for traffic speeds of more than num kmh or num horizontal to num vertical for traffic speeds of num kmh or less .
c removal of temporary ramping before asphalt replacement all temporary ramping shall be removed by cutting back along a straight line to expose a vertical face of fully compacted asphalt at the specified layer depth .
num schedule of details strikethrough items below which are not applicable a type of work i removal of asphalt with a standardfine toothstrikethrough inappropriate option cold planer ii cutting of tapered longitudinal chases against kerb and channel median openings and side streets iii cutting of tapered transverse chases iv excavation of granular pavement material v profiling of concrete pavement vi removal and replacement of asphalt in accordance with section num of this specification b nominal area and depth of removal mnum mm clause num c nominal width of removal m clause num d planed material shall become the property of the department of state growth and be department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth stockpiled at clause num. e planed material shall become the property of the contractor and shall be removed from the site clause num .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num stone mastic asphalt this section crossreferences section num .
if section num is relevant it should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section shall be read in conjunction with section num hot mix asphalt and covers special requirements for size num mm stone mastic asphalt sma that are in addition to or override the requirements of section num .
the section covers two types of sma mixes normal duty size num mm sman and heavy duty size num mm smah .
sma is a coarse graded asphalt containing a high proportion of binder and added filler with the addition of cellulose fibre .
num cellulose fibre additive cellulose fibre additive shall be non toxic and supplied in a powdered fine fibrilled long fibred form manufactured from raw cellulose .
cellulose fibre shall be supplied in bags of equal mass suitable for metered plant mixing and shall be handled in accordance with the manufacturers specifications .
cellulose fibre additive may be supplied in loose or pelletised form and may be incorporated with a binding agent .
the binding agent can be either bituminous or nonbituminous .
num aggregates unless otherwise specified properties of the aggregates used in sma shall comply with the requirements for type h asphalt as specified in clause num .
further to clauses num and num no reclaimed asphalt pavement rap shall be added to sma .
num binder binder used in sman shall be either class anume pmb or class anume pmb or class anume pmb and binder used in smah shall be class anume pmb all complying with the requirements specified in clause numb .
num mix design the mix to be used shall be a state growth registered mix and shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
hp the contractor shall only use asphalt mixes that are registered by state growth as general mixes at the time of placement unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
the contractor shall also provide the following information a marshall stability department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth b the results of the binder paste drain off tests meeting the requirements of clause nume and the selected maximum mixing temperature to avoid excess binder drain off .
c the indirect tensile modulus of the mix is required to be submitted .
the sample shall be prepared at num air voids .
num mix design requirements a the grading limits in the job mix shall lie within the limits specified in table num below table num grading limits for aggregates including any filler sieve size as mm percentage passing by mass sman smah num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num b the proportions of mineral matter bitumen and cellulose fibre additive shall lie within the limits shown in table num below table num proportions of mineral matter binder and cellulose fibres material percentage by total mass of mix sman smah mineral matter num num num num bitumen num num num num cellulose additive num num c further to the requirements of num and num the mix shall contain a minimum of num added filler for sman .
the minimum proportion of added filler shall be num for smah .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth d the marshall cylinder test properties num blows each face compacted at num and using class num binder shall comply with table num .
table num marshall properties and voids in mineral aggregate mix size mm stability kn minimum air voids voids in mineral aggregates minimum minimum maximum sman num num num num smah num num num num e the asphalt binder paste drainoff test shall be performed at the design binder content to confirm that excessive binder drainage will not occur .
the mass of binder paste drain off shall not exceed num of the total mass of the sample of mix tested .
num storage of cellulose fibre at the mixing plant packaged cellulose fibre products shall not be stored in the open or exposed to direct sunlight unless protected by a waterproof uv resistant covering .
any product that has become wet shall not be used .
num mixing plant batch pug mill type mixing plant may be used to produce sma .
pressed packs of cellulose fibre shall only be used in batch mixing plants .
the superintendent may allow drum type mixing plants to produce sma where the drum plant is capable of incorporating the filler and fibre in a dedicated mixing chamber remote from the burner and the flow of exhaust gases from the plant .
the contractor shall provide information to show the asphalt plant is able to produce a wellmixed and uniform sma that can be successfully placed and produces a material comparable to sma from batch plants .
where any mixing plant has not yet proven its ability to produce conforming and consistent sma the superintendent may require a trial of about num tonnes to assess the sma .
num mixing sequence batch mixing plants cellulose fibre press packs shall be added to the mixer during the metered addition of the hot aggregates .
cellulose fibre press packs shall not be added to the mixer before the aggregates are added .
cellulose fibre press packs shall be added to the aggregates unopened .
dry mixing shall continue for a maximum of num seconds after the last cellulose fibre press pack has been added .
binder shall be added after completion of the dry mixing as specified and mixing shall continue for a minimum of num seconds or longer period required to ensure that coarse department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth aggregate particles are fully coated with bitumen and the cellulose fibres are distributed homogeneously through the mix .
drum mixing plants the mixing sequence shall be determined by the contractor and in accordance with fibre manufacturers recommendations .
num mixing and mixing temperatures the temperature of aggregates before mixing shall not exceed numc .
num frequency of inspection and testing at the mixing plant the production tolerances on the grading aim of the mix before compaction shall be as specified for size num mm in table num .
notwithstanding the requirements of clause num a reduced frequency is not permitted .
further to table num the minimum frequency for binder content and full sieve analysis of asphalt full extraction test shall be one test per num tonnes or part thereof of the asphalt plant production on a representative sample taken from a delivery truck .
the binder content and full sieve analysis of asphalt and fibre content results shall be provided to the superintendent .
num conditions for placing stone mastic asphalt the contractor should note sma may be adversely affected by traffic during hot weather and within num hours of placement .
it is the contractors responsibility to ensure sma is placed at such times that hot weather and traffic shall not affect the sma by reducing the texture of the surface or cause rutting of the surface .
detouring traffic shall not be used a method of managing risk of damage to the new surface .
num commencement of placing hp the placement of sma shall not commence until approval is obtained from the superintendent .
num requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction after placement the sma shall be immediately compacted to meet the requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction as detailed in clause num except work shall be tested for compaction density on a lot basis regardless of the quantity of material placed work represented by a lot of six tests shall be assessed as shown in table num work represented by either four or five cores shall be assessed as shown in table num .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num limits for characteristic density ratio six tests for layers less than num mm thickness characteristic value of the density ratio rc assessment num or more accept lot num to num lot may be accepted at a reduced rate calculated by p num rc num table num mean density ratio less than six cores for layers less than num mm thickness mean value of the density ratio rm assessment num or more accept lot num to num lot may be accepted at a reduced rate calculated by p num rm num vibratory rollers may be used for a maximum of two passes only .
use of vibration shall be discontinued immediately if any breakdown of surface aggregate occurs .
pneumatic tyred rollers shall not be used .
hp the contractor shall not place traffic on the sma until the superintendent has agreed the temperature of the asphalt is less than numc and is trafficable .
department of state growth section num hot mix asphalt sections num num and num must be included in the specification .
this section crossreferences sections num num num num num num and num .
if any of these sections are relevant they should also be included in the specification otherwise all references to these sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for the manufacture and placement of hot mix asphalt including quality of materials mix design supply and placing of the asphalt .
the following supplementary vicroads standard sections shall be read in conjunction with this section where mixes other than hot mix asphalt and dense graded asphalt are required stone mastic asphalt section num regulation gap graded asphalt section num warm mix asphalt section num ultra thin asphalt section num open graded asphalt section num bitumen crumb rubber asphalt section num lean mix asphalt section num .
if any cold planing is undertaken in association with placing of asphalt section num shall apply .
num definitions asphalt base course asphalt base course is that part of an asphalt pavement supporting the intermediate and wearing courses .
it rests on the subgrade or pavement subbase .
asphalt course an asphalt course comprises one or more layers of a single asphalt type .
asphalt intermediate course asphalt intermediate course is that part of the asphalt pavement immediately under the wearing course .
it rests on the asphalt base course .
asphalt layer an asphalt layer comprises a single paving run of uniform asphalt .
asphalt pavement asphalt pavement comprises the combined thickness of all asphalt courses as defined in clause num .
asphalt regulating course asphalt regulating course is an asphalt course of variable thickness applied to the road surface to adjust the shape prior to the wearing course or any other bituminous surfacing or resurfacing .
asphalt types dense graded dense graded asphalt types l n v and h series mixes primarily used for wearing and regulation courses and type s series mixes are primarily used as structural mixes for intermediate and base courses .
a brief description for the various types of dense graded department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth asphalt is shown in table num .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num types of dense graded asphalt mix designation description l a light duty size num or num wearing course with low air voids and higher binder content for use in very lightly trafficked pavements .
n a light to medium duty size num num or num wearing course or regulating course for use in light to moderately trafficked pavements .
h a heavy duty size num num or num asphalt wearing course or regulating course for use in most heavily trafficked pavements .
v a heavy duty size num or num asphalt wearing course for heavily trafficked intersections .
hg a multi purpose heavy duty size num or num wearing course asphalt incorporating multigrade binder where a high resistance to deformation is required particularly at heavily trafficked intersections .
hp a high performance size num or num heavy to very heavy duty wearing course asphalt incorporating a polymer modified binder pmb where a high resistance to deformation and flexural cracking is required .
si a multi purpose size num or num structural asphalt for intermediate course in heavy duty pavements or base course in medium duty pavements .
sf a fatigue resistant size num structural base course asphalt for heavy duty asphalt pavements with a total asphalt thickness in excess of num mm .
sp a high performance heavy to very heavy duty size num structural intermediate course asphalt incorporating a polymer modified binder pmb for high resistance to deformation and flexural cracking .
sg a multi purpose heavy duty size num structural intermediate course asphalt incorporating a multigrade binder for high resistance to deformation particularly at very heavily trafficked intersections .
ss a very stiff size num structural intermediate course asphalt sometimes used to increase pavement stiffness for very large scale heavy duty asphalt pavements .
asphalt wearing course asphalt wearing course is the final part of the pavement upon which the traffic travels except for open graded asphalt oga where the wearing course is the layer beneath the oga .
assigned polished stone value assigned polished stone value is a friction rating derived from test results and is assigned to each source by vicroads on the basis of past test data obtained from testing products .
binder binder is bitumen multigrade binder or polymer modified binder pmb used to hold a mixture of aggregates together as a cohesive mass .
binder film index binder film index is an empirical calculation of theoretical thickness of the binder film around each aggregate particle within the asphalt mix having regard to the aggregate grading surface area of the aggregates and binder content .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth bulk density bulk density is the mass per unit volume of the compacted mix where the volume is the gross volume of the mix including the air voids .
coarse aggregates coarse aggregates are aggregates retained on a num mm as sieve .
cold joints cold joint are where asphalt is placed against the exposed edge of an existing asphalt mat where the existing mat has cooled to less than numc for bitumen and multigrade binders or to less than numc in the case of pmbs .
filler filler is that portion of the aggregates passing the num mm sieve .
it includes the combined mass of crusher dust any added recycled fines from asphalt plant dust extraction filters and any added filler required to enhance the mix properties .
fine aggregates fine aggregates are aggregates passing a num mm as sieve .
glass fines glass fines are recycled glass cullet crushed to a cubic shape and passing the num mm as sieve .
hot mix asphalt asphalt asphalt is a designed and controlled mixture of coarse and fine aggregates filler and binder which is mixed spread and compacted to a uniform layer while hot .
asphalt types are designated by the use of symbols .
in situ air voids in situ air voids represents the air voids in the field compacted mix onsite .
it is based on a ratio of field density to maximum density .
manufactured sand manufactured sand is a material passing the num mm as sieve produced by crushing igneous or metamorphic rock spalls or washed gravel .
maximum density void free density the maximum density is the density that could be achieved in a sample of asphalt if it were possible to compact it so as to exclude all air voids between coated aggregate particles .
sometimes this is referred to as the voids free bulk density vfbd .
mineral matter mineral matter includes coarse and fine aggregates plus filler .
particle density particle density is the mass of a dry particle of aggregate in air divided by volume of particle of aggregate excluding permeable voids .
placing placing is the spreading and compacting of asphalt including operations necessary for preparation of the surface .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth reclaimed asphalt pavement rap reclaimed asphalt pavement is asphalt removed from an existing asphalt pavement and re processed by crushing andor screening for recycling into new asphalt .
registered mix registered mix is an asphalt mix which has been placed on the state growth asphalt mix design register .
num aggregates a general the combined aggregate mixture shall consist of crushed rock or a mixture of crushed rock and sand or any rap permitted under clause num .
aggregates shall consist of clean hard durable angular rock fragments of uniform quality .
b source rock source rock shall comply with the requirements of section num. c crushed aggregate products i the flakiness index of each separate sized coarse aggregate fraction with a nominal size of num mm or larger shall comply with table num. ii the unsound and marginal rock in that fraction retained on a num mm as sieve excluding any rap shall not exceed the relevant percentages specified in table num .
table num quality of coarse aggregates type of asphalt flakiness index max total of marginal and unsound rock by mass max unsound rock by mass max h and v series num num num l n and s series num num num iii the particle density of each separate sized aggregate fraction shall be provided by the source quarry at regular intervals not exceeding num months .
d crusher fines and manufactured sand crusher fines and manufactured sand shall i consist of a uniformly graded product of separate particles from the crushing of rock which complies with the requirements of clause numb appropriate to the asphalt type being produced ii be free from lumps and aggregations department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth iii comply with the grading limits specified in table num .
table num grading of crusher fines and manufactured sand sieve size as mm crusher fines percentage passing by mass manufactured sand percentage passing by mass num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num iv comply with the relevant requirements specified in table num .
table num quality of crusher fines and manufactured sand test value degradation factor crusher fines min plasticity index max num num e natural sand natural sand extracted from natural sand deposits shall consist of clean hard durable grains free from lumps clay mica and organic or harmful matter .
where natural sand is accepted as washed sand for the registered mix the sand equivalent value of any such sand supplied for asphalt production shall not be not be less than num .
where natural sand is accepted as unwashed sand for the registered mix the plasticity index of any sand supplied for asphalt production shall not be more than num. f glass fines glass fines shall i consist of a uniformly graded product with a maximum particle size of num mm manufactured by crushing of recycled glass cullet ii be generally free of contaminants such as paper corks metals and other harmful materials maximum limit of num by mass .
glass cullet shall be primarily container glass and shall not include glass from ceramics cathode ray tubes fluorescent light fittings and laboratory glassware iii comply with the grading limits specified in table num for manufactured sand iv be cubical in shape not sharp edged or elongated .
the use of glass fines as a replacement for natural sands shall be limited to intermediate and base course layers .
g aggregates for asphalt used as wearing course i coarse aggregates shall be a mixture of separate onesized aggregates blended together .
ii coarse aggregates for type h hg and hp asphalt shall have a minimum assigned polished stone value psv of num .
coarse aggregates for type v asphalt shall have a minimum psv of num .
department of state growth iii fine aggregates shall be a mixture of one or more sands and crusher fines .
for mixes designed by the marshall method the fraction passing the num mm as sieve shall contain not less than num of natural sand .
for wearing course mixes designed by the austroads method using gyratory compaction the quantity of natural sand may be less than num .
no mix shall contain more than num by mass of natural sand .
h aggregates for asphalt used as intermediate or base course the combined aggregates shall consist either of crushed material or a mixture of crushed material and natural sands .
the fraction of the mix passing the num mm as sieve shall contain not more than num by mass of natural sands .
num filler mineral filler shall comply with the requirements of tables num and num .
if any of the following added fillers are specified or required they shall comply with the corresponding requirements below a hydrated lime complying with as num lime and limestones lime for building and the requirements of table num b cement kiln dust complying with the requirements of tables num and num c ground limestone complying with the requirements of tables num and num d ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs complying with as num and the requirements of table num e portland cement complying with as num f fly ash produced from the combustion of black coal complying with tables num and num .
table num grading limits fillers other than hydrated lime cement and ggbfs as sieve size mm percentage passing by mass num num num num num num num num table num test requirements for filler filler type test test limit total combined filler dry compacted voids num min all added fillers moisture content num max cement kiln dust water soluble fraction num note on table num the total combined filler is the total amount of all filler in the mix including any added department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth filler .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num bituminous materials a binders the class of binder for each asphalt type shall be as specified in table num .
table num class of binder asphalt type binder class l and n cnum v si and sf cnum hg and sg mnum hp and sp anume pmb ss cnum notes on table num cnum binder shall be used if the mix contains more than num rap .
pmb class anume shall be used unless otherwise specified in clause nume .
classes num num and num bitumen used for production of asphalt shall comply with as num bitumen for pavements .
bitumen used for asphalt types l n v and h shall comply with the additional requirement specified in table num .
table num durability of bitumen class of bitumen durability minimum time to reach the specified apparent viscosity level savl days num num num not applicable note on table num test for resistance to hardening when exposed to heat and air .
the viscosity of bitumen recovered from a sample of mixed asphalt prior to placement or from the roadbed after compaction shall comply with the requirements specified in table num and tested at the frequency specified in table num .
table num viscosity range of bitumen recovered from mixed asphalt class of bitumen viscosity range at numc kpa.s wearing course intermediate course base course num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num b polymer modified binder pmb and multigrade binder all pmb and multigrade binders shall comply with the test requirements specified in the austroads specification framework for polymer modified binders and multigrade bitumens as listed in section num .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth the contractor shall comply with the following requirements for supply and handling multigrade binder and pmb i material shall be handled in accordance with the manufacturers requirements ii a product quality certificate and test report from the manufacturer shall be obtained for each delivery of material iii material shall be transported and stored in such a manner to avoid contamination andor deterioration of the product to the extent that it no longer complies with specified test properties .
c bitumen emulsion bitumen emulsion used for tack coating shall be a cationic rapid setting type complying with as num bitumen emulsions for construction and maintenance of pavements .
emulsion diluted with water shall have a bitumen content of not less than num .
num mix design all asphalt mixes proposed for use on department of state growth works shall be registered in accordance with vicroads code of practice rcnum .
all mix designs registered with state growth are issued a status according to compliance as general complies with the requirements of code of practice rcnum .
conditional mixes which do not comply in all respects with the requirements of code of practice rcnum but which are considered appropriate for use subject to conditions attached to the registration .
expired superseded by another registered mix but details are retained for record purposes .
hp no asphalt shall be supplied until the mix has been registered and the superintendent approves the mix for use .
the contractor shall only use asphalt mixes that are registered by state growth as general mixes .
approval of a registered mix for use under the contract does not guarantee the handling properties or performance of the mix nor relieve the contractor from contractual obligations in regards to rectification of defects .
the superintendent shall be notified of any proposed changes to the components or proportions of components used in the registered mix .
new mix designs shall be carried out a where it is proposed to change the source grading or nature of the components or binders and b when current registered mix designs are more than three years old .
if a registered mix has unsatisfactory handling or field performance the contractor or superintendent may request the mix be deregistered in accordance with code of practice rcnum .
num tolerances on mix production the production tolerances on the grading aim of the mix before compaction shall be as specified in table num .
the tolerance on the binder content in the mix shall be num of the total mix by mass .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num production tolerances for mix grading sieve size as mm tolerance on percentage passing by mass tolerance for asphalt types l n v s and h series by mass tolerance for asphalt type s series by mass size num size num size num size num num nil nil nil nil num nil nil nil nil num nil nil nil num num nil nil num num num nil num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note on table num if post compaction grading is checked by binder extraction and sieve analysis after placement the positive tolerances shall be increased by one percentage point .
num production of asphalt a temperatures the temperature of binder and aggregates at the mixing plant and the temperature of the asphalt as it is discharged from the mixing plant shall not exceed the limits specified in table num .
asphalt manufactured at temperatures in excess of the limits specified in table num shall not be used .
table num maximum mixing temperatures material temperature c max binder plant storage num aggregates before binder is added num asphalt at discharge from mixing plant num note on table num this limit may vary for pmbs in accordance with the suppliers recommendations .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth b mixing the mixing period shall be such that at least num of the coarse aggregate particles are fully coated with binder .
after completion of mixing the moisture content of the mix shall not exceed num. c hot storage of mixed asphalt asphalt types with pmb multigrade and cnum binders shall not be stored in hot bins for more than num hours prior to use .
all other asphalt types shall not be stored in hot bins for more than num hours prior to use .
asphalt that is deemed unsuitable for use may be recycled by re processing and adding it to a new mix at a proportion not greater than num by mass of the total aggregates .
alternatively it may be added to the rap stockpile and reprocessed to comply with the requirements of clause num .
num asphalt recycled from reclaimed asphalt pavement a general requirements reclaimed asphalt pavement rap may be recycled by adding it to new asphalt during the mixing process subject to the following requirements i all mixes containing rap shall be registered mixes ii rap shall consist of milled or excavated asphalt pavement free of foreign material such as unbound granular base broken concrete or other contaminants and shall be crushed and screened to a maximum size not exceeding the size of asphalt produced iii the manufacturing process shall provide for addition of rap to a batch plant pug mill or drum mixer separately from other mix components by a method that avoids damage to the mix by overheating iv no rap shall be added to asphalt types v hp hg ss or sp .
b unconditional use of rap the following mix types may contain the following maximum quantities of rap provided that all relevant specification requirements are met for each mix type i type l up to num by mass ii type n up to num by mass iii types h up to num by mass iv type si and sg up to num by mass v type sf up to num by mass .
c higher percentages of rap with additional performance testing the superintendent may approve the use of a registered mix containing percentages of rap up to num above the limits specified in clause numb .
representative samples of production asphalt shall be taken and tested at a frequency not less than that specified in table num .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth the test results will be assessed on the basis of a rolling average where the mean of the last three test results for the mix shall be within the specified range or in the case of asphalt particle loss the value determined for the same mix without rap inclusion .
test specimens for each test type shall be compacted to an air voids content as specified in vicroads code of practice rcnum for that test type .
test specimens for asphalt particle loss shall be prepared at the air voids content specified for the moisture sensitivity test .
the results shall be presented in such a way that trends can be readily ascertained for each asphalt type so corrective action can be taken when required .
table num frequency of testing for mixes with high percentages of rap check required minimum frequency indirect tensile modulus in each production month one per num tonnes or part thereof .
moisture sensitivity minimum wet strength and tensile strength ratio in each production quarter one per num tonnes or part thereof .
mix cohesion asphalt particle loss test on moisture conditioned and unconditioned specimens in each production quarter one per num tonnes or part thereof .
d rap stockpile management requirements for the use of high rap content asphalt mixes the asphalt manufacturers quality plan shall include a rap stockpile management plan meeting the following requirements i all rap materials used for asphalt production shall be processed by blending crushing and stockpiling ii testing of the processed rap stockpile to ensure uniformity of grading and binder content iii ensure uniformity of the rap stockpile properties by matching the registered asphalt mix design rap gradings and bitumen content data with those rap gradings and bitumen contents determined from multiple samples taken from the processed rap stockpile iv quality control testing of rap stockpiles including a statistical assessment to measure variability of the product v once the processed rap stockpile has been assessed for compliance there shall be no more processed rap added to that stockpile vi address issues such as contamination mixing of various sources of rap during processing fractionating of the processed rap and storage or stockpiling of the compliant processed rap in a manner that ensures materials removed are representative of the cross section of the processed rap stockpile .
during asphalt production one sample shall be taken and tested for gradings and bitumen content from the processed rap stockpile for every num tonnes used .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num red asphalt not used .
num frequency of inspection and testing at the mixing plant the frequency shall not be less than that shown in table num except that the superintendent may agree to a lower frequency where the contractor has implemented a system of statistical process control and can demonstrate that such lower frequency is adequate to assure the quality of the product .
table num frequency of inspection and testing checks required minimum frequency unsound rock content and particle size distribution of each aggregate and sand component including processed rap on each production day one test on each component unless certification of specification compliance is received for each delivery to the mixing plant .
degradation factor of crusher fines at monthly intervals .
plasticity index of crusher fines and natural sand supplied as unwashed sand at monthly intervals .
sand equivalent of natural sand supplied as washed sand at monthly intervals .
flakiness index of coarse aggregate num mm and larger at monthly intervals .
particle density of all aggregate components at num monthly intervals maximum density at monthly intervals viscosity of bitumen and multigrade binder at numc certification of specification compliance for each delivery of bitumen supplied to the mixing plant .
at weekly intervals where bitumen has been stored above numc for more than num days without the storage tank being topped up by more than num of its capacity .
in cases where two or more bitumen classes are blended together to correct the viscosity a viscosity test at numc shall be taken prior to use and at weekly intervals thereafter .
viscosity at num torsional recovery and softening point of pmb at weekly intervals for pmb that has been stored above num for more than three days or between numc and numc for more than seven days without the storage tank being topped up by more than num of its capacity .
scrutiny for segregation uncoated particles separated binder excess binder or overheating before dispatch from the plant each loaded truck .
temperature of asphalt before dispatch from the plant each loaded truck or at intervals of num minutes if more than one truck is dispatched in num minutes .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth checks required minimum frequency binder content and full sieve analysis of asphalt full extraction test on each production day one test per num tonnes or part thereof of the asphalt plant production on a representative sample taken from a delivery truck .
moisture content binder content and full sieve analysis of rap full extraction test at weekly intervals one test on a representative sample of each num tonnes of rap prior to use .
viscosity of recovered bitumen at numc as directed by the superintendent the average of three tests where asphalt type v h or type ss is reasonably suspected of being overheated or overmixed .
the contractor shall make available all completed work sheets check lists and test reports for inspection at the mixing plant .
num rate of delivery asphalt shall be placed at the highest practicable rate in order to minimise the time traffic is disrupted and to avoid intermittent paving .
num ambient conditions for placing the surface on which asphalt is to be placed shall be essentially dry and free from surface water .
a intermediate and base courses asphalt shall not be placed when the majority of the area to be paved has a surface temperature of less than numc .
asphalt mixes with pmb and class num binder shall not be placed when the majority of area to be paved has a surface temperature less than numc .
b wearing course wearing course asphalt shall not be placed when the majority of the area to be paved has a surface temperature of less than numc .
asphalt mixes with polymer modified binder shall not be placed when the majority of the area to be paved has a surface temperature less than numc .
num surface preparation and raising or lowering of manhole and valve covers where specified in clause numd all manhole and valve covers shall be raised or lowered to the new surface level prior to asphalt work commencing .
temporary ramping around each cover shall be provided and removed in accordance with the requirements of clause nume prior to asphalt surfacing being placed .
prior to tack coating and placing of asphalt the contractor shall remove all harmful material and sweep clean the area upon which asphalt is to be placed .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num tack coat a tack coat shall be applied to the cleaned asphalt or sealed surface on which asphalt is to be placed unless the unsealed surface has been primed .
tack coat shall consist of cationic bitumen emulsion and shall be applied only to a clean essentially dry surface free from surface water .
tack coat shall be sprayed in a uniform film over the entire road surface .
the application rate for bitumen emulsion tack coat shall be num to num litresmnum num bitumen content or num to num litresmnum num bitumen content except for joints and chases where rates shall be doubled .
before asphalt is placed sufficient time shall be allowed for the free water to evaporate and for the tack coat to cure and change in colour from brown to black .
any tack coat not covered by asphalt shall be covered with clean grit or sand before the road is opened to traffic .
where asphalt is to be spread over clean freshly laid asphalt or over a clean primed surface or where the depth of the layer exceeds num mm the contractor may omit the tack coat .
num delivery a general delivery shall only be made during the hours listed for possession of site .
asphalt delivered to the site which is segregated has been overheated is too cold contains separated binder or uncoated particles which does not comply with the specification shall be removed from the site .
b delivery dockets delivery dockets shall show i name of supplier and location of plant ii docket number iii name of user iv project name and location or contract number v registered number or fleet number of the vehicle vi date and time of loading vii size and type of asphalt viii empty and loaded mass of the vehicle or the total of the electronically measured batch weights printed on the docket ix class of binder and proprietary name of modified binder x temperature of load at mixing plant when measured .
where asphalt is scheduled for measurement by mass a copy of the delivery docket for each load shall be provided at the point of delivery or delivered to the superintendent at the end of each days work .
where asphalt is measured by other means and for lump sum contracts the contractor shall make delivery dockets available for inspection on request by the superintendent .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num joints and junctions a general the location of all joints shall be planned before work commences to achieve the specified offsets between layers and the final position of joints in the wearing course .
the number of joints shall be minimised by adopting good asphalt paving practices .
if requested by the superintendent the contractor shall produce drawings showing the location of longitudinal joints of asphalt layers in respect to the traffic lane lines .
all joints shall be well bonded and sealed and the surface across the joint shall meet the requirements of clause num .
all cold joints and abutting concrete edges shall be heavily tack coated .
where cold joints are constructed any loose or poorly compacted existing asphalt on the exposed edge shall be trimmed back to produce a face of fully compacted asphalt along the exposed edge before fresh asphalt is placed .
b transverse joints all transverse joints shall be offset from layer to layer by not less than num m. c longitudinal joints i longitudinal joints in the wearing course shall coincide with the location of intended traffic lane lines .
ii longitudinal joints in intermediate and base courses shall be offset from layer to layer by not less than num mm and shall be within num mm of the traffic lane line or the centre of traffic lane .
where new pavement abuts an existing pavement the existing pavement shall be removed in steps to achieve an offset from layer to layer of not less than num mm .
iii longitudinal joints shall be parallel to the traffic lanes .
iv cold joints shall be avoided either by matching up all longitudinal joints over the full width of the carriageway each day or such lesser period depending on the rate of cooling of asphalt placed in the preceding run or by paving with two or more pavers in echelon .
subject to approval by the superintendent a longitudinal joint in the wearing course may be located up to num mm from the traffic lane line or num mm from the centre of a traffic lane .
d junctions at junctions where the new asphalt mat is required to match the level of existing pavement surface at the limits of work chases shall be cut into the existing pavement by cold planing as specified in section num .
the chase shall be cut by removal of a wedge of asphalt tapering from zero to a depth of num times the nominal size of the asphalt from the existing pavement to the minimum width as follows i at side streets and median openings num mm ii on through carriageways with a speed limit of num kmh or less num m iii on through carriageways with a speed limit of more than num kmh num m. department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth e treatment of exposed edges under traffic on completion of each days work and prior to opening to traffic the following treatment of exposed edges shall be adopted for asphalt work .
i longitudinal edges all longitudinal joints within the trafficked area shall be matched up between paver runs except for a short section required to achieve the minimum offset between transverse joints .
any exposed longitudinal edges within the trafficked area shall be ramped down at a slope of not steeper than num horizontal to num vertical by constructing a temporary wedge of hot mixed or cold mixed asphalt .
in unusual situations such as the sudden onset of inclement weather a longer length of longitudinal joint may be exposed provided it is ramped down as specified .
ii transverse edges at the end of the paving run in the transverse direction the new asphalt mat shall be squared up to a straight line and ramped down by constructing a temporary wedge of hot mixed or cold mixed asphalt .
temporary ramping shall not be steeper than shown in table num .
table num maximum grade of temporary ramping maximum ramp grade horizontal to vertical num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num iii removal of temporary ramping before commencement of each days work all temporary ramping shall be removed by cutting back along a straight line to expose a vertical face of fully compacted asphalt at the specified layer depth .
num commencement of placing hp the placement of asphalt on the subbase or granular base for a new pavement or for an overlay of an existing bituminous surfaced pavement shall not commence until approval to proceed is obtained from the superintendent .
num regulating course a regulating course of asphalt of the type and size specified shall be placed for correction of longitudinal and transverse pavement shape so that the resulting surface is parallel with the finished surface .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num spreading a general asphalt shall be spread in layers at the compacted thicknesses shown on the drawings or specified .
all asphalt shall be spread with an asphalt paver except for small areas where use of a paver is not practicable .
b level control asphalt paver screed levels shall be controlled by a suitable combination of manual and automatic controls operating from fixed or moving references .
c spreading all asphalt shall be spread with a purpose designed asphalt paving machine to form a uniformly smooth asphalt mat complying with the requirements of clause num without segregation tearing or gouging .
the contractor shall conduct spreading operations to ensure that the paver speed matches the rate of supply so that stoppages are minimised .
if the paver is required to stop and asphalt in front of the screed cools to below numc a transverse joint shall be constructed .
for asphalt work carried out on a road to be opened for traffic at the completion of work each day each layer of asphalt shall cover the full width of the trafficked area .
the requirements of clause nume shall be followed in respect of the treatment required for exposed edges .
d spreading by hand hand spreading shall only be used for small areas where it is not practical to use a paver .
e echelon paving where specified in clause numg two pavers in echelon shall be used in locations where a full carriageway wider than num m is available clear of traffic .
the width of a single paving run shall not exceed num metres unless paving in echelon is proposed .
f trafficking of type sf asphalt trafficking or placement of asphalt over type sf asphalt is not permitted unless the majority of the type sf asphalt has a surface temperature of numc or less and falling .
where trafficking of the type sf results in deformation of the asphalt further trafficking shall cease until such time that the type sf asphalt has adequately cooled to allow works to proceed without further damage .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num compaction asphalt shall be uniformly compacted to the standards specified in clause num as soon as the asphalt has cooled sufficiently to support the rollers without undue displacement .
num requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction a general work shall be tested and accepted for compaction on either a test lot basis as provided in clause numb or on an approved procedural basis as provided in clause numc .
where the total quantity of the particular size andor type of asphalt supplied under the contract exceeds num tonnes compaction shall be tested and accepted on a test lot basis .
acceptance of compaction for all other asphalt work will be on a procedural basis .
b testing and acceptance of compaction on a lot basis for small lots the test procedure specified in section num shall apply .
the density of extracted cores for the purposes of determining the bulk density for acceptance purposes or to check or assign offsets to a nuclear gauge shall be undertaken in accordance with vicroads codes of practice num and num .
a lot presented for testing consists of that part of a particular layer of asphalt which is placed in one day under uniform conditions and is essentially homogeneous in respect to material and appearance .
sites for density testing shall be selected on an essentially random basis provided that no site shall be selected within num mm of a joint constructed against a cold edge .
for core sample tests the layer thickness is the mean thickness of the core samples and for nuclear gauge tests the layer thickness is the nominal layer thickness .
asphalt density ratio is defined as the percentage ratio of the field bulk density to the assigned bulk density of the approved laboratory mix design .
the assigned maximum density of the asphalt shall be calculated from the num point rolling average maximum density of the production mix .
should a single maximum density of the production mix vary by more than num of its rolling average then a check design or redesign should be initiated .
the characteristic value of density ratio is the calculated value of x nums for six tests per lot where x and s are respectively the mean and standard deviation of the individual density ratio test values for the lot .
the work represented by a lot of six tests shall be assessed as shown in table num .
table num limits for characteristic density ratio six tests for layers less than num mm thickness for layers num mm thickness or greater characteristic value of the density ratio rc assessment characteristic value of the density ratio rc assessment department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num or more accept lot num or more accept lot num to num lot may be accepted at a reduced rate calculated by p num rc num num to num lot may be accepted at a reduced rate calculated by p num rc num rc is the characteristic value of the density ratio for the lot and p is the percentage of the relevant scheduled rate to be paid which shall not be greater than num .
where the contract is a lump sum contract the relevant scheduled rate will be that shown in the rates for variation purposes schedule accompanying the lump sum tender .
if no such rate is provided a variation will be considered in accordance with clause num of the general conditions of contract valuation of variations .
where one or more individual core thicknesses are less than the relevant values shown in table num they shall be discarded and the acceptance assessment modified in accordance with table num provided that there remain at least four test values .
table num minimum thickness of cores extracted from the pavement size of asphalt individual core thickness mm min num num num num num num num num table num mean density ratio less than six cores for layers less than num mm thickness for layers num mm thickness or greater mean value of the density ratio rm assessment mean value of the density ratio rm assessment num or more accept lot num or more accept lot num to num lot may be accepted at a reduced rate calculated by p num rm num num to num lot may be accepted at a reduced rate calculated by p num rm num rm is the mean of the individual density ratios for the lot and p is the percentage of the relevant scheduled rate to be paid which shall not be greater than num .
in situ air voids and characteristic in situ air voids shall be reported for each lot .
percentage in situ air voids is defined as the ratio of in situ air voids to the maximum density of asphalt .
percentage in situ air voids represents the air voids of the compacted asphalt as placed onsite and shall be determined as follows in situ air voids maximum density field bulk density x num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth maximum density the characteristic value of in situ air voids is the calculated value of x nums for six tests per lot wherex and s are the mean and standard deviation of the individual in situ air void test values for the lot respectively .
c acceptance of compaction on a procedural basis acceptance of work as far as compaction is concerned shall be based on the adoption of approved placing procedures and a density test check plan that provides for a minimum test frequency of num of relevant lots to be tested .
the test check plan shall provide for additional testing to demonstrate correction of nonconformance .
placing procedures shall be in accordance with as num hot mix asphalt .
num surface finish and conformity with drawings a general for all asphalt works the following requirements shall apply for conformance with location shape alignment and width .
i surface finish the finished surface of asphalt wearing course shall be of uniform appearance free of dragged areas cracks open textured patches and roller marks .
ii kerb and channel where asphalt is placed against kerb and channel the surface at the edge of the wearing course shall be either flush with or not more than num mm above the lip of the channel .
iii shape no point on the finished surface of the wearing course shall lie more than num mm below a num m straight edge laid either parallel to the centreline of the pavement or except on crowned sections at right angles to the centreline .
for intermediate and base course layers the distance below the straight edge shall not exceed num mm and num mm respectively .
iv alignment where asphalt pavement is not placed against a concrete edging the edge of asphalt layers shall not be more than num mm inside nor more than num mm outside the designed offset from centreline or design line .
within these tolerances the rate of change of offset of the edge of layer shall not be greater than num mm in num m. v width where asphalt pavement is not placed against a concrete edging the width of asphalt layers shall not be less than the design or specified width of layer by more than num mm or greater than the design or specified width by more than num mm .
the average width over any num m shall not be less than the design or specified width .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth b conformity with drawings for new pavements and major pavement rehabilitation projects for pavement works where design drawings show the finished surface level and thickness of each pavement course the surface level of each asphalt course shall be measured in accordance with the requirements of section num .
every test lot shall meet either a scale a b or c requirement as specified in clause num .
unless otherwise specified in clause numf the maximum lot size for measurement and assessment of surface level shall be num m .
i scale a and b surface level requirements each level measurement shall be taken at random locations over the area of the lot in accordance with the relevant test method and the number of measurements taken within each lot shall not be less than the number specified in table num .
the mean surface level and the variation in surface level for the base intermediate and wearing courses within each lot shall meet the requirements of table num .
table num minimum number of level measurements per lot scale of surface level measurement minimum number of measurements per lot scale a num scale b num table num average surface level tolerances for the subbase and pavement courses scale of surface level measurement granular or cement treated subbase asphalt layers x range mm max .
s mm x range mm max .
s mm scale a num to num num num num scale b num to num num num num notes on table num x is the mean value of all level readings taken in the lot a negative value designates a measured departure below the design level and positive value designates a surface level above the design level s is the standard deviation of all level readings taken in the lot .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth for scale a and scale b level requirements the superintendent may agree to accept a lot which does not conform with the limits of table num at a reduced payment in accordance with table num .
the value of the lot of work shall be calculated from the unit rates for pavement construction as specified in clause numc .
table num payment deduction for surface level variation payment reduction mean x outside the specified limit up to a maximum of num of the limit .
num plus num reduction for each num mm the mean value extends outside the tabulated limit standard deviation s exceeding the specified limit up to a maximum of num of the limit .
num plus num reduction for each num mm the standard deviation extends outside the tabulated limit note to table num if both x and s vary by more than the specified limit the payment reduction shall be the sum of the payment reductions for both x and s. ii scale c surface level and thickness requirements surface level and thickness measurements shall be taken in accordance with the procedure specified in section num .
the level of the top of each asphalt course shall not differ from the specified level by more than num mm for intermediate and base courses and num mm for wearing course .
where a uniform thickness of new asphalt pavement construction is specified the mean thickness of a lot of asphalt shall be not less than the combined thickness of all asphalt courses specified in clause num or shown on the drawings .
for the purpose of this clause the maximum lot size shall be not more than num mnum of pavement area .
c asphalt overlays where a minimum average or nominal thickness of overlay is specified and no existing pavement or finished levels are available the average thickness of the overlay shall be calculated by t m x num d x a where t is the thickness of overlay in millimetres a is the area of the job in square metres d is the mean field density of placed asphalt in tonnesmnum .
m is the mass of asphalt used in tonnes the average thickness of the overlay shall not be less than the specified thickness .
num schedules of details department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth a asphalt requirements clause num course layer nominal size of asphalt mm type of asphalt thickness of layer mm wearing and regulation open graded section num wearing regulation intermediate intermediate num intermediate num intermediate num base combined thickness of asphalt pavement less the open graded asphalt wearing course layer b scales compaction and levelthickness control clause num road name location scale for level thickness control c basis for determining the value of the lot to be used for price deduction for departure from specified surface level and density requirements clauses num and num .
location layer unit price mnum d schedule of manhole and valve covers to be raised or lowered to the new finished level prior to asphalt overlay department of state growth location or chainage direction or carriageway lane cover type manhole or valve e polymer modified binder if different to class anume clauses numa and b strikethrough if default class anume is to be used the class of pmb required in the course shall be grade .
f maximum size of test lots if different to num mnum clause numc strikethrough if the maximum lot size is to be num mnum the maximum size of test lot for assessment of compaction under clause num and if applicable compliance drawings under clause num shall be mnum .
g paving in echelon clause nume two pavers in echelon shall be used on the through carriageways from to .
vicroads section num sprayed bituminous surfacings guide notes for the use of the standard specification this section is used for sprayed bituminous surfacing treatments including priming primersealing and sealing of road pavements .
this section may be used for a separate sprayed bituminous surfacing contract or may be included in a construction contract where sprayed bituminous surfacing is only part of the work .
a checklist has been prepared to help contract administrators andor surveillance officers make a determination on the release of the hp under clause num contractor and superintendent agree that the pavement surface is fit and ready for surfacing .
refer to checklist for the construction and preparation of granular pavements available under other templates checklists located within the vicroads microsoft word procurement services drop down menu .
summary of action to be taken in preparation of specifications involving sprayed bituminous surfacing work general the following steps should be followed in preparing a contract specification for sprayed sealing num .
obtain or determine the twoway aadt and percentage equivalent heavy vehicles ehv for all roads to be sealed .
num .
for each job item halve the twoway aadt to determine the directional aadt then apportion the directional aadt to each traffic lane in the same direction .
num .
inspect each site and select the treatment type and aggregate size having regard to the condition of the existing surface the traffic volume location and environment .
poorly selected treatments will markedly reduce the success rate of the treatment and specialist advice should be sought where necessary to assist in selection of an appropriate treatment .
num .
mark out the limits of work at each job site .
num .
measure up and calculate the area of each job element that has either a different traffic volume or requires different treatment .
num .
determine the default rates of application for each job element based on past history or by using tables enum enum and enum as a guide .
num .
fill out information in tables num and num as per guide notes provided for clause num below .
num .
insert and delete special clauses in the contract specific clauses section of the specification shell document .
standard sections required crossreferences are made to the following sections which may also be required to be included in the specification documents section num referenced documents for standard specifications for roadworks and bridgeworks section num source rock for the production of crushed rock and aggregates section num aggregate for sprayed bituminous surfacing section num sands for sprayed bituminous surfacing .
it is quite common to include the initial linemarking for new works or reinstatement of linemarking for resurfacing works as part of a sealing and line marking contract in which case the following sections should also be included section num fixing raised pavement markers section num pavement markings section num hot melt bitumen adhesive for raised pavement marker installation .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads standard sections normally required in a sprayed bituminous surfacing contract are section num bituminous surfacing and cold planing general section num traffic management section num occupational health and safety management section num examination and testing or materials and work roadworks section num environmental management minor section num provision for adjustment of contract sum shell document shell document cnum is used for sprayed sealing contracts .
insertions table num schedule of details .
all job items to be undertaken as part of the contract need to be inserted into this table .
table num stacksite locations .
all stacksites to be used under the contract need to be inserted into this table .
table num.anum special processes .
standard section num covers the quality management system requirements and there are a number of special processes that should be listed to ensure that the contractor has appropriate processes in place should problems occur .
the following special processes should be included in this table treatment of emulsified seals due to rain treatment of bleedingslickfatty seals rectification of urgent defects within specified timeframe measurement of actual aggregate application rate .
contract specific clauses the contract shell document contains certain standardised contract specific clauses as listed below .
contract specific clauses are used for additional requirements that are not adequately covered in the shell document or the standard sections .
standardised contract specific clauses must be carefully reviewed to delete any that do not apply .
further additional contract specific clauses may also be added to the relevant section as noted below .
section num contract specific clauses general clauses of a general nature that may be inserted in section num include standard contract specific clauses location and detail scope of works work by others cooperation with others on site possession of site restrictions and delays to traffic goods and service tax payment of sub contractors num hour contact details notification of abutting land owners of impending work damage to vehicles and complaints may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads other contract specific clauses application of the defects liability period conditions for sealing during fire danger period program and sequence of works separable parts of the works separate completion dates for areas of different climate or for heavily trafficked roads and light trafficked roads timing of asphalt regulation and works to be performed by others under a separate contract permitted traffic detour routes restrictions to operations undertaken at stack sites and site restoration that is not adequately covered in table num matters to be addressed in the environmental management plan waiting time .
if it is proposed to include a schedule items for waiting time to cover situations where the contractor is prevented from working within the period specified in the contract for any reason the following special clause should be considered where the contractor is directed to wait or cease work for reasons such as abnormal traffic congestion or if the job not ready for sealing as specified the contractor shall be allowed waiting time for all time lost within the specified hours of possession of site specified in clause num.cnumb to the nearest half hour paid at the relevant scheduled rates .
section num contract specific clauses for sprayed sealing activities clauses of a technical nature not adequately covered in section num that may be inserted in this section include accuracy of areas refer notes to clause num use of flux oil refer notes to clause numg gritting repair of poor workmanship and minor defects sampling of binders supplied .
samples should be taken prior to addition of cutter adhesion agent or other additives .
the proportions of any blended products and additives as well as binder temperature and digestion time must be clearly stated on the label .
samples must be suitably labelled .
a typical example showing the information required is attached to these notes .
note arrangements have been made for the arrb group to receive these samples for storage free of cost and to undertake future testing at vicroads cost should it become necessary due to defects becoming apparent in a seal or some other reason .
samples should be labelled see overleaf and forwarded to technical consulting who will then forward them on to arrb .
special proprietary or experimental treatments not specifically covered under section num details of any special primers primerbinders binders not covered by the specification details of the location and type of bitumen emulsion required if emulsion is preferred over cutback bitumen binders for certain areas or jobs use of specialised plant when it is considered that the methods of assessment provided by the specification are inadequate to ensure a satisfactory outcome e.g .
use of an aggregate loader to pre screen and precoat aggregate prior to use particularly for seals carried out on high trafficked roads .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads typical binder sample label contract number contract item number sample number of date and time of sampling ______________ at _______ a.m. p.m. road and location kms binder type and source and manufacturer other comments general information basic sprayed seal treatment types sprayed sealing comprises three basic treatment types as follows a priming priming is a type of initial treatment carried out on a dry pavement as part of an initial treatment prime and seal or in some cases beneath asphalt surfacing usually where the asphalt surfacing is less than num mm in thickness .
initial treatments constructed as a prime and seal are generally regarded as a superior treatment and more economical than primersealfinal seal treatments .
priming however is generally restricted to the months of october to april and to roads constructed clear of traffic although it can be used in a half width sequence for roads with less than num vehicles per day .
a prime normally has no cover aggregate but may be gritted or sanded after about num hours in locations where traffic detours are not possible or to allow access to properties .
priming is also used on concrete surfaces prior to sealing or placing of asphalt surfacing .
a prime consists of a light grade of cut back bitumen with a low viscosity which enables it to penetrate the surface of most dry pavements and if applied at the correct rate of application it will leave a thin skin of bitumen on the pavement surface .
the prime tends to bind the fine particles of pavement together to form a clean dust free surface promoting a strong bond between the pavement and the following seal or asphalt surfacing .
the primed surface can be lightly trafficked for one to two weeks prior to sealing if required .
in warm dry conditions a prime can cure in num hours but can take up to a week in cooler conditions .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads bitumen emulsion may be used as an alternative to cutback bitumen and is particularly suited to applications where the subsequent seal is required to be placed within a short period of time or where works need to be undertaken in less favourable weather conditions .
b primersealing a primerseal is an initial treatment used to provide a temporary seal over new construction .
primersealing is used in preference to priming at sites constructed under traffic or where priming is not practicable due to damp cold conditions .
a final seal must be applied to the primerseal within num to num years .
a primerbinder consists of a medium grade of cut back bitumen having a viscosity low enough to provide some penetration of the granular pavement surface but high enough to sufficiently wet and retain a small to medium sized aggregate .
primerseals constructed with cutback bitumen should not be resealed until after a reasonable period of curing typically a minimum of num to num years as any residual volatile oil can affect the subsequent treatment .
primerseals typically achieve significantly less penetration when compared to primes and generally rely predominantly on adhesion to the pavement hence the condition of the surface prior to sealing is critical .
bitumen emulsion may be used as an alternative to cutback bitumen and is particularly suited to applications where the final seal or asphalt surfacing is required to be placed within a short period of time because it does not contain any cutter .
c sealing sealing is the application of binder and aggregate to a primed or primersealed surface initial treatment seal or final seal or to an existing sealed surface reseal .
a seal binder may comprise either cut back bitumen or bitumen emulsions which can be modified to enhance performance .
the most common aggregate sizes used are num num or num with the occasional use of size num in conjunction with sizes num or num as part of a double application treatment .
traditionally the vast majority of sealing and resealing works are undertaken with cut back bitumen however bitumen emulsions can be used as an alternative but have different handling and placement characteristics .
additional notes on selection of aggregate size and sprayed seal type are provided below .
selection of aggregate size a sealing the choice of aggregate size for sealing can be an important factor in the success or otherwise of a seal .
if the surface to be resealed is highly textured a size num or num aggregate is normally used whereas if the surface has low surface texture a size num or num aggregate may be appropriate .
it is generally not economical to use an aggregate larger than size num for roads with less than num vpd and for sealed shoulders .
a size num aggregate or larger should not be used in urban areas where increased traffic noise could be a problem .
a number of austroads guides are also available to assist in treatment selection .
b primersealing the choice of aggregate size for primersealing is usually related to traffic volume and expected life .
as a general guide a size num primerseal is suitable for roads with a traffic volume of generally less than num vpd whereas a size num primerseal is suitable for roads with more than num vpd .
above num vpd more robust primerseal may be required including doubledouble applications andor the use of polymer modified binders .
a primerseal has an average life of between one and two years although longer may be achievable from more robust primerseal treatments may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads choice of seal type conventional seal c a conventional seal using class num bitumen binder should generally provide a satisfactory result for sound pavements without steep grades sharp curves and large numbers of truck turning movements and where the annual average daily traffic aadt over a num hour period does not exceed around num vpd .
high stress seal hss hss seals can be divided up into two types hssnum and hssnum .
hssnum is used to designate a singlesingle seal while a hssnum designates a doubledouble seal .
both types of hss are used for improved aggregate retention in high stress areas such as areas of turning traffic steep grades sharp curves and high speed roads .
hssnum seals are suitable for roads up to num vpdlane but can also provide good performance on straight or undulating roads with up to num vpdlane with low proportions of commercial vehicles num .
hssnum seals are more appropriate for roads with higher traffic volumes and more stressed locations such as steeper grades smaller radius curves and higher proportions of commercial vehicles .
both hssnum and hssnum use a lightly modified polymer modified binder pmb such as class snume class snume or cnum bitumen modified in the field with num parts crumb rubber per num parts of bitumen .
a slightly higher rate of application is used for an hss as consistency of the modified binder is greater than a conventional binder .
in the case of a hssnum the default practice is to use the same modified binder in both applications but in some cases where a doubledouble seal is necessary but lesser levels of performance are required conventional binders can also be used for the second binder application .
an hss usually produces a more consistent surface than conventional seals for surfaces with variable surface texture .
similar spraying practices are used for an hss as for a conventional seal .
extreme stress seal xss xss seals are a variation to the hssnum seals designed to cope with higher stress situations imposed by parameters such as heavy traffic volumes num vpdlane high proportions of commercial vehicles steep grades and tight radius curves .
such treatments are generally appropriate for major freeways and highways heavily trafficked arterial roads as well as lesser roads in mountainous areas where high shear loading may be present and a sprayed seal treatment is considered appropriate .
these are always placed as a doubledouble application most commonly with a num mm aggregate combination .
a highly modified binder such as snume snumr or snumrf is used in both binder applications .
like hss seals these usually produce a more consistent surface than conventional seals for surfaces with variable texture .
strain alleviating membrane sam sam seals are used where there is a need for enhanced performance waterproofing properties or to delay the propagation of cracks on moderately cracked pavements .
sam seals incorporate about num of elastomeric pmb or about num parts of crumbed rubber per num parts of bitumen equivalent to num .
typical binder classes include snumr snume and snumrf .
the increased consistency and elasticity of the binder allow heavier binder application rates and provide greater resistance to reflective cracking .
snume or snume binder classes can also be used as binders in sam applications although they offer a lower level of modification and should be reserved for lesser cracked pavements .
a minimum binder application rate of num lmnum is deemed necessary for a sam treatment to be effective .
strain alleviating membrane interlayer sami sami treatments are used as an interlayer under asphalt surfacing to provide increased waterproofing andor resistance to reflective cracking when placed over a cracked pavement .
a sami treatment used in conjunction with a thin or ultrathin asphalt surfacing is sometimes referred to as a combination or composite surfacing treatment .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads a sami comprises a heavy application of a very highly modified binder such as snume or snumrf with a very light cover of size num aggregate to allow the passage of traffic until the asphalt surfacing is placed .
sami treatments are generally not trafficked hence use a lighter application of aggregate relative to other seals to allow for construction traffic .
in some circumstances a sami may need to be trafficked for a short period of time in which case it should be designed to be closer to a sam treatment .
it is important that there is no loose aggregate remaining on the surface at the time of asphalt placement to ensure a strong bond between the sami and the asphalt surfacing .
a minimum binder application rate of num lmnum is deemed necessary for a sami treatment to be effective .
geotextile reinforced seal grs a grs is a seal incorporating a nonwoven needle punched paving fabric to reinforce the seal and allow a significantly higher rate of binder application an additional num lm of binder is soaked up by the fabric .
a grs is normally used to waterproof and extend pavement life of severely cracked pavements or as a sami treatment under a thin asphalt surfacing .
double application seals are preferred to single application seals as they provide a more robust treatment with better resistance to turning traffic and are less prone to stripping .
aggregate sizes for double application seals are commonly num .
a grs can be also used as a sami treatment as an alternative to a highly modified binder over severely cracked pavements and will provide a higher level of resistance to cracking .
in this circumstance they are placed with a single layer of aggregate usually a size num mm to allow for construction traffic .
the binder used is usually cnum bitumen although bitumen emulsions and pmbs may be used for specific purposes and need to be specified in table num .
pmbs however should not be used in the bond coat .
fibre reinforced seal frs an frs is a proprietary sprayed sealing treatment consisting of a layer of glass fibre strands sandwiched between two coats of a polymer modified bituminous emulsion .
the fibres are applied randomly to form a mat that resists the onset of reflective cracking .
finally a layer of aggregate is spread and rolled in the conventional manner .
an frs is also used for severely cracked pavements in a similar manner to a sam seal or grs .
frs is reported to be superior to a sam seal but less so than a grs .
an frs is more suitable than grs for sharp curves where placement of the geotextile fabric is likely to develop kinks and creases .
this specification does not specifically cover frs product requirements but the acceptance criteria specified in clause num still apply .
similarly an frs can also be used as an alternative to a geotextile as a sami treatment .
surface enrichment se an se is a low cost seal treatment for highly textured surfaces with little or no traffic .
the process involves the spraying of a light application of cut back bitumen or bitumen emulsion to the surface without application of additional aggregate .
an se is particularly suited to sealed shoulders that can be closed to traffic for num or num days .
it is most important that an se is applied in good weather conditions to ensure that it cures rapidly and minimise the risk of bituminous material washing off after heavy rain and damaging the environment .
double application treatments for high stress areas double application doubledouble seal treatments provide a stronger surfacing capable of withstanding abrasive forces caused by turning and braking traffic .
a double application seal usually consists of a size num first coat followed by a size num top coat .
other combinations such as num or num can be considered for special applications but should not be used without prior consultation with vicroads technical consulting .
the size of aggregate used for the second application should not be more than half the nominal size of aggregate used for the first application .
doubledouble application treatments are commonly used for initial treatments on rural freeways or in grs applications .
a slightly different design process applies to double application seals where the second application is applied immediately compared to double application seals where the second application is delayed until after a period of trafficking .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads a further form of double application seal is that of a singledouble .
it involves a single application of binder with two applications of aggregate .
the first application of larger size aggregate is followed by a second application of aggregate about half the size of the first .
this process is often termed racking in where the fine aggregate penetrates into voids between the coarse aggregate particles locking the coarse aggregate particles in place .
the procedure is also often used for moderately trafficked intersections and at private entrances with large heavy vehicles .
programming of sealing works ensuring sprayed bituminous surfacing works are undertaken at an appropriate time of year is a key factor in the long term success of treatments .
generally the more elaborate treatments i.e .
use of highly modified binders or geotextiles the greater risk of failure if they are applied in less favourable conditions .
as such these types of treatments should be prioritised for the best weather conditions i.e .
typically december to february particularly on high risk or high profile sites .
guidance as to the suggested sealing periods for various treatments is provided below .
however some regions with areas in the northern parts of the state which are generally warmer for longer may be able to further extend when their treatments are undertaken .
similarly some of the alpine and southern cooler areas of the state such as the otway ranges for example may need to shorten the periods when more complex treatments can be undertaken .
local knowledge and judgement should also be used .
month suggested good practice july preparation works august preparation works september preparation works and size num seals at low risk sites october size num and num seals november size num num num num seals december size num num num num hss sam grs january size num num num num hss sam grs february size num num num num hss sam grs march size num num num num hss seals april size num and num seals at low risk sites may preparation works and size num seals at low risk sites june preparation works primes and primerseals it is preferable to place these types of treatments in the warmer weather conditions but sometimes it is unavoidable or impractical to delay placing primes or primerseals due to various reasons .
with careful treatment selection and application initial treatments can generally be placed in less favourable conditions particularly with the use of emulsions as long as all other specification requirements can be met e.g .
pavement dryback .
guidance as to the appropriate treatment selection and timeframes for placement on pavements constructed clear of traffic is provided in vicroads code of practice rcnum code of practice for selection and design of pavements and surfacings appendix c table cnum .
in some cases it may be necessary to undertake bituminous surfacing work outside the optimum conditions .
in some cases this can still achieve a satisfactory outcome with careful treatment selection and planning however advice should be sought from vicroads technical consulting .
specifying restrictions on work consideration needs to be given to the potential programming inefficiencies that may result from restrictions which may increase the costs of sealing works .
this should however be weighed up against the reduced risks for vicroads and contractors of treatments failing and requiring costly rework of defects .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads restrictions on works in specific locations due to special events tourist holiday periods etc .
may also need to be considered .
care needs to be taken to not be over prescriptive and ensure that works can still be reasonably and economically programmed .
restrictions for programming works can be done in a number of ways depending on the extent of works that need to be restricted .
restrictions can be included in the comments column of table num and is most suited to where restrictions need to be applied only a small number of job items .
separable portions of contracts can be set up in section num table num.cnum .
this approach is more suited to where there are a reasonably large number of job items in geographical area where restrictions need to be applied so that works are completed within a certain timeframe or before a certain date .
contract specific clauses can be used to restrict when particular treatments or works in specific areas can be undertaken .
attachment a the job completion report includes a column for information to be provided on pretreatment work .
this information is required as specified in the measurement and payment section refer to contract specific clause num in shell cnum .
section num contract specific clauses for reinstatement of pavement markings standard contract specific clauses that are not appropriate should be deleted .
section num contract specific clauses for measurement and payment clauses relating to measurement and payment that may be inserted in this section include clauses clearly identifying the work elements where separate payment is made and those where no separate payment will be made how binder rates of application are to be measured for both full width application and areas of pre treatment measurement and payment of areas sprayed calculation of price adjustments for variation in binder rates of application rate from the specified default rates determination and payment of cpi price adjustments in addition to information covered in section num payments to contractors .
further information further information may be found in the following publications austroads guide to pavement technology part f bituminous binders austroads guide to pavement technology part k seals austroads update of the austroads seal design method num ap tnum austroads update of doubledouble design for austroads seal design method num aptnum austroads guide to the selection and use of bitumen emulsions num austroads guide to the selection and use of polymer modified binders and multigrade bitumen aptnum austroads specification framework for polymer modified binders and multigrade bitumens agpttnum austroads geotextile reinforced seals aptnum austroads fibre reinforced seals aptnum vicroads bituminous surfacing manual technical bulletin num road management act num code of practice for operational responsibility for public roads austroads australian asphalt paving association work tips available at www.aapa.asn.au .
vicroads technical consulting manual of technical notes available at www.vicroads.vic.gov.au may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads notes to specification clauses num commencement of work a hold point applies to commencement of work being subject to agreement between the contractor and the superintendent that the road surface is fit and ready for surfacing .
this particularly applies to initial treatments where excessively damp or poorly prepared unbound pavements can be detrimental to the performance of priming and primersealing .
it can also refer to adequacy of pretreatment for resealing .
cold wet weather is a further factor that can increase the risk of failure typically stripping of sprayed seal treatments particularly special treatments such as strain alleviating membrane sam seals and geotextile reinforced seals grs .
generally sprayed sealing work should be programmed to be undertaken in the warmer months october to may to minimise the risks associated with cold damp conditions .
num limits of work nearly all vicroads sealing contracts are lump sum contracts that require the limits of work to be marked on the main carriageways and at side roads .
for existing sealed pavements this is normally done using hand sprayed painted arrows on the pavement .
for new pavements not yet constructed drawings need to be available in sufficient detail to enable the areas of various elements of the job to be accurately determined to enable the schedule of details clause num to be completed .
unless otherwise specified scheduled areas of work are normally required to be measured and calculated to an accuracy of num or of the actual area sprayed otherwise a contract variation to the lump sum is applicable .
where the area of work can not be marked out to an accuracy of num the relevant level of accuracy should be included in a contract specific clause .
however the appropriate level of accuracy is usually readily calculated as part of the vicroads process of marking out the limits of work .
reference should be made to the road management act num code of practice for operational responsibility for public roads for assistance in defining the job limits for reseals that extend on to side streets and intersecting roads .
num inclusion and deletion of job items when preparing the contract schedule it is important not to include too many uncertain jobs that may be removed from the contract by way of variation as reductions in the total value of the contract by more than num may lead to a claim for additional payment .
if there is uncertainty about the number of jobs that may be deducted from the contract consideration could be given to developing a list of unscheduled jobs that may be added to the contract to offset the value of deductions .
num calibration of bitumen sprayers all bitumen sprayers must have a current calibration certificate valid for num months from the date of testing which should be located within the vehicle .
certificates of calibration are acceptable from any testing organisation suitably qualified to undertake the relevant tests including test facilities located in other states of australia .
a listing of current calibrated sprayers is maintained on the australian asphalt pavement association aapa website www.aapa.asn.au under the heading of technical .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads num bituminous materials most of the bituminous and other materials required for sprayed sealing are manufactured to meet an australian standard or austroads specification framework .
however if new or alternative products are offered or tendered the advice of vicroads technical consulting should be obtained .
generally the contractor is required to provide evidence of satisfactory field performance of alternative products for a period of at least three years although new and untried products may also be allowed on a trial basis under certain conditions .
a adhesion agent adhesion agent is chemical agent that is added to either the binder or aggregate precoating material to improve the adhesion of bitumen to aggregate .
adhesion agent is usually more effective if added to the aggregate precoating material particularly if aggregate is being field precoated as part of the aggregate screening and loading operation .
for wet aggregates including wet plant precoated aggregate adhesion agent is also added to the binder .
advice should be provided by the manufacturers in regard to the concentration of adhesion agent required to be added the binder or precoating material which must be supported by evidence of satisfactory field performance .
this evidence should include results of testing for effectiveness of adhesion of binder on a range of aggregate types using vicroads test method num. b aggregate precoating material guidance on selection of aggregate precoating material is provided in the notes to clause numb .
c bitumen class num bitumen complying with as num is used for all conventional seals .
conventional seals make up the large majority of seals on sound pavements for roads with relatively low traffic and low stress locations .
d bitumen emulsion bitumen emulsion comprises around num to num bitumen in an aqueous solution of bitumen colloids water and a small volume of emulsifier .
basic grades comply with as num .
cationic rapid setting crs emulsion is generally preferred for sealing work .
various proprietary grades of emulsion are also available offering benefits in terms of higher viscosity for retention of larger aggregate sizes or the incorporation of polymer modified binders for enhanced performance .
bitumen emulsion seals can be up to num more costly than conventional cut back bitumen seals but may be considered for a range of applications including a light primer seal prior to an asphalt surfacing in lieu of a cutback bitumen prime or primerseal essential where asphalt is to be placed within num months primes and primer seals on new works a second application of a two application primerseal an emergency reseal during cool weather to prevent further deterioration of a failing seal or primerseal for num mm and num mm reseals particularly in cooler months where conventional cnum bitumen seals would require an excessive amount of cutting oil and an increased risk of bleeding or flushing problems the following summer .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads e cutback bitumen cutback bitumen used for sealing is usually field produced by the addition of cutter cutting oil at the site immediately prior to sealing .
cutter is used to temporarily reduce the viscosity of a binder in cooler weather to achieve an even distribution of binder across the pavement and more importantly to achieve initial adhesion to and proper embedment of aggregate into the binder .
the proportion of cutter is dependent on the specific pavement temperature and ambient conditions .
austroads ap tnum sprayed seal cutting practice and the austroadsaapa work tips nos .
num and num provide useful information on this subject .
cutter should not be added at a central depot as the amount is dependent on temperature conditions at the time of day the spraying of each sprayer load commences .
excessive cutter can lead to bleeding or flushing of the completed seal during hot weather whereas insufficient cutter can result poor distribution of binder to the pavement and poor initial aggregate adhesion .
cutback bitumen used for priming and primersealing may be field produced on the day but is mostly produced in a central location to either as num standard grades or to a proprietary specification proprietary grades .
proprietary grades may differ slightly from standard grades but may be accepted on the basis of previous demonstrated satisfactory performance .
f cutter cutting oil the most common type of cutter used is high flash point hfp cutter which has been specifically developed for sprayed sealing work .
hfp cutters are less costly and are safer to transport and handle than lower flash point cutters such as aviation fuel or normal kerosene .
there are numerous proprietary grades of cutting oil available .
g flux oil not to be used the role of flux oil is to achieve a longer term softening of the binder for lightly trafficked roads aadt num vehicles per lane to assist in aggregate embedment over a longer period and to delay the onset of age hardening of the bitumen binder .
as num provides for two grades of flux oil .
num .
light flux oil distillate or distillate based product num .
heavy flux oil heavy fuel oil in practice it has been found that there is little difference in the long term softening effects of light flux oils such as distillate and that of hfp cutter .
recent practice therefore has been to use a further num or num parts cutter for low trafficked roads in addition to requirements for pavement temperature in place of flux oil .
if flux oil is required in preference to additional cutter it must be specified in the other requirements column of table num or by use of a special clause .
table a below should also be inserted into the special clause .
note that clause numg provides for the use of heavy flux oil only .
table a addition of flux oil traffic volume aadtlane volume of flux oil parts num of binder num num parts num num num parts num nil may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads h geotextile fabric two grades of fabric are available .
the most commonly used fabric for general applications has a minimum mass of num gmnum but a num gmnum fabric is available for special applications such as large aggregate sizes greater than num mm or for use as an initial treatment on unbound granular pavements .
geotextile fabrics are manufactured from polyester or polypropylene .
polyester fabric is preferred for use with hot binders as it has a much higher melting point .
polypropylene fabric is generally restricted to bitumen emulsion treatments .
the manufacturer is required to provide advice on the absorption characteristics of the fabric so that an appropriate allowance can be made in the design procedure .
normally geotextile fabrics have a binder absorption rate ranging from num to num litresmnum .
geotextile fabrics are usually available from the manufacturer in a standard widths of up to num m by up to num m long but can also be ordered in custom widths and lengths if a nonstandard size are required .
it is preferable to not trim widths on site and the correct widths for the job should be ordered from the manufacturer .
it is important for rolls of geotextile fabric to be stored in a dry location and out of direct sunlight .
i polymer modified binder pmb clause numi provides nominated classes of pmb for various treatments .
if a different or particular class pmb is required it must be specified in the other requirements column of table num .
the austroads specification framework for polymer modified binders and multigrade bitumens agpttnum lists a wide range of pmb classes it is not practical for the manufacturers to make all classes of pmb available at all times .
the default grades are generally regarded as the most commonly used pmbs with the crumb rubber classes being the most common .
if another type of pmb is required other than one of the default grades pmb suppliers should be contacted to ensure that it can be made available in sufficient quantities .
some pmbs may not meet all the specified requirements of agpttnum and are regarded as unclassified many of which are often proprietary products .
if an unclassified pmb is proposed for use evidence is required to show that it has produced seal treatments with a satisfactory history of performance over a period of at least num years .
if in doubt regarding the selection of different classes of pmbs or the use of unclassified pmbs advice should be sought from the vicroads technical consulting .
j prime the contractor is required to select a grade of prime depending on the porosity of the pavement and how tightly bound the surface is after preparation .
heavy and very heavy grades of prime are required for porous types of materials such as sandstone and limestone and for surfaces lacking in fines or natural cementation .
some types of crushed rock particularly those that are paver laid can lack sufficient fines to provide a tightly bound surface and may also require the use of a heavier grade of primer or primerbinder .
if local knowledge and experience has shown that a specific grade of prime produces the desired result it may be specified in the other requirements column of table num .
table b below provides some typical standard grades of prime that may be considered .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads table b typical standard grades of primer application generic description viscosity range at numc pas concrete pavements and bridge decks very light num num tightly bonded with good retention of fines after sweeping light num num surfaces of medium porosity medium num num moderately bonded with some loss of surface fines after brooming e.g .
paver laid pavement heavy num num porous pavements materials such as sandstone limestone and scoria .
very heavy num num k primerbinder as for selection of a prime the contractor is required to select a suitable grade of primerbinder for a primerseal based on the type porosity and condition of the pavement materials to be treated .
if local knowledge and experience has shown that a specific grade of primerbinder consistently produces as satisfactory result it may be specified in the other requirements column of table num .
table c provides some typical standard grades of primerbinder .
table c typical standard grades of primerbinder application generic description viscosity range at numc pas cold andor damp conditions .
tightly bonded or medium porosity pavements .
light medium num num warmer andor dry conditions .
porous pavements materials such as sandstone and limestone .
heavy num num various austroads documents also provide additional guidance on grades of primer for priming and primer sealing along with the relevant as num cutback bitumen amc grades .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads num aggregate a aggregate specification the size and class of aggregate are to be specified in table num .
table d below which is reproduced from the guide notes for section num provides a guide to selection of aggregate class .
further guidance on selection of aggregates is provided in the notes to section num .
table d selection of aggregate class traffic volume aadt aggregate class assigned polished stone value min more than num vehicles or more than num commercial vehicles a num or num all other traffic levels b num or num assigned psv to be obtained from department of state growth sections num and section num must be included in all specifications for sprayed sealing .
if sand aggregate is to be specified for any reason such as for covering of primer at entrances or as part of racking in procedure section num must also be included .
class a aggregate has a minimum polished stone value psv of num which is satisfactory in most heavily trafficked situations .
for high accident locations on heavily trafficked roads with an aadt in excess of num vehicleslaneday a psv of num may be specified provided that a suitable supply is available and economically feasible to transport .
if in doubt advice should be sought from vicroads technical consulting .
b aggregate precoat precoating of aggregates is used to assist in overcoming adverse effects of dust and moisture on the adhesion between aggregates and binder .
all aggregate for sealing must be precoated prior to use but precoating is not generally required for primersealing .
aggregate can be either field precoated with a distillate based precoating material as part of the aggregate loading operation or plant precoated with a very light cutback bitumen at the aggregate source prior to delivery .
plant precoating with cutback bitumen is preferred to site precoating particularly for heavy trafficked roads and for roads in high rainfall locations where aggregates becomes wet in stockpiles .
if plant precoated aggregate is required it must be specified in table num as follows yplant if plant or field applied precoated aggregate is required it must be specified in table num as follows y if precoated aggregate is not required e.g .
for primerseals it must be specified in table num as follows n may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads num use of stacksites stacksites are critical for the storage of sealing aggregates and can often also be utilised as a staging area for transferring mixing and heating binders as well as parking of plant and equipment .
generally vicroads will make nominated stacksites typically within the road reserve available for the contractor to utilise to carry out its works .
a contractor may also elect to make its own arrangements to use sites managed by councils or other authoritiesproperty owners and it is the contractors responsibility to seek approval and adhere to any associated requirements .
the management of stacksites across vicroads has varied from region to region however due to a recent incident and subsequent workcover investigation and resulting provisional improvement notice vicroads now has in place a stacksite management procedure qd num that requires annual inspection and assessment of stacksites .
this procedure also requires all contractors or relevant parties accessing stack sites under their control to have a swms in place which should be checked against a provided swms checklist .
num application of bituminous material aggregate and geotextiles a design rates of application the contractor is required to determine the design rates of application for binder and aggregate in accordance with aptnum update of the austroads sprayed seal design method and the associated num update to the doubledouble design method aptnum or later version as listed in section num .
for tendering purposes vicroads is required to insert a default rate of application of bituminous material .
if the contractors design rate of application is different to the default rate the lump sum for that job item can be adjusted in increments of num litresmnum above or below the default rate of application .
refer to section num clauses in the shell document for further information .
default rates of application for aggregate are not specified as the contractor is required to determine the rate of application to suit the aggregate size and if applicable the average least dimension ald .
it is important that the correct design rate of application of aggregate is used .
if the aggregate spread rate is too heavy it will result a surplus of loose aggregate particles .
the combination of surplus aggregate particles and heavy traffic tends to grind and break down the aggregate in the sprayed seal .
if the aggregate spread rate is too light satisfactory aggregate particle interlock may not be achieved resulting in ongoing dislodging of aggregate particles from the binder under heavy traffic stripping .
the contractor should therefore apply aggregate at or close to the design aggregate spread rate with minimum overlap to ensure a minimum of surplus aggregate and a spread rate sufficient enough to provide adequate aggregate particle interlock .
tables enum enum and enum and footnotes are provided as a guide to determination of default rates of application of bituminous materials .
table enum typical rates of application for primer pavement condition nominal rate of application tightly bonded num lmnum porous num lmnum very porous num lmnum first application num lmnum second application may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads table enum typical rates of application for cutback bitumen primerbinder aggregate size primerbinder lmnum aggregate square metres per cubic metre aadt lane less than num num num num num and num num num num num num num num num num table enum typical base rates of application for aggregate and binder for sealing nominal size estimated rate of application mnummnum traffic range aadt lane num num num num num num num num s num num num num num num num num num s num num num num num num num num num s num num num num num num num num num num d num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num notes on above tables enum enum and enum num typical rates of application for priming and primersealing are based on average grades of primer and primerbinder on average pavements .
num application rates for prime and primerbinder refer to total volume including cutter at numc .
for bitumen emulsion primerbinders the application rates should be increased by approximately num for num bitumen emulsions and num for num bitumen emulsions respectively .
num it is usually more economical to use heavier grades of prime or primerbinder on known porous pavements rather than specifying abnormally high rates of application .
num typical rates of application for primerbinder and binder do not include any allowances and should be used as a guide only for tendering purposes .
where it is not possible to inspect the site and make an assessment of the surface texture a default allowance of num lmnum may be used .
num increase base rates given in the table enum by num for hss and xss and num for sam seals .
num add num lmnum to the rates given on table enum for a geotextile reinforced seal .
b surface pretreatment the contractor is required to nominate the application rate for pretreatment as part of the design process outlined in clause numa .
to assist in this requirement vicroads has agreed with the industry to list in table num where pretreatment is most likely to be required .
every attempt should be made to comply with this agreement .
typical rates for application of bituminous binder used as pre treatment are num num lm .
failure to nominate all pretreatments however does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for determining the need for pretreatment in order to meet the specified requirements for surface texture and aggregate loss .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads surfaces requiring pretreatment typically involve wheel paths with significantly less texture depth than areas outside the wheelpaths .
the austroads sprayed seal design method requires binder application rates to be designed for the wheelpath traffic and surface condition .
this can result in insufficient binder to hold aggregate in the coarser textured areas outside the wheel paths .
a common procedure for correcting this condition is to prespray the additional binder required in the coarse textured areas and then apply the design binder application rate across the full lane or road width .
suitable techniques for prespraying are described in vicroads technical note num .
an alternative to prespraying is the use of a specially designed bitumen sprayer that can apply a variable binder distribution across the width of the spray bar .
regardless of the method of application used the contractor is required to separately determine the design binder application rate for wheelpaths and the additional binder application rate for the remainder of the spray width .
contractors using variable distribution sprayers must be able to demonstrate the means by which the variation in binder application rate is verified and show both the individual design rates and the total amount of binder sprayed for each run in the job completion report clause num .
some road surfaces may require more extensive pretreatment than a simple transverse variation in binder application rate specialised treatments include a surface voids filling seal consisting of a fine aggregate and binder applied at the base rate of application a few weeks prior to reseal solvent and grit treatments to treat flushed areas a few weeks prior to sealing techniques for solvent and grit treatment are described in vicroads technical note num dry matting involving the spreading of a thin layer of loose aggregate in flushed or partially stripped areas prior to a further application of binder and aggregate techniques for the application of dry matting technique to stripped seals are described in vicroads technical note num .
these specialised treatments should always be specified as separate schedule items .
they require particular care in application and should only be used after consultation with vicroads technical consulting .
surface pretreatment in sprayed sealing contracts is intended only for the correction of variations in surface texture and does not extend to the correction of defects such as pavement weakness potholes wide cracks surface shape or extensive areas of severe surface bleeding .
pavement repair work if required should be carried well in advance of any sealing work to allow repair work to properly cure and prove in quality by the passage of traffic .
d minimum temperature the viscosity of bitumen changes with temperature which is an important consideration for the longer term performance of sprayed seals as lower viscosities are required for initial wetting and adhesion to pavements and sealing aggregates .
in cool temperatures binders rapidly cool which reduces wetting effects and adhesion .
temperatures provided in table num are considered the minimum values based on various aapa and austroads guides however undertaking works in such conditions still have a heightened risk of poor performance relative to warmer conditions and does not absolve the contractor of the other seal performance requirements .
crumb rubber binders can be used at slightly lower temperature as the surface of the binders do not tend to skin on the surface when sprayed like many pmbs when used in lower temperatures .
this discourages adhesion of the aggregate and can lead to stripping .
the one exception to this is snume grade pmb where the manufacturer uses a pbd type polymer rather than sbs .
these have been found to still provide reasonable adhesion in cooler conditions similar to crumb rubber .
pmb specifications are nonspecific on the type of polymer i.e .
sbs or pbd and snume binders can utilise either to achieve the specification requirements of this grade of binder .
as such specialist advice from technical services should be sought if this issue arises .
it should also be noted that whilst the application of a prime treatment can be undertaken at a relatively low temperature ongoing low temperatures will result in a prime that will not set up and cure and should generally be avoided during the cooler months i.e .
late autumn and winter .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads e forward aggregate spreading the purpose of the introduction of forward spreading aggregate techniques is to provide a safer work place for the performing of sprayed sealing operations hence vicroads is facilitating and encouraging the introduction of forward moving aggregate operations from num july num. i transition period a num year transition period to allow the purchase and commissioning of appropriate plant by contractors has been introduced with a requirement for all aggregate spreading operations to be carried out in the forward direction from num july num .
to complement the introduction of this initiative the following incentives have been adopted num all sealing works delivered prior to num july num shall have a value recognition of an additional payment of num cents per square metre sealed for the use of forward aggregate spreading techniques above the tendered schedule num amount num all sealing works delivered prior to num july num shall have an early adopters incentive of an additional payment of num cents per square metre sealed for the use of forward aggregate spreading techniques above the tendered schedule num amount num for all sealing works delivered after num july num the forward aggregate spreading requirements shall be mandatory for all sprayed sealing works and any additional costs if determined by the contractor shall be included in schedule num of the tender .
it is proposed that an evaluation of the process be undertaken in cooperation with appa at the end of the first two years of operation .
ii vehicles qualifying for the incentives num items of plant that qualify for consideration under this agreement include synchronised sprayers that both spray bituminous binders and spread aggregates as part of the one forward moving operation .
these plant items are sometimes referred to as chipsealers or one step machines .
aggregate cover trucks or vehicles that spread aggregate from the front of the vehicle whilst travelling in a forward direction only .
self propelled aggregate spreaders that do not have the ability to spread aggregate whilst reversing .
note these machines only qualify whilst being loaded by front or side discharging vehicles or being loaded by rear discharge vehicles whilst stationary .
other plant items may be submitted to the superintendent for approval subject to meeting all the requirements of the specification .
num items of plant that do not qualify for consideration under this agreement include all vehicles that discharge aggregate whilst reversing .
this includes reversing tip trucks live bottom trucks that discharge aggregate while operating in reverse and any truck that reverses into a hopper of a machine that in turn spreads aggregate whilst travelling forwards e.g .
self propelled aggregate spreaders .
any tipping truck that lifts the top of the tray or any other part of the vehicle above num m from ground level .
all plant which the contractor is proposing to seek incentive payments under the forward spreading aggregate program shall be approved by the superintendent prior to the plant being used on site .
for any item of plant to be approved by the superintendent for forward spreading aggregate operations a failsafe device shall be installed on the plant to prevent the discharge of aggregate while the plant is moving in a reverse direction .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads iii combination or mixed plant operations where a combination of forward and reverse spreading or discharge plant or devices are used on the same section of road a prorata rate will be used to determine any additional payment e.g .
if one forward spreading vehicle and two reverse spreading vehicles are being used on the same section of road the additional payment shall be paid on one third of the total square metres sealed for that part of the contract provided that the forward spreading aggregate plant has undertaken a commensurate amount of aggregate spreading for the works .
the term commensurate implies that an equal or equivalent amount of operational time has been spent by the forward spreading aggregate plant contributing to the sealing operations but not necessarily the equivalent sealing area .
the term commensurate does not imply having the forward spreading aggregate plant on the site in either stand by or broken down mode .
for the contractor to be eligible for the incentive payments all items of plant contributing to the forward spreading aggregate sealing operations must be approved by the superintendent and operating .
in regard to the use of combination of forward and reverse spreading techniques on the same section of road there may be instances where for example the main runs of the sealing works are undertaken by forward aggregate spreading techniques and the wings a significantly small proportion of the works are undertaken by reverse spreading techniques .
in this case the actual area of the works sealed by each technique should be used for payment purposes .
iv multiple aggregate application seals for sprayed seals consisting of multiple application of aggregates incentive payments shall only be applicable to the area of the completed seal treatment i.e .
the application of a size num multiple coat seal shall only receive incentive payments for the application of the initial size num seal even if the second coat size num seal is undertaken on a subsequent day .
v multiple year contracts for multiple year contracts the additional payments shall only be applicable to the years as specified in clause numf regardless of when the contract was awarded .
num removal of loose aggregate on job items where removal of loose aggregate with a suction sweeper is required it must be specified in other requirements column of table num .
use of a suction sweeper is normal practice for all urban roads with kerb and channel and roads with a sealed shoulder .
aggregate may be swept on to unsealed shoulders using a rotary road broom where there is an unsealed shoulder but for job items where this is undesirable the use of a suction sweeper should be specified .
care needs to be taken to ensure that loose aggregate is not swept onto grass verges or areas that are mowed as it can become dangerous projectiles when ejected from mowers .
alternatively a contract specific clause can be used to specify circumstances where a suction sweeper is required if there are likely to be a large number of sites where this will be required .
it is also important to ensure that non trafficked areas are swept particularly in urban areas as loose stone can accumulate on traffic islands medians driveways pram ramps and footpaths which also need to be swept often by hand .
responsibility for removal of loose aggregate applies to the whole of the defects liability period and the contractor may be required to take action within num hours of notification to remove measurable loose aggregate arising for example from aggregate stripping .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads num acceptance of work a change has been made from earlier versions of section num to introduce a maximum texture depth as well as the minimum texture depths previously specified .
minimum texture depth requirements are included in the specification to meet vicroads policy for skid resistance and refer to potential loss of skid resistance through flushing and bleeding .
maximum texture depth is used as an indicator of inadequate binder application rate and potential for stripping or reduced service life from the seal .
texture depth of primerseals should be assessed after a period of trafficking num to num weeks to take into account the influence of aggregate embedment into the underlying pavement .
num records the contractor is required to prepare a job completion report for all work including pretreatments refer attachment a of section num .
if more information is required a contract specific clause should be inserted requiring additional information .
num defects liability period vicroads policy now requires a defects liability period of num years for sprayed sealing works .
num schedule of details table num schedule of details table num of the specification is a schedule of details for all sealing jobs under the contract .
it is important that all the details in this table are filled out correctly as the information forms the basis of tendering by defining the full extent of the work required .
for large contracts this can be a lengthy task and sufficient time must be allowed for completing this schedule before the planned date of advertising .
due to the amount of detail to be inserted into this table it is recommended that the table be prepared as an anum sized excel spread sheet in landscape mode when preparing tender documents .
the notes beneath table num of the specification provide summary information .
additional guidance for filling in this table is provided below .
job item no .
job item nos .
are also listed in schedule num of tender documents .
for large contracts it may be advantageous to have job items in groups based on the municipal area or road classification e.g .
m a b and c arterial roads .
in such cases the job items will require another number e.g .
item nos num num num etc .
as one group and item nos .
num num num etc .
as another group etc ..
the various job item elements such as the left lane right lane shoulder etc .
with different traffic volumes andor treatment types can be numbered num num num etc and num num num etc .
road name it is important to insert the declared name of the road rather than the local road or street name .
the first named town of the declared name is usually the start of the road or where the kilometre markers start .
for example on the birchiprainbow road the road kilometres would start from birchip and increase in the rainbow direction .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads map reference all vicroads declared arterial roads have a road reference number which can be obtained from the vicroads country directory or schedule b of the vicroads road management plan table num .
listing this number will ensure that correct road is located because the declared name may not be well known in the local area and road name signs may only display the local road name .
a further road descriptor required to be used is the linking victoria classification of m a b and c road classifications .
these classifications are shown in the current edition of vicroads country roads directory and on most road direction signs .
current vicroads maps of the declared road network also show these classifications .
maps can be obtained from the vicroads bookshop .
the map reference defines the approximate location of the job and assists greatly in job location .
the vicroads country directory map references are preferred but melway street directory map references may be used in the melbourne and geelong metropolitan areas provided that it is made clear that the reference applies to the melway street directory .
alternatively maps num to num of the vicroads country directory could be used for the metropolitan areas of melbourne and geelong .
chainage the chainage specifies the exact limits of work to the nearest num km which will not always be the actual length to be treated .
in some cases the overall job limits may be broken up into several lengths within the job limits having exactly the same treatment in all respects e.g .
an initial treatment final seal on a shoulder that is broken up by lengths of existing sealed left turn lanes and side roads .
approximate length this is the measured length of each element of the job regardless of width .
tapered areas are measured to half the length of the taper if the width is to be specified as a constant width see below .
approximate width this is the average width measured in at least three locations or at each change in width .
on most jobs the width of each element varies slightly and it is important that the average width is determined and specified .
if the width varies by more than num m the letter v should be inserted after the figure to indicate a variable width .
this particularly applies to small irregular shaped areas such as intersection splays chevrons and bus bays etc .
for irregular shaped areas it may also be useful to include a sketched drawing .
approximate area an electronic spread sheet program is a convenient way to record field measurements and automatically calculate areas .
in such cases the area is determined from the length by width or average width .
irregular shaped areas are manually determined and the area only is inserted length and width columns may be left blank .
tenderers use the calculated area for determination of the lump sum price for each item so it is important that the area is determined to an accuracy of num .
if the area varies by more than num a variation to the lump sum for the item is applicable refer measurement and payment section of the shell document .
on more complex jobs such as intersections it is common practice to produce a sketch to assist with calculation and checking of areas .
treatment type prime only po specified when the sealing contractor is only required to apply a prime to a pavement or bridge deck and the remainder of the work typically asphalt surfacing is to be completed by others .
primerseal ps a temporary initial treatment that is to be followed up by a final seal at a later time .
prime and seal ps a permanent initial treatment where a primer is first applied then followed by a seal one to two weeks later .
final seal fs an initial treatment seal that is sprayed over a previously completed primerseal or asphalt patch .
reseal r maintenance retreatment over an existing sealed surface as part of a periodic maintenance program .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads treatment description these have been fully covered in detail in the general introductory notes and are not repeated here .
single or two application enter whether the treatment is a single application s or two double applications d of binder and aggregate .
if a singledouble treatment racking in procedure is required it must be specified in the other requirements column .
aggregate size enter the nominal size of aggregate required .
if sand is to be used enter sealing sand .
minimum aggregate class enter the class of aggregate a b or c to be used see notes to clause num .
class a is a premium quality aggregate for high traffic roads .
it should not be specified on roads were a class b or c would suffice in order to conserve the higher quality aggregates where they are most needed .
annual average daily traffic aadt the aadt is the total amount of traffic travelling along a length of road in both directions in an average num hour day .
the vicroads annual traffic statistics usually provide separate traffic counts in each direction so the aadt in each direction must be added together to determine the two way aadt for the road .
some traffic counts particularly those provided by municipalities are provided as a two way aadt .
it is important to establish whether the count is for both directions or a single direction .
if only a num hour traffic count is given the aadt can be approximated by multiplying the num hour count by a factor of num unless better information is available .
percentage of equivalent heavy vehicles the vicroads traffic statistics usually provide the number and percentage of heavy vehicles in each direction for various sections of road .
the average percentage of heavy vehicles for the road can be obtained by calculating the mean of the percentage of heavy vehicles in each direction from the vicroads traffic statistics .
the percentage of equivalent heavy vehicles ehv is determined using the procedure described in the austroads sprayed seal design method aptnum which applies an additional factor to very heavy vehicles such as bdoubles and road trains austroads class num and above .
aadtlane this is the traffic volume per traffic lane or other crosssectional elements such as turn lanes bus bays and shoulders etc that is used to determine the design rate of application for binder or primerbinder in the case of a primerseal .
the aadt for each traffic lane is determined as half the two way aadt for the section of road apportioned between each of the traffic lanes .
the apportioning of the volume of traffic using each lane or crosssectional element varies and depends on the steepness of the grade the total traffic volume and the number of heavy vehicles using the route .
if possible field observation of traffic behaviour should be undertaken to assess the split in volume between traffic lanes .
if there is no other information such as actual traffic lane counts the austroads seal design guide provides guidance on traffic splits between lanes .
plant precoating of aggregate with bitumen specify whether aggregate is to be supplied as plant precoated with bitumen based precoat yplant or field precoated with distillate based precoat y or not precoated n e.g .
for primerseals .
plant precoated aggregate with bitumen based precoat should be considered for all urban roads rural roads with an aadt in excess of num vpd and for major intersections .
plant precoating should also be considered for all roads to be sealed in late autumn or winter months where aggregate is likely to wet up in stockpile .
may num num guide notes page num of num vicroads default rates of application default rate of application may be based on previous experience or guidance given in notes to clause num .
pretreatment guidance to the specification of pretreatment y or n is provided in the notes to clause numb .
other requirements other requirements may include specific class of pmb notes to clause numi aggregate psv num notes to clause num and clause numd use of suction sweeper notes to clause num gritting of trafficked areas of prime only po treatments notification to abutting landowners and placement of variable message boards or other additional advisory signs .
table num stacksite locations stack site number insert the designated stack site number .
some regions have erected signs at each stack site with the number shown .
any restrictions for a particular site should also be noted .
map reference insert the map reference from vicroads country directory preferred or melway street directory .
location and general description insert the location using local road name and km or distance from the nearest side road .
additional restrictions on use and cleaning up of stack sites insert any restrictions on use of stack sites and a time limit on when stack sites are to be cleaned up and surplus aggregate removed .
may num num guide notes page num of num department of state growth section num sprayed bituminous surfacings this section crossreferences sections num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for materials design and application of sprayed bituminous surfacings including primes primers and sprayed seals of various types .
num definitions adhesion agent a wetting agent designed to promote adhesion of binder or primerbinder to stone .
aggregate retention retention of aggregate particles by the binder or primerbinder under normal traffic conditions .
the degree of aggregate stripping is measured to assess aggregate retention .
forward aggregate discharge plant any item of plant or device approved by the superintendent that loads aggregate into a vehicletruck or hopper for the use in the process of forward aggregate spreading .
forward aggregate spreading plant any item of plant or device approved by the superintendent that uniformly spreads aggregate on to the road surface at a predetermined rate and width while the vehicle is travelling in a forward direction .
polymer modified binder pmb a bituminous binder with modified properties achieved by the addition of a polymer or crumb rubber .
prime an initial treatment comprising of the application of a bituminous primer to a prepared granular pavement base or concrete surface without cover aggregate .
primerseal an initial treatment comprising of the application of a bituminous primerbinder and covered with sand or aggregate to a prepared basecourse which has not been primed to provide a temporary bituminous surfacing .
residual binder the volume of bituminous binder at num c including the volume of any polymer granular rubber and flux oil but does not include the volume of any cutter water emulsifier or adhesion agent .
reverse aggregate spreading plant any item of plant or device that uniformly spreads aggregate at a predetermined rate and width while the vehicle is operating in a reverse direction e.g .
tip trucks with box spreaders attached .
sprayed seal the sprayed application of bituminous binder to a previously primed or sealed surface followed by an application of aggregate to form an allweather skid resistant road surfacing .
types of sprayed seals include conventional c where the bituminous binder is class num bitumen .
high stress seal hss where the bituminous binder is a lightly modified pmb or has ten parts of crumbed rubber added to aid aggregate retention on heavily trafficked roads .
hss seals may be applied as a singlesingle application hssnum or a doubledouble application hssnum .
department of state growth extreme stress seal xss is a doubledouble treatment where the bituminous binder is a medium to heavily modified binder to accommodate extreme stresses imposed by heavy traffic volumes and high proportions of heavy vehicles or difficult service conditions .
strain alleviating membrane sam where the bituminous binder is a heavily modified pmb or has num parts of crumbed rubber added to treat cracked pavements .
strain alleviating membrane interlayer sami where the bituminous binder is a heavily modified pmb or has num parts crumbed rubber added to inhibit cracks reflecting through to an overlying surface .
a geotextile reinforced seal grs is a type of sam or sami seal where the bituminous binder is reinforced with a geotextile fabric to treat extensively cracked pavements .
a fibreglass reinforced seal frs is a type of sam or sami seal where the bituminous binder is reinforced by the inclusion of chopped fibreglass strands to treat cracked pavements .
surface enrichment se a light application of cutback bitumen or bitumen emulsion to an existing highly textured bituminous surfacing in very low or nontrafficked areas to rejuvenate an existing sprayed seal or asphalt surface .
surface pretreatments surface pretreatments include any sprayed bitumen aggregate combination of sprayed bitumen and aggregate or other treatment approved by the superintendent .
surface texture the mean height of aggregate particles above the level of the binder as determined by the vicroads test for surface texture testing as listed in section num .
num commencement of work a periodic resurfacing and maintenance works within num weeks of the date of award of contract the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for review the sealing program for the whole of the works .
during the period of the contract the contractor shall submit by the preceding thursday a detailed program of planned sealing jobs for the following week for review by the superintendent including planned dates for each sealing job .
b construction projects the contractor shall include details of all sprayed bituminous surfacing works on the construction program .
during the period of the contract the contractor shall submit by the preceding thursday a detailed program of planned sprayed bituminous surfacing works for the following week for review by the superintendent including the planned sprayed bituminous surfacing works for each day .
on the day prior to the works being carried out the contractor shall provide written confirmation of the works that will be undertaken the following day and obtain agreement from the superintendent to any variation in the design rates of application to those provided under clause numa .
hp work shall not commence until the contractor and the superintendent have agreed that the road or pavement surface is fit and ready for surfacing no more than num hours prior to the works occurring .
num limits of work where the job items are detailed in table num the limits of work at the start and finish chainages plus the limit in any side road have been marked on the pavement surface .
the works shall include all existing tapers bell mouths at intersecting roads pavement widenings turn lanes traffic lanes and sealed shoulders .
department of state growth march num section num department of state growth the superintendent may increase or decrease the limits of work listed in schedule num .
the contractor will be notified in writing prior to works commencing of such adjustments to the limits of work for any job .
the contract sum shall be adjusted on a prorata basis using the item price tendered in the schedule num and the difference in area of the revised works .
the areas for items listed in table num are accurate to num .
num inclusion and deletion of job items the superintendent may cancel any work subject to notice of cancellation being given at least one week prior to the proposed commencement date .
the contractor will be notified in writing of such deletion and the contract sum adjusted by the price tendered in schedule num for the job items deleted .
no additional payment will be made as a result of the deletion of any job item .
however where the deletion of job items results in a contract sum reduction of more than num of the original contract sum the deletion of job items in excess of this amount will be treated as a variation in accordance with the contract .
in the event of aggregate having been delivered to a job stacksite and the job is deleted in accordance with this clause the cost of the removal of the aggregate and any loss of aggregate shall be treated as a variation in accordance with the contract .
the superintendent may request the contractor to undertake additional sealing works at sites not listed in schedule num .
these works will be treated as a variation in accordance with the contract .
num calibration of bitumen sprayers all sprayers used for application of bituminous materials shall have a current certificate of calibration showing compliance with austroads test methods for calibration of bitumen sprayers as listed in section num .
the certificate of calibration shall be renewed every num months .
if any sprayer has its spray equipment overhauled or replaced it shall be issued with a new certificate of calibration prior to use .
num bituminous materials a adhesion agent adhesion agent may be added to the aggregate precoat binder or primerbinder to promote adhesion to the cover aggregate andor pavement surface .
the type of adhesion agent and the percentage to be used shall be subject to the contractor providing evidence that the proprietary product has satisfactory field performance .
when adhesion agent is added to the binder or primerbinder the total volume of adhesion agent and diluent shall not exceed num by mass of the binder .
b aggregate precoating material aggregate precoating material shall be distillate or distillate based product cutback bitumen emulsion based product or proprietary product subject to the contractor providing evidence that the proprietary product has demonstrated satisfactory field performance for a period of at least num years .
restricted use of untried products on a trial basis shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent .
c bitumen bitumen shall be class num complying with the requirements of the current australian standard for bitumen for pavements as listed in section num .
in addition the minimum time to reach the specified apparent viscosity level shall be nine days when tested in accordance with the australian standard .
class num bitumen incorporating up to five parts of crumb rubber is considered to be an unmodified bituminous binder .
class num bitumen incorporating a low amount of polymer may be considered to be an unmodified bituminous binder subject to the approval of the superintendent .
department of state growth march num section num department of state growth d bitumen emulsion bitumen emulsion of class ars or crs shall comply with the requirements of the current australian standard for bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements as listed in section num .
any nonstandard proprietary classes of bitumen emulsion shall be subject to the contractor providing evidence that the product has demonstrated satisfactory field performance for a period of at least num years .
restricted use of untried products on a trial basis shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent .
e cutback bitumen cutback bitumen shall comply with the requirements of the current australian standard for cutback bitumen as listed in section num or an equivalent product subject to the contractor providing evidence that the proprietary product has demonstrated satisfactory field performance for a period of at least num years .
restricted use of untried products on a trial basis shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent .
f cutter cutter shall comply with the current australian standard for oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements as listed in section num .
other cutters or methods of temporarily lowering the viscosity of the binder may be used subject to the contractor providing evidence that such methods or products have demonstrated satisfactory field performance for a period of at least num years .
restricted use of untried products on a trial basis shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent .
g flux oil not to be used .
h geotextile fabric the geotextile fabric used for a geotextile reinforced seal as a sam or sami shall be a nonwoven needle punched fabric .
the mass of the fabric shall be a minimum of num gm for seals of nominal maximum size of num mm and under and num gm for seals of nominal maximum size of larger than num mm .
the geotextile fabric shall have a melting point determined in accordance with the requirements of the current australian standard for geotextiles method of test as listed in section num at least numc above the maximum binder spraying temperature .
i polymer modified binder pmb the class of pmb shall comply with the requirements of the austroads specification framework for polymer modified binders agpttnum as listed in section num .
alternative or ungraded pmbs which do not comply with the specified test requirements of agpttnum shall not be used without approval by the superintendent and will be subject to the contractor providing evidence that the product has delivered satisfactory field performance for a period of at least num years .
restricted use of untried products at nominated trial sites shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent .
department of state growth march num section num department of state growth unless otherwise specified in table num one of the following classes of pmb shall be used i hss treatments class snume snume ten parts crumbed rubber or alternative as approved by the superintendent .
hss treatments may be applied as a singlesingle application hssnum or a doubledouble application hssnum .
where a hss is applied as a doubledouble the same binder shall be used for both applications .
if crumb rubber is used to field produce a rubber modified binder the amount of added crumb rubber shall not be less than ten parts by mass of binder .
the volume of carrier oil used before any cutting oil is added shall not exceed four parts by volume of binder .
ii xss treatments class snume snumr or snumrf or alternative as approved by the superintendent .
xss treatments are applied as a doubledouble application and the same binder shall be used for both applications .
if crumb rubber is used to field produce snumrf rubber modified binder the amount of added crumb rubber shall not be less than num parts num by mass of binder .
the volume of carrier oil used before any cutting oil is added shall not exceed four parts by volume of binder .
iii sam treatments class snume snumr snumrf or alternative as approved by the superintendent .
where sam treatments are applied as a doubledouble application the above binder classes shall apply to the first application only .
the second binder applications of all doubledouble sam treatments shall use a conventional cnum .
if crumb rubber is used to field produce snumrf rubber modified binder the amount of added crumb rubber shall not be less than num parts num by mass of binder .
the volume of carrier oil used before any cutting oil is added shall not exceed four parts by volume of binder .
iv sami treatments class snume snumrf or alternative as approved by the superintendent .
if crumb rubber is used to field produce snumrf rubber modified binder the amount of added crumb rubber shall not be less than num parts num by mass of binder .
the volume of carrier oil used before any cutting oil is added shall not exceed four parts by volume of binder .
v grs treatments unless otherwise specified in table num unmodified class num bitumen binder shall be used for all geotextile reinforced seals .
j primer the primer shall be cutback bitumen complying with the requirements of nume of this clause and shall be of a suitable class to ensure penetration into the pavement surface and when cured be waterproof of uniform appearance and capable of providing a strong bond between the bituminous surfacing and the pavement .
proprietary classes of bitumen emulsion may be accepted by the superintendent as an alternative to cut back bitumen if evidence is provided to show that the emulsion product meets the same functional requirements and delivers the equivalent amount of bitumen residue to the road surface .
k primerbinder the primerbinder to be used shall be a suitable cutback bitumen or a bitumen emulsion .
the primerbinder shall be waterproof and capable of penetrating into and adhering to the pavement surface while retaining sufficient binder on the surface to hold the aggregate in place .
department of state growth march num section num department of state growth num crumb rubber crumb rubber must be processed from waste tyres generated in australia and processed by a tyre stewardship australia accredited supplier and shall be free from cord wire fluff and other deleterious material .
num aggregate a aggregate specification aggregate shall comply with sections num source rock for the production of crushed rock and aggregates num aggregate for sprayed bituminous surfacing num sands for sprayed bituminous surfacing .
b aggregate precoating the contractor shall either supply plant precoated aggregate from the aggregate supplier or field precoated aggregate from the stacksite .
num use of stacksites a general any stacksites used by the contractor during the contract shall be cleaned and returned to their original condition within four weeks of completion of the use of that stacksite for works under this contract .
where the contractor does not clean any stacksite used as specified the superintendent may arrange for it to be done by others at the contractors expense .
no additional stacksites are to be constructed on the road reserve .
the use of stacksites on other road reserves such as municipal stacksites or on other public or private land require the approval of the relevant authority or owner prior to use for items under this contract .
b placement of stacks the following requirements shall apply to the placement of aggregate and materials i stacks shall be so placed that they do not unduly reduce sight distance at locations such as intersections and curves ii stacks shall not be placed under or immediately adjacent to power lines and shall comply with all nogo zones and the relevant requirements for spotters iii stacks shall not be placed under trees or structures where the overhead clearance is less than num m iv stacks shall be placed clear of the road formation drains gateways and side tracks and the toes of the stacks shall be not less than num m from any obstructions which could impede the operation of mechanical loading equipment .
c safe work method statement prior to using any stacksite the contractor or relevant parties shall submit a safe work method statement addressing the requirements of the swms checklist in appendix department of state growth march num section num department of state growth num application of bituminous material aggregate and geotextiles a design rates of application the contractor shall determine the design rates of application for primer primerbinder binder surface pretreatments remedial works and aggregate in accordance with the procedures set out in the current austroads sprayed seal design method as listed in section num .
all rates of application of bituminous material shall be expressed in litresm .
in the case of binder rates of application shall refer to residual binder at numc .
traffic data and default rates of application for bituminous material are specified in table num .
at least num week prior to the commencement of work the contractor shall submit the design rates of application for bituminous material aggregate and rates for pretreatment for review by the superintendent .
b surface pretreatment surface pretreatments to correct variable surface texture shall be allowed for by the contractor and carried out as part of the works to meet the requirements of surface texture and aggregate retention specified in tables num and num .
where the superintendent has included a requirement for pretreatment in table num this does not limit the contractors responsibility for pretreatments on all jobs .
the cost of surface pretreatments shall be included in the lump sum works .
the acceptance criteria for surface texture and aggregate retention specified in tables num and num will not be waived for any job item unless these requirements are waived in table num. c geotextiles geotextile fabric shall be fixed to the pavement surface free of wrinkles andor folds .
transverse joins shall be butt jointed .
longitudinal joins in geotextile fabric shall be overlapped by approximately num mm and be located along lane lines .
the contractor shall make an allowance for additional binder to be applied along the join so that both geotextile layers are adequately saturated with bitumen .
this allowance shall be included in the contractors seal design .
d minimum temperature unless otherwise approved by the superintendant the contractor shall not apply any sprayed bituminous treatments unless the air and pavement temperature are above those listed in table num and rising .
the minimum temperature shall not apply for strain alleviating membrane interlayer sami treatments which will not be trafficked prior to the sami being overlayed .
in addition to table num priming and primersealing shall only be undertaken when the prevailing weather conditions when assessed in accordance with aapa hse guide no.num environmental management when spraying bituminous materials have a risk rating of low or less and appropriate work practices to minimise risks are in place .
table num minimum temperatures for spraying bituminous materials treatment type minimum air and pavement temperature c initial treatments primes num primerseals singlesingle num primerseals doubledouble num reseal treatments cnum and crumb rubber modified pmbs num other pmbs num geotextile reinforced seals num department of state growth march num section num department of state growth e aggregate spreading forward direction only not applicable hp where the contractor proposes to use forward aggregate spreading plant written approval is required from the superintendent prior to use unless written approval has been previously provided by the department .
f additional payment for forward aggregate spreading not applicable num removal of loose aggregate the contractor shall remove and dispose of all loose aggregate within the maximum time limits as specified in table num below .
this includes loose aggregate on all trafficked areas and areas where loose aggregate has been swept or moved by traffic onto sealed shoulders or non trafficked areas or into other areas such as concrete channels traffic islands medians open drains drainage pits footpaths nature strips or verges .
table num maximum time limit for removal of loose aggregate traffic volume aadt maximum time limit num and all freeways within num hours of sealing num to num within num hours of sealing num to num within num hours of sealing num within num days of sealing annual average daily traffic refer to table num for aadt for each job item department of state growth march num section num department of state growth until loose aggregate is removed from the sealed surface traffic speed shall be controlled by signing and installation of road works speed limits in accordance with the traffic control for works on roads tasmanian guide .
loose aggregate shall not be removed until the aggregate has properly bedded down into the binder by either trafficking or additional rolling .
any damage to the seal resulting from removal of loose aggregate shall be repaired by the contractor .
rotary brooms andor suction sweepers are permitted to remove loose aggregate from the trafficked areas unless otherwise specified .
loose aggregate may be temporarily dumped at the stack sites nominated in table num .
for seals of nominal size num mm and over including multiple application seals after the removal of loose aggregate and at any time during the defects liability period of the contract no more than num loose stones in any square metre of pavement shall remain .
this includes stones that have originated from the area sealed under the contract and which have accumulated on adjacent sealed areas such as intersections additional traffic lanes in either direction shoulders and flanks .
on job items where num loose stones or more are measured warning signs shall be erected within eight hours and the site shall be reswept or the loose stones removed within num hours of measurement .
for seals of nominal size num mm and under after the removal of loose aggregate and at any time during the defects liability period no more than num loose stones in any square metre of pavement shall remain .
this includes stones that have originated from the area sealed under the contract and which have accumulated on adjacent sealed areas such as intersections additional traffic lanes in either direction shoulders and flanks .
on job items where num loose stones or more are measured warning signs shall be erected within eight hours and the site shall be reswept or the loose stones removed within num hours of measurement .
num acceptance of work a rates of application for binder the contractor shall produce evidence to show that the actual rate of application for a particular job or segments of a job with different design rates of application complies with the design rates of application .
variation between the actual rates and the design rates will be assessed in accordance with table num .
if a payment deduction or rectification is required in respect of unsatisfactory surface texture or aggregate loss as specified in parts b and c of this clause deductions under table num will not be applied .
table num variation in rates of application of bituminous material variation from the design rates of application for bituminous material lm assessment num lm below the design rate of application accept num lm to num lm below the design rate of application deduct numm for the affected area provided that minimum texture and aggregate retention requirements are met num lm below the design rate of application deduct numm for the affected area provided that minimum texture and aggregate retention requirements are met the variation from the design rate of application for sam seals or samis may be increased by num lm .
acceptance or otherwise of the criteria specified in table num shall not relieve the contractor from its obligations under the defects liability period .
department of state growth march num section num department of state growth march num section num department of state growth b surface texture acceptance of work for surface texture and surface enrichment shall be based on visual assessment however in marginal cases the superintendent may request that nominated areas be tested in accordance with vicroads test method for surface texture of sprayed seals as listed in section num and assessed in accordance with table num .
the test lot size shall not be less than num m of single traffic lane or more than num m of single traffic lane .
for any testing undertaken on areas other than within traffic lanes the minimum lot size shall be not less than num m or more than num m .
table num surface texture requirements treatment mean texture depth mm action required size num size num size num size num size num seals all types num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num accept num to num or num to num num to num or num to num num to num or num to num num to num or num to num num to num or num to num the superintendent may require rectification of the works or elect to reduce payment for the lot by numm num or num num or num num or num num or num num or num work to be rectified primerseals num na num to num num to num na na accept na num or num num or num na na work to be rectified surface enrichment num na num na accept na num na work to be rectified notes num surface texture measurements for seals and surface enrichment may be undertaken at any time during the defects liability period but final acceptance of works is not affected until the end of the defects liability period .
num surface texture measurements for primerseals shall be undertaken no sooner than num weeks after placement and no later than num weeks after placement .
if tests are not undertaken in this period and later test results require the works to be rectified the later test results are to be used for acceptance of the works .
c aggregate retention acceptance of work for aggregate retention shall be based on visual assessment however in marginal cases the superintendent may request that nominated areas be tested in accordance with the vicroads test method for stripping of aggregate from sprayed seals as listed in section num and assessed in accordance with table num .
depending on the measured degree of aggregate stripping the contractor shall take action as specified in table num .
the test lot size shall not be less than num m of single traffic lane or more than num m of single traffic lane .
for any testing undertaken on areas other than within traffic lanes the minimum lot size shall be not less than num mnum or more than num mnum .
table num assessment of aggregate retention degree of aggregate stripping action required num to num accept num to num work to be retested within one month prior to the end of the defects liability period .
if the degree of aggregate stripping has increased since it was last tested the work shall be rectified before the end of the defects liability period .
greater than num work shall be rectified within num days .
note aggregate retention measurements may be undertaken at any time during the defects liability period but final acceptance of works is not affected until the end of the defects liability period .
department of state growth d visual uniformity the contractor shall provide a surface with uniform colour and texture to provide a consistent appearance and aggregate for each job item including aggregate used for repairs and remedial works shall be supplied from the same source .
num maintenance of seals the contractor shall be responsible for the monitoring and maintenance of seals from the time of application until the end of the defects liability period .
monitoring of seals shall include regular and timely inspection of work management of traffic and monitoring of any deterioration in the surface condition .
the contractor shall carry out any work necessary to protect and maintain the seal or to effect repairs to any seal failure .
such failures include but are not limited to potholing emulsification flushing bleeding fatty areas significant areas of bitumen on kerb and channel excess bitumen without aggregate cover at the startfinish of runs aggregate stripping nonuniform aggregate spreading and streaking of aggregate but do not include pavement failures or events beyond the reasonable control of the contractor .
hp the contractor shall advise the superintendent in writing of the proposed treatment to effect the above work before undertaking the work .
hp where the treatment for protection or repair of a seal involves the application of a further seal coat the contractor shall obtain the agreement of the superintendent of the proposed treatment before undertaking the work .
the contractor shall undertake the protection or repair work within num hours of notification by the superintendent .
for urgent repairs the contractor shall take action to preserve the work and make the road safe within num hours of being notified or becoming aware of the problem .
payment will be made for the cost of repairs undertaken by the contractor and approved by the superintendent for damages that are the result of incidents outside the contractors control including but not limited to damage caused by others involving oil spills accidents vehicle fire or tearing due to heavy braking and skidding .
num records the contractor shall forward to the superintendent a job completion report sealing using the proforma included as attachment a to this section num or an equivalent proforma as approved by the superintendent for each job item in schedule num .
the completed form shall be submitted within seven days of completion of sealing each job .
the contractor shall show and certify by initialling each item on the above job completion report sealing the actual status of the item compared to the specified requirement for that item and sign and date the report prior to forwarding to the superintendent .
the contractor shall ensure that where a representative of the superintendent is on site during the works that officer validates the works as provided on the job completion report sealing .
num defects liabilty period all defects should be rectified six months prior to the conclusion of the defects liability period to an agreed corrective action .
this does not limit the contractors responsibly to undertake protection or urgent repair works under clause num .
the defects liability period for repaired work shall recommence on the date of repair in accordance with the provisions of the contract .
the contractor shall carry out at least two inspections of each job during the defects liability period and provide a condition report to the superintendent .
the condition report shall detail the condition of the seal any defects and the proposed corrective action .
department of state growth march num section num department of state growth march num section num department of state growth num schedule of details table num schedule of details job item refer sch num freeway highway or road name chainage km approx length m approx width m approx area mnum treat ment type num treat ment descrip tion num single or two appli cation num agg sizes mm min agg class a b or c traffic data agg precoat yn default binder rates of appli cation lmnum pretreat yn other requirements road link ref map ref num num hr aadt num ehv num hr aadt lane num note to author the following items are examples only .
change text to suit your specification delete this row before printing num birchiprainbow road num cnum numgnum num num num num fs c s num b num num num num num western highway num anum numbnum num num num see under num lane num slow lane num num num num r grs d num a num num min .
psv of is required for aggregate num lane num passing lane num num num num r sam s num a num num pmb class is required num lane num reverse direction num num num num r hss s num a num num num shoulders x num num num num x num num r se s na na num num num mallee highway num bnum numcnum num num num num r sam s num b num num num num if any space is left blank it shall be read as not applicable .
notes on table num num treatment type prime only po primerseal ps prime and seal ps final seal fs reseal r. num treatment description conventional c singlesingle high stress seal hssnum doubledouble high stress seal hssnum extreme stress seal xss strain alleviating membrane sam strain alleviating membrane interlayer sami geotextile reinforced seal grs fibreglass reinforced seal frs surface enrichment se .
num single or two application singles or double application d of binder and aggregate .
num aadt is the annual average daily num hr traffic and ehv is the percentage of the aadt calculated from number of heavy vehicles and large heavy vehicles .
num aadt lane is the average annual daily num hr traffic for the traffic lane being considered .
where this is not given it shall be proportioned by the contractor from the aadt figures .
num typical other requirements include specific pmb class cl .
numi aggregate psv num section num if plant precoated aggregate is specifically required cl .
numb need for gritting of trafficked areas for prime only treatments po notification to abutting landowners placement of variable message boards or other additional advisory signs suction sweeper required cl .
num specific programming requirements .
department of state growth march num section num department of state growth table num stacksite locations not applicable contractor to identify and manage own stacksite locations stacksite no .
map reference location and general description additional restrictions on use and cleaning up of stacksites map no .
grid ref .
note to author .
the following items are examples only .
change text to suit your specification .
delete this row before printing num num gnum birchiprainbow road approx .
num km north side remnant aggregate shall be removed from the stacksite within num weeks rather than num weeks na contractor to obtain approval to selected stacksite department of state growth march num section num department of state growth attachment a to section num job completion report sealing contract no .
job specifics job no treatment road name seal date start chainage stacksite location end chainage existing conditions circle or fill in weather sunny clear ocast windy showers wet air temp pavement temp pavement isolated stone loss stripping flushed wheel paths flushed patching cracking regulatory speed limit num km num km num km num km num km other aggregate conditions clean dry dusty dirty damp wet aggregate precoat predelivery onsite no precoat ncr required yes no reasons ncr no traffic control circle or fill in subcontractor managing traffic control yes no subcontractor subcontractor initials signs during work installed to wtm code yes no date time installed speed limit kmhr removed yes no date time removed tmp no .
used after work installed to wtm code yes no date time installed speed limit kmhr removed yes no date time removed tmp no .
used traffic delays average delay to vehicles minutes queues average queue length vehicles sealing works run no .
pretreatment run num run num run num run num run num totals start chainage end chainage lane description air temperature pavement temperature length m width m area mnum binder type tank dip start litres tank dip end litres quantity sprayed litres actual application rate lmnum average design application rate lmnum average mix bitumenflux oilcutteradditive num num num num num aggregate aggregate size quantity mnum average least dimension ald aggregate design spread rate mnummnum ald ald ald ald ald actual design spread rate mnummnum ald ald ald ald ald rolling time hrs forward aggregate spreading plant proportion of forward aggregate spreading use on run e.g .
num num all delineation existing rrpms removed yes no date trrpms installed yes no date spacings m uncovered yes no date reinstatement pavement markings numst coat specified date due actual date done pavement markings numnd coat specified date due actual date done rrpms specified date due actual date done weather delays to linemarking days i certify the above details as correct contractors representative print name contractors representative signed i concur with the above superintendents representative print name superintendents representative signed department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num warm mix asphalt this section crossreferences section num .
where section num is included in the specification section num must also be included num general these clauses cover special requirements for warm mix asphalt wma that are in addition to or override the requirements for section num hot mix asphalt .
num definition warm mix asphalt wma warm mix asphalt wma is asphalt which contains an additive or uses a manufacturing process that allows the asphalt mix to be produced and placed at lower temperatures than hot mix asphalt hma .
num binders the class of binder for each asphalt type shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
num mix design all mixes shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
hma mix designs registered as general can be used as the basis of wma mix designs .
the mix identification number for wma shall include the suffix w. num additional performance testing for wma a representative samples of production asphalt shall be taken and tested at a frequency not less than that specified in table num. b test specimens for the tests shall be compacted to an air voids content as specified in vicroads code of practice rcnum .
table num frequency of testing for wma test required minimum frequency moisture sensitivity minimum wet strength and tensile strength ratio one per num tonnes or part thereof .
indirect tensile modulus one per num tonnes or part thereof .
modulus testing is only required for the approved wma mixes produced by using the sequential aggregate coating method with two different binder grades .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num open graded asphalt this section crossreferences section num .
if section num is relevant it should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section shall be read in conjunction with section num asphalt and covers special requirements for size num open graded asphalt surfacing that are in addition to or override the requirements for section num .
num description of material open graded asphalt oga is an asphalt manufactured essentially from a size num onesized aggregate to produce a mix with high air voids .
num aggregates unless otherwise specified properties of the aggregates used in oga shall comply with the requirements for asphalt type h as specified in clause num .
further to clauses num and num no rap shall be added to oga .
num binder binder used in oga shall be a polymer modified binder pmb complying with the requirements of the austroads test method agpttnum specification for polymer modified binders .
unless otherwise specified in clause numa the pmb to be used in oga shall be one of the following grades anume anume anume anump or anump num mix design the asphalt mix proposed for use shall be registered in accordance with clause num .
the contractor shall also provide the following information a the class and test properties of the pmb proposed b the results of the binder paste drain off tests meeting the requirements of clause numd and the selected maximum mixing temperature to avoid excess binder drain off .
the indirect tensile modulus of the mix is not required to be submitted .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num mix design requirements a grading limits and production tolerances for aggregates unless otherwise specified or directed the grading of mineral matter and the production tolerances from the grading aim shall lie within the limits specified in table num .
table num sieve size as mm grading aim passing by mass production tolerance from grading aim passing by mass num num nil num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num b added filler the mix shall contain a minimum of num by mass of hydrated lime added filler .
c binder content unless otherwise specified or directed the binder content of the mix shall be num with a production tolerance of num. d binder drain off test a series of asphalt binder drain off tests over the range of likely mix temperatures shall be performed at the specified binder content to determine the maximum allowable mixing temperature to avoid excessive binder drainage .
the mass of binder paste drain off shall not exceed num of the total mass of the sample of mix tested at the maximum allowable mixing temperature .
e air voids the mix design shall have an air void range of num .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num temperatures of binder aggregate and asphalt unless otherwise specified or directed temperatures of binder aggregate and asphalt shall comply with the requirements of table num .
table num material polymer modified binder temperature c min max binder delivered into plant storage num num asphalt at discharge from mixing plant num num asphalt at spreading plant num num num ambient conditions for placing oga shall not be placed when the majority of the area to be paved has a surface temperature of less than numc .
num water resistant bituminous bond coat a water resistant bond coat shall be applied to the existing surface consisting of cationic rapid setting bitumen emulsion num bitumen content applied at a rate of application of not less than num lmnum using a calibrated sprayer to uniformly spray the emulsion .
hand spraying shall only be permitted on small irregularly shaped areas clear of the traffic path .
a cationic rapid setting pmb emulsion with num to num binder content may be used to reduce the possibility of run off and excessive tackiness .
num spreading heating of the paver screed shall cease while the paver is stationary and the screed is in contact with the asphalt mat .
the thickness at any point in the oga layer shall not be less than num mm and the mean thickness of a test lot of oga shall not be less than the specified thickness .
for the purposes of this clause a test lot shall be defined as an area of up to a maximum of num mnum .
unless otherwise specified all areas of the existing pavement surface that are not free draining shall be filled or regulated with dense graded asphalt as specified prior to placing oga .
num joints and junctions at junctions where the new asphalt mat is required to match the level of the existing pavement and where the depth of the oga can not be used to match into the existing pavement junctions shall be constructed with size num type h dense graded asphalt over the full width of carriageway as follows side streets and median openingsnum mm through carriageways with a speed limit of num kmh or lessnum metres through carriageways with a speed limit of more than num kmhnum metres .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth at any location where the layer is to be feathered to a depth of less than num mm such feathering shall be carried out with type n or h size num or size num dense graded asphalt as specified .
feathering constructed in the direction of paving shall be placed by the paving machine .
num compaction requirements acceptance of compaction shall be based on the adoption of approved placing procedures .
such procedures shall include not less than num passes with a static steel wheeled roller with a minimum overall mass of num tonnes .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num bitumen crumb rubber asphalt this section crossreferences section num .
if section num is relevant it should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section is a supplement to standard section num asphalt and covers special requirements for bitumen crumb rubber asphalt that are in addition to or override the requirements of section num .
num description bitumen crumb rubber asphalt is asphalt which contains crumb rubber obtained from tyre shredding to improve flexural and elastic recovery properties of an asphalt layer .
num aggregates unless otherwise specified properties of the aggregates used in bitumen crumb rubber asphalt shall comply with the requirements specified in clause num .
num filler added filler shall be hydrated lime .
num granular crumb rubber a general requirement granular crumb rubber shall consist of synthetic rubber from car tyres or natural rubber from truck tyres or a mixture of both and shall be free from cord wire fluff and other deleterious material .
b grading and particle size the grading shall comply with table num and shall not contain particles greater than num mm in length .
table num sieve size as mm num num num percentage passing by mass num num num num num c bulk density the maximum bulk density shall not exceed num kgmnum as determined by the arrb transport research test method described in air num .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num mix design requirements a mix design the asphalt mix proposed for use shall be registered in accordance with clause num .
the contractor shall also submit marshall stability and marshall flow properties .
b grading unless otherwise specified the grading of aggregate with added filler after mixing but before compaction and the proportions of aggregate added filler granular crumb rubber and bitumen in the mix shall comply with tables num and num .
table num grading of aggregate with added filler sieve size as mm percentage passing by mass mix size num mix size num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num proportions of aggregate added filler granular crumb rubber and bitumen sieve size as mm percentage passing by mass mix size num mix size num aggregate num num num num added filler num num num num granular crumb rubber num num num num bitumen num num num num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth c marshall test properties the marshall cylinder test properties of the mix shall comply with table num .
table num size stability kn min flow mm air voids voids in mineral aggregates min bitumen film thickness microns num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num notes num .
for purposes of calculation of voids in mineral aggregates granular crumb rubber is not considered as part of the aggregates .
num .
bitumen film thickness shall be calculated as bitumen distributed over the surface of the aggregates including granular crumb rubber .
num mixing and mixing temperatures a granular crumb rubber is added to the mix before the binder dry mixing .
a pugmill batch mixing plant shall be used .
the temperature limits shall be numc higher than those shown in table num .
following discharge of aggregate and filler into the mixer the required quantity of granular rubber shall be added and dry mixed for a minimum period of num seconds .
following addition of bitumen the whole mixture shall be mixed for a minimum of num seconds or until the whole of the mix is homogeneous and proper digestion of the rubber into the bitumen has occurred .
b granular crumb rubber bitumen binder has been preblended prior to being added to the mix wet mixing .
the mixing plant may be a drum plant or a pugmill batch plant .
the crumb rubber bitumen mixture shall not contain carrier oils cutters or flux oils .
the temperature limits shall be numc higher than those shown in table num .
num ambient conditions for placing bitumen crumb rubber asphalt shall not be placed when the pavement temperature is less than numc .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num bituminous slurry surfacing this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for manufacture and placing sizes num num num and num mm bituminous slurry surfacing .
num definitions bitumen emulsion a system of fine droplets of bitumen with or without polymer suspended in a mixture of water and emulsifier which begins to set up on contact with surfaces and when exposed to air .
bituminous slurry a mixture of fine graded aggregate bitumen emulsion and water of sufficient fluidity to be capable of being screeded over a road surface in a very thin layer without the need for heating or use of mechanical compaction equipment .
microsurfacing a slurry surfacing that normally contains polymer modified binder for better stability and cohesion particularly on heavily trafficked roads and for coarse aggregate mixes .
mean average texture depth the mean average texture depth is the mean of num tests for average texture depth using the sand patch test method .
num aggregates a general the combined aggregate mixture shall consist of crushed rock or a mixture of crushed rock and sand .
aggregates shall consist of clean hard durable angular rock fragments of uniform quality .
sand aggregates shall consist of clean hard durable grains free from lumps clay mica and foreign matter .
b source rock source rock shall comply with the requirements of section num source rock for the production of crushed rock and aggregates .
c crushed aggregate products unless otherwise specified properties of the aggregates used shall comply with the requirements for asphalt type h as specified in clause num .
further to clause num use of rap is not permitted .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth d crusher fines and manufactured sand crusher fines and manufactured sand shall comply with the relevant requirements specified in table num .
table num quality of crusher fines and manufactured sand test value degradation factor crusher fines min plasticity index max num num e natural sand where natural sand is supplied as a washed sand for the registered mix the sand equivalent value of any such sand shall not be not be less than num .
where natural sand is supplied as an unwashed sand the plasticity index shall not be more than num .
num aggregate grading the combined grading of the aggregates shall conform to the following grading limits for dense graded size num size num size num and size num nominal size mixes as shown in table num and as specified in clause num .
table num grading limits sieve size mm size num passing size num passing size num passing size num passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num added filler added mineral filler used in the mix shall comply with australian standard as num hot mix asphalt a guide to good practice and the quantity added to the mix during placing shall not vary by more than num from the filler content for the mix design .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num bituminous material bitumen used for emulsion manufacture shall comply with the requirements of as num bitumen for pavements .
polymer shall be added to the formulation of the emulsion to enhance its behaviour and field performance and meet the mix design requirements specified in table num and the minimum softening point of the bituminous residue shall be numc as determined by australian standard test method as num num .
num water water to be added to the mix shall be tested for compatibility with the design mix prior to use .
num mix design and test requirements all asphalt mixes proposed for use on vicroads works shall be registered by vicroads in accordance with section num .
hp no slurry surfacing shall be supplied until the mix has been registered and the superintendent advised of details and approves the mix for use .
the following information is also required for each new mix design a source of the aggregates b grading aim for aggregates c assigned polished stone value psv of the source rock d degradation factor of the crusher fines component and sand equivalent of the natural sand component e bitumen content of emulsion f softening point of emulsion residue g slurry properties determined from tests on laboratory mixes as specified in table num .
table num slurry surfacing properties test requirements property test description requirement traffic time austroads agptnum wet cohesion num minutes initial set num minutes trafficking num kn.m min num kn.m min wear loss austroads agptnum wet track abrasion loss one hour soak six day soak num gmnum maxnum num gmnum maxnum notes num .
traffic num vehicles per lane per day vld num .
traffic num vld if it is proposed to use a mix which does not meet all the above requirements consideration may be given to its acceptance based on past field performance under similar conditions .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num additives additives may be used to control the setting speed of the mix depending on ambient conditions and traffic requirements .
the contractor shall specify the use of any additives when submitting the mix design .
num ambient conditions for placing unless otherwise specified fresh slurry surfacing shall be capable of being trafficked within one hour of being placed .
slurry surfacing shall not be placed when the pavement temperature and air temperature is numc and falling but may be placed when the pavement and air temperature is numc and rising .
slurry surfacing shall not be placed when the ambient temperature is above numc without prior consultation with the superintendent nor shall it be placed during rain or when rain is imminent .
if weather conditions rapidly change to prevent the slurry surfacing being trafficked within one hour work shall not proceed without prior consultation with the superintendent .
num surface preparation prior to slurry surfacing commencing the contractor shall remove all deleterious material and sweep the surface clean .
the surface may be dampened by lightly spraying with water prior to placing slurry .
num protection of road furniture manhole covers entry pits and valve covers and other road furniture shall be protected by papering or other suitable means to prevent these being covered or blocked by slurry surfacing .
all used paper or cover material including surplus slurry shall be removed from site .
num mixing and spreading hp spreading shall not commence until approval to proceed is obtained from the superintendent .
the metering devices used for slurry surfacing shall be recalibrated every num months and shall be capable of consistently producing a uniform mix within the production tolerances for grading as shown in table num and bitumen content as determined as part of the laboratory mix design .
if any device critical to correct proportioning of materials is overhauled or replaced the machine shall be recalibrated prior to recommencement of work .
adjustments to metering settings shall be made on a job by job or on a daily basis to allow for varying aggregate density moisture content and bitumen content of the emulsion .
the contractor shall produce a series of calibration charts or evidence of calibration prior to commencing work .
the edge of the new slurry surface shall be located within num mm of all concrete edgings and sealed shoulders and to within num mm of the specified width or average width of carriageway if not specified for roads with unsealed shoulders .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth table num production tolerances for mix grading sieve size tolerance on percentage passing by mass size num size num size num size num num nil nil nil nil num nil nil nil num num nil nil num num num nil num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num frequency of product testing the contractor shall test the constituents of the mix at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that the material supplied under the contract complies with specified requirements which is not to be less than shown in table num .
table num frequency of product testing checks required minimum frequency degradation factor crusher fines one per month .
sand equivalent test one per num cubic metres of aggregates used or part thereof .
unsound rock content one per num cubic metres or part thereof sampled directly from stockpile on site or one per num cubic metres of production at the quarry source .
sieve analysis of aggregates one per num cubic metres or part thereof sampled directly from stockpile on site or one per num cubic metres of production at the quarry source .
emulsion content one tank dipping or flow meter reading per batch or every num cubic metres of material placed whichever is the lesser .
binder content and full sieve analysis one per num cubic metres or one per day from a sample of mix taken from the mixer whichever is the lesser .
residual binder content of emulsion and softening point of bituminous residue certification of specification compliance for each delivery to site .
the tolerance on the residual binder content after curing shall be not more than num below or num above the mix design aim .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num rut filling course where specified in clause num or where wheel ruts average num mm or more in depth a rut filling course shall be applied with the aid of a rut filling attachment to the mixerspreader prior to placing the wearing course .
sections where rut filling has been carried out shall be trafficked for a minimum of num hours prior to placing the wearing course .
num tack coating unless otherwise specified concrete surfaces shall be primed with very light primer at a rate between num to num lmnum and allowed to fully cure prior to placing slurry surfacing .
num regulating course where specified in clause num or where the existing surface varies by more than num mm from a num m straight edge a regulating or scratch course shall be applied to the surface prior to placing the wearing course .
the wearing course shall not be applied until the regulating course has set sufficiently to carry the mixerspreader without damage .
for regulating or scratch courses the spreader box shall be fitted with skids of not less than num m in length and where the shape of the existing surface permits a rigid strike off blade may be used .
num wearing course the wearing course shall be placed over the road surface at the average thickness specified in clause num .
the average layer thickness shall not be less than the nominal aggregate size or greater than twice the nominal aggregate size .
the layer thickness at any point shall not exceed three times the nominal aggregate size without first applying a regulating course or prefilling isolated low areas .
num joints and junctions the longitudinal joints of the wearing course shall be placed at either the edge of a traffic lane or in the centre of a traffic lane .
the edge of the mat and joints shall be lightly screeded with a squeegee to achieve a smooth uniform edge and to remove isolated mismatches in level or excess build up of surplus material at the edge of the run .
all joints shall be overlapped .
the maximum overlap shall be num mm .
num surface finish and shape the finished surface of the final wearing course shall not vary by more than num mm from a num m straight edge .
when requested by the superintendent the contractor shall measure the mean average texture depth on a lot by lot basis by vicroads test method for surface texture of sprayed seals as listed in section num .
additional payment will be made for this work .
for wearing course mixes of nominal size num or greater the mean average surface texture depth determined from a lot of ten sand patch tests consisting of five tests taken at an equal spacing along each wheelpath shall be assessed as shown in table num .
for the purpose of this test a lot shall be considered as a maximum of num m of single traffic lane which has been trafficked for a minimum period of one month after completion .
smaller areas not less than num m of single traffic lane which have a different uniform appearance such as a defective batch of material may be treated as a separate lot .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num cleanup all surplus slurry shall be removed from site and any road furniture such as kerb and channels shall be cleaned of all aggregate and bitumen deposited by the contractor .
the aggregate stockpile site and mixing area occupied by the contractor shall be restored to a similar condition as existed before occupation .
num urgent repairs if serious damage to the new slurry surface occurs due to either a poor mix or inclement weather whereby it presents a hazard to road users the road shall be made safe within num hours of notification .
the contractor shall submit proposals for the rectification of damaged work to the superintendent for review prior to commencing further work .
rectification of the damaged work shall be carried out as soon as weather conditions permit .
num acceptance of work unless otherwise specified or directed work shall be assessed in accordance with table num .
table num assessment of work variation in binder content of total mass from the design mix mean average texture depth mm or size num and size num wearing courses assessment not more than num below or num above greater than or equal to num mm accept for the purpose of applying the provisions contained in table num the binder content is to be calculated from measured flow rates of aggregates and emulsion the moisture content of the aggregates before and after dippings from the emulsion tank and the residual binder content of the emulsion as applicable .
these provisions shall apply for every individual batch of material or for every num cubic metres placed whichever is the lesser .
the requirements of table num shall not apply to samples taken from the road for full sieve analysis and binder content unless results differ in a consistent way from the quantities measured by the mixerspreader machine .
in such cases the mixerspreader shall be re calibrated before further work proceeds .
the assessment of work in table num shall apply for either the binder content or the mean average texture depth as applicable .
variation in binder content limits shall apply to all mixes in all layers and the mean average texture depth is an additional requirement for size num and size num wearing courses .
num schedule of details bituminous slurry surfacing requirements clauses num num num num and num table num schedule of details course nominal size average layer thickness mm minimum polished stone value of num yes no wearing yes rut filling regulating other department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num surface retexturing using high pressure water this section crossreferences section num .
if section num is relevant it should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for use of high pressure water to improve surface texture of bituminous surfaced roads by removing slick flushed areas remove unwanted materials such as petrol oil grease lichen and other grime from road surfaces .
num definitions aggregate retention retention of aggregate particles by the binder under normal traffic conditions .
the degree of aggregate stripping is measured to assess aggregate retention .
binder binder is the material used to hold a mixture of aggregates together as a cohesive mass on the road surface .
retexturing removal of excess binder to improve the texture of the road surface with an aim of providing a binder level of num to num of the height of the aggregate as is the case for a well textured surface .
sprayed seal the sprayed application of bituminous binder to a pavement surface followed by an application of aggregate to form an all weather skid resistant road surfacing .
surface texture the mean height of aggregate particles above the level of the binder as determined by the vicroads test for surface texture testing as listed in standard section num .
num plant and equipment the retexturing and surface cleaning machine shall consist of a self contained system which uses high pressure water jets to dislodgeremove excess binder from the road surface remove unwanted materials from the road surface .
the equipment shall incorporate a suction system to uplift all of the dislodged particles of binder or other materials being removed and all sprayed water .
the equipment shall meet all requirements of as num high pressure water hydro jetting systems .
num water supply the contractor shall supply all water for the high pressure water retexturing process and shall ensure that all permitslicenses are obtained and any associated charges have been paid to the appropriate authority .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth proof of permitsapprovals shall be submitted to the superintendent prior to the obtaining any water from local streams channels or dams .
a record shall be kept of the quantity of water obtained from these sources .
no additional payment shall be made for meeting this requirement .
all associated costs for meeting this requirement shall be included in the contract sum .
num acceptance of work a surface texture acceptance of work for retexturing shall be based on visual assessment .
in marginal cases the superintendent may request that nominated areas be tested in accordance with the relevant test method for assessment in accordance with table num .
the test lot size shall not be more than num m of single traffic lane or num mnum for other areas .
table num test requirements for minimum surface texture treatment average texture depth mm as per vicroads test method for each aggregate size action required size num num size num size num sprayed seals all types num num num accept num to num num to num num to num rectify or reduce payment for the lot by num mnum num num num work to be rectified b aggregate retention acceptance of work for aggregate retention shall be based on visual assessment .
in marginal cases the superintendent may request that nominated areas be tested in accordance with the relevant test method for aggregate stripping for assessment in accordance with table num .
depending on the measured degree of aggregate stripping the contractor shall take action as specified in table num .
for any testing undertaken the maximum lot size shall be not be more than num mnum .
table num assessment of aggregate retention degree of aggregate stripping action required num to num accept num to num work to be retested within one month prior to the end of the defects liability period .
if the degree of aggregate stripping has increased since it was last tested the work shall be rectified before the end of the defects liability period .
greater than num work shall be rectified within num days .
c areas exempt from testing areas exempt from testing requirements are noted in table num schedule of details .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth in addition to any areas noted in the above table as being exempt from testing requirements the contractor may seek approval from the superintendent to exempt further areas from testing requirements .
areas that may be considered include gritted areas asphalt surfaces and distressed areas .
in these cases a visual assessment of the improved surface condition shall be undertaken .
num waste management a liquid waste liquid waste generated from this process shall be disposed of to a treatment plant registered by the environment protection authority to accept the type of waste generated .
b solid waste solid waste shall be disposed of to a waste facility licensed to accept the type of waste material generated .
the contractor may request to leave the solid waste at a site approved by the superintendent for a period of not more than num week prior to moving the waste to a licensed waste facility .
if waste is to be left at an approved site other than a licensed waste facility for any period of time the waste must be contained to the site where it was placed with appropriate bunding used .
num limit of work the limits of work at the start and finish chainages and any individual areas within these limits have been marked on the pavement surface .
these are described in table num .
the superintendent may increase or decrease the limits of work listed in the schedules .
the contractor will be notified in writing prior to works commencing on job items of such adjustments to the limits of work and the contract sum adjusted on a prorata basis using the item price tendered in the schedules .
where the change in the limits of work results in a net change of the item price by greater than num the amount in excess of num will be treated as a variation under clause num of the general conditions of contract .
num inclusion and deletion of job items the superintendent may cancel any work subject to notice of cancellation being given num week prior to the proposed commencement date .
the contractor will be notified in writing of such deletion and the contract sum adjusted by the price tendered in the schedules for the job items deleted .
no additional payment will be made as a result of the deletion of any job item .
however where the deletion of job items results in a contract sum reduction of more than num of the original contract sum the deletion of job items in excess of this amount will be treated as a variation under clause num of the general conditions of contract .
the superintendent may request the contractor to undertake additional surface cleaning or retexturing works at sites not listed in the schedules .
these works will be treated as a variation under clause num of the general conditions of contract .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num damaged pavement areas caused by contracted works the contractor shall be responsible for all repairs to any damaged pavement areas caused as a result of these works .
damage includes areas such as those of excessive texture depth loss of aggregate and loss of surfacing .
the contractor shall immediately advise the superintendent of any damage caused and the nature of the damage .
before treating any damaged areas the contractor shall have advised the superintendent of the remedial works proposed and have obtained the superintendents approval to those works .
num records the contractor shall complete and forward to the superintendent a job completion report sealing using the proforma included as attachment a to this section num also available electronically in microsoft word and excel format from the standard documents page of the vicroads website or an equivalent proforma as approved by the superintendent for each job item in the schedules .
the completed form shall be submitted within seven days of completion of each surface cleaning or retexturing job .
the contractor shall show and certify by initialling each item on the above job completion report the actual status of the item compared to the specified requirement for that item and sign and date the report prior to forwarding to the superintendent .
the contractor shall ensure that where a representative of the superintendent is on site during the works that officer validates the works as provided on the job completion report .
a job completion report shall also be completed for any repair works to damaged areas .
num accuracy of quantities the total area of each job item in table num is accurate to num .
no additional payment or deduction will be made where the measured total treated area of each job falls within num of the listed area .
department of state growth may num section num page num onum department of state growth numschedule of details table num schedule of details item refer sch num freeway highway or road name chainag e approximate length m approximate width m approximate area mnum treat ment type num aggregate sizes mm other requirements num road link no .
map ref num note to author the following items are examples only .
change text to suit your specification .
delete this row before printing num birchiprainbow road num numdnum num num num num num rx num western highway num numgnum num lane num left lane num num num num num sc num remove oil from surface num lane num middle lane num num num num num rx num num lane num right lane num num various various num rx num various patches in wheel paths as marked num shoulders both sides num num num num x num num sc num remove lichen from shoulders .
exempt from minimum surface texture requirement .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth may num section num page num onum vicroads june num section num department of state growth table num schedule of details item refer sch num freeway highway or road name chainag e approximate length m approximate width m approximate area mnum treat ment type num aggregate sizes mm other requirements num road link no .
map ref num num mallee highway west bound num numbnum num varies num num rx num various patches in wheel paths generally num m wide and mainly in outer wheel path .
exempt from minimum surface texture requirements as surface has been extensively gritted .
if any space is left blank it shall be read as not applicable .
notes on table num num treatment type surface cleaning sc retexturing rx .
num typical other requirements include special restrictions on timing of works exempt areas type of material to be removed from surface .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth attachment a to section num job completion report sealing contract no .
.. job specifics job no treatment road name seal date start chainage stacksite location end chainage existing conditions circle or fill in weather sunny clear ocast windy showers wet air temp pavement temp pavement isolated stone loss stripping flushed wheel paths flushed patching cracking regulatory speed limit num km num km num km num km num km other aggregate conditions clean dry dusty dirty damp wet aggregate precoat predelivery onsite no precoat ncr required yes no reasons ncr no traffic control circle or fill in subcontractor managing traffic control yes no subcontractor subcontractor initials signs during work installed to wtm code yes no date time installed speed limit kmhr removed yes no date time removed tmp no .
used after work installed to wtm code yes no date time installed speed limit kmhr removed yes no date time removed tmp no .
used traffic delays average delay to vehicles minutes queues average queue length vehicles sealing works run no .
pretreatment run num run num run num run num run num totals start chainage end chainage lane description air temperature pavement temperature length m width m area mnum binder type tank dip start litres tank dip end litres quantity sprayed litres actual application rate lmnum average design application rate lmnum average mix bitumenflux oilcutteradditive num num num num num aggregate aggregate size quantity mnum average least dimension ald aggregate design spread rate mnummnum ald ald ald ald ald actual design spread rate mnummnum ald ald ald ald ald rolling time hrs delineation existing rrpms removed yes no date trrpms installed yes no date spacings m uncovered yes no date reinstatement pavement markings numst coat specified date due actual date done pavement markings numnd coat specified date due actual date done rrpms specified date due actual date done weather delays to linemarking days i certify the above details as correct contractors representative print name contractors representative signed i concur with the above superintendents representative print name superintendents representative signed version num april num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth section num high friction surface treatment this section crossreferences sections num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for the supply and placement of high friction surface treatment hfst .
num definitions the following definitions apply to the high friction surface treatment clauses .
accelerant accelerant refers to any material used to reduce the curing time of the binder .
aggregate aggregate refers to any natural or synthetic particles used as a cover material applied to the binder to provide texture and skid resistance to achieve a high friction surface treatment .
aggregate coating aggregate coating includes all materials used to cover andor colour aggregate .
aggregate retention aggregate retention refers to the ability of the binder to adhere and retain the aggregate under traffic or maintenance conditions .
binder binder refers to any resin used to bond the aggregate to the existing road surface .
cleaning agents cleaning agents include all materials used to remove dirt grime fuel oil and other materials from the existing surface .
delamination delamination includes failure of the binder and aggregate to adhere to the existing pavement surface .
high friction surface treatment high friction surface treatments provide increased skid resistance for vehicles .
the treatment consists of a binder applied to the existing road surface and aggregate spread over the binder surface .
high friction surface treatment may include an additional layer of binder over the aggregate layer .
paint paint shall comply with the relevant standard listed in section num .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth polished stone value polished stone value of aggregate shall be determined in accordance with vicroads test method rcnum or bs en num .
priming material priming material refers to any substance used to clean and prepare the existing road for the application of binder .
priming materials may be used to improve the adhesion of the binder to the existing roadway .
protective sealer protective sealer refers to any substance used to protect and seal the high friction surface treatment from fuel and oils spills from traffic .
skid resistance skid resistance is the friction between the vehicle tyre and the pavement surface .
surface texture surface texture refers to the mean height of aggregate particles above the level of the binder .
surface texture shall be measured in accordance with the vicroads surface texture by sand patch rcnum .
test lots acceptance of work and materials shall be based on testing of the work or material in lots .
a lot will consist of a single batch or area of like work which has been constructed under essentially uniform conditions and is essentially homogeneous with respect to material and appearance .
a lot shall be the smaller of either each days production or each num mnum placed each day .
discrete portions of a lot which are nonhomogeneous with respect to material and appearance shall be excluded from the lot and either treated as separate lots or replaced .
where the areas excluded from a lot as nonhomogeneous exceed num of the total lot area the whole of the lot shall be rejected .
thermoplastic thermoplastic shall comply with the relevant standard listed in section num .
num details of materials a binder the binder shall be resistant to fuel and oils spills from traffic non flammable after placement and curing on road surface able to be broomed and high pressure water cleaned without damage free from lead capable of providing strong adhesion between the existing surface and the aggregate to achieve a uniform surface .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth thermoplastic binders are not permitted .
paint is not permitted as a binder .
the following binder details shall be provided to the superintendent at least num days prior to the start of works i priming materials type and source ii manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for priming material supply and placement iii binder type and source iv manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for binder mix quantities and tolerances on mixing components v manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for mixing of binder and components vi manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for pot life of binder i.e .
time of mixing to time of spreading vii manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for placement of binder including placement quantities and tolerances and placement temperatures viii manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for curing ix manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for accelerants if applicable x manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for supply and placement of protective sealers .
b aggregate the aggregate shall be clean of uniform shape and quality free from dirt free from clay and organic matter resistant to fuel and oils spills from traffic able to withstand traffic stresses without damage and able to be broomed and cleaned with high pressure water without damage .
the following aggregate details shall be provided to the superintendent at least num days prior to the start of works i aggregate type source and gradation ii manufacturers or contractors recommendationsinstructions for placement of aggregate including spread rate iii polished stone value of the aggregate .
c product performance documented evidence of satisfactory performance over at least num years for the high friction surface treatment in a heavy urban traffic environment shall be provided with the tender .
the documentation may include references from clients details of sites with the high friction surface treatment evidence of texture with time evidence of skid resistance with time evidence of colour retention with time evidence of durability with time .
restricted use of untried products on a trial basis shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent .
the superintendent may request additional information regarding performance of the proposed high friction surface treatment at no additional cost .
the superintendent shall determine if the documented evidence is satisfactory .
only products with satisfactory documented evidence will be considered for award of the works .
acceptance of the documented evidence and acceptance of the proposed high friction surface treatment does not guarantee the performance of the high friction surface treatment and does not relieve the contractor from any of the requirements of this document .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num environmental protection the high friction surface treatment shall not emit offensive odours after opening to traffic such that complaints are received by the department of state growth .
the superintendent shall determine if the high friction surface treatment is producing offensive odours and if the material is therefore unacceptable .
the superintendents decision will be final .
high friction surface treatment which is deemed to be unacceptable shall be rectified with the agreement of the superintendent .
num site preparation the existing pavement markings at the site may be covered by the surface treatment by the contractor as part of the site preparation works or may be masked to ensure the high friction surface treatment is not applied to the markings .
all raised reflective pavement markers rrpms may either be removed from the area of works prior to any high friction surface treatment being placed or masked to ensure the high friction surface treatment is not applied to the rrpms .
all masking shall be removed prior to opening the site to traffic .
all reinstatement of rrpms and pavement markings shall be in accordance with section num .
any damage caused to the surface by the removal of pavement marking and rrpms shall be repaired prior to placement of high friction surface treatment .
the proposed methods of removal and repair shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval .
all loose material grit stones vegetative matter and rubbish shall be removed from the area of works prior to placement of high friction surface treatment .
the site may be further cleaned and prepared as required by the contractor .
cleaning and preparation shall not cause structural damage to the pavement .
all cleaning agents and collected material shall be removed from site in accordance with environment protection authority requirements for the type of waste generated .
stikeout this paragraph if not requiredcracks and sawcut traffic detector loops in the existing surface shall be masked with a maximum of num mm total width of tape .
the masking tape shall ensure high friction surface treatment is not placed over the cracks and detector loops and shall be removed after the high friction surface treatment is placed .
hp high friction surface treatment shall not be placed until the superintendent and contractor agree the road surface is ready for surfacing .
num placement high friction surface treatment shall be applied to produce a visually uniform surface .
the edges of the work shall provide a neat and clean line onto the adjacent surface .
a priming materials priming materials may be used on all or part of the site at the contractors discretion .
b binder binder shall be spread to provide a uniform thickness over the site .
the spread rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area and the result recorded .
all spread rates for the work shall be provided to the superintendent .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth c aggregate aggregate shall be spread to provide a uniform thickness over the site .
the spread rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area and the result recorded .
all spread rates for the work shall be provided to the superintendent .
d temperature the pavement temperature of the site shall be measured and recorded at least every num hours during the works .
the temperature shall be measured using an infrared temperature gauge accurate to numc .
the temperature results shall be provided to the superintendent .
e accelerants accelerants may be used to reduce the time of curing for the high friction surface treatment .
the spread rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area and the result recorded .
all spread rates for the work shall be provided to the superintendent .
num schedule of details the details for each site of works for hfst are job no road name map ref location appro x area mnum num hr aad t other requirements no additional payment or deduction shall be made where the measured total area of each job falls within num of the listed area .
num cleanup all excess material shall be removed from the site .
the removal of loose aggregate and disposal from site is the responsibility of the contractor .
excess aggregate shall be removed from the finished surface prior to opening the site to traffic .
excess aggregate shall be removed from the roadway kerb and channel driveways and any trafficked and untrafficked areas prior to opening to traffic .
hp the contractor and superintendent shall agree the site is neat tidy and free of excess aggregate prior to opening to traffic .
material which becomes loose after the initial cleanup shall be removed at num hours num days and num days after placement unless otherwise directed by the superintendent .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num acceptance of work high friction surface treatment shall provide a visually uniform surface with uniform aggregate retention and be free from delamination stripping and areas of wearscuffing .
a surface texture the surface texture of high friction surface treatment shall be a minimum of num mm as measured using vicroads surface texture by sand patch .
each lot of material shall be tested within num weeks of initial placement and within num weeks prior to the end of the defects liability period .
b skid resistance not used num maintenance and repairs the contractor shall be responsible for monitoring and maintenance of the high friction surface treatment from the time of placement until the end of the defects liability period .
the contractor shall carry out any works necessary to protect and maintain the surface and effect repairs to all surface failures .
such failures include but are not limited to loss of aggregate bleeding fatty areas flushing loss of skid resistance and delamination from the existing surface .
the contractor is not responsible for defects caused by either settlement or failure of the existing pavement or for damage including gouging and vehicle fire and repairs to the surface caused by traffic incidents .
areas of delamination less than num mnum are not required to be repaired unless the total of defective areas exceeds num of any area .
areas of defect shall be agreed with the superintendent .
areas shall be squaredup and extend to the width of the traffic lane .
defective high friction surface treatment shall be removed and replaced .
repairs shall be undertaken within num weeks of notification by the superintendent .
urgent repairs shall be started onsite within num hours of notice by the superintendent .
hp the contractor shall advise the superintendent in writing of the proposed treatment for any repairs before undertaking the work .
department of state growth section num coloured surface treatments this section crossreferences sections num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for the supply and placement of coloured surface treatments .
num definitions the following definitions apply to the coloured surface treatment clauses accelerant accelerant refers to any material used to reduce the curing time of the binder .
aggregate aggregate refers to any natural or synthetic particles used as a cover material applied to the binder to provide a coloured and textured skid resistant surface .
aggregate coating aggregate coating includes all materials used to cover andor colour aggregate .
aggregate retention aggregate retention refers to the ability of the binder to adhere and retain the aggregate under traffic and maintenance activities .
binder binder refers to any resin used to bond the aggregate to the existing road surface .
cleaning agents cleaning agents include all materials used to remove dirt grime fuel oil and other materials from the existing surface .
coloured surface treatment coloured surface treatments provide a trafficable surface that is coloured for enhanced delineation for specific road uses .
the treatment consists of a coloured binder applied to the existing road surface and coloured aggregate spread over the binder surface .
a coloured surface treatment may include an additional layer of coloured binder or protective sealer over the aggregate layer .
delamination delamination refers to failure of the binder and aggregate to adhere to the existing pavement surface .
polished stone value the polished stone value psv of an aggregate is a friction rating derived from test results .
measure of the aggregates resistance to polishing shall be determined in accordance with department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth vicroads test method rcnum .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth priming material priming material refers to any substance used to clean and prepare the existing road surface for the application of binder and improve the adhesion of the binder to the existing roadway .
protective sealer protective sealer refers to any substance used to protect and seal the coloured surface treatment .
sideways force coefficient sfc sideways force coefficient also called sideways friction coefficient is a general term for the ratio of the resistance to sideways motion to the normal component of force between the tyres of a vehicle and the road surface when using sideway force test equipment .
skid resistance skid resistance is the friction between the vehicle tyre and the pavement surface .
skid resistance shall be measured using a portable pendulum friction tester tested in accordance with as num wet method .
surface texture the mean height of aggregate particles above the level of the binder as determined by the vicroads test for surface texture testing as listed in section num .
test lots acceptance of work and materials shall be based on testing of the work or material in lots .
a lot will consist of a single batch or area of like work which has been constructed under uniform conditions and is essentially homogeneous with respect to material and appearance .
a lot shall be the lesser of either one days production or each num mnum .
num materials a binder the binder shall be i resistant to fuel and oils spills from traffic ii non flammable after placement and curing on road surface iii able to be swept using a mechanical broom and cleaned with high pressure water without damage iv free from lead and other heavy metals v stable in uv light vi capable of providing strong adhesion between the existing surface and the aggregate to achieve a uniform surface .
thermoplastic and paint binders are not permitted .
department of state growth the following primer and binder details shall be provided to the superintendent at least num days prior to the start of works i priming materials type and source ii binder type and source iii manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for priming material supply and placement iv manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for binder mix quantities and tolerances on mixing components v manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for mixing of binder and components vi manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for pot life of binder i.e .
time of mixing to time of spreading vii manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for placement of binder including application rates and tolerances and placement temperatures viii manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for curing ix manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for accelerants if applicable x manufacturers recommendationsinstructions for supply and placement of protective sealers xi type of coloured pigment .
b aggregate the aggregate shall be clean free from dirt clay and organic matter of uniform shape and quality resistant to fuel and oils spills from traffic able to withstand traffic stresses without damage and able to be swept using a mechanical broom and cleaned with high pressure water equipment without damage .
the aggregate may be pigmented to provide a colour match of the final product .
the following aggregate details shall be provided to the superintendent at least num days prior to the start of works i aggregate type source and gradation ii manufacturers or contractors recommendationsinstructions for placement of aggregate including spread rate iii polished stone value psv aggregates shall have a minimum psv of num .
num product performance documented evidence of satisfactory performance over at least num years for the coloured surface treatment in a heavy urban traffic environment shall be provided with the tender .
the documentation may include references from clients details of sites with the coloured surface treatment evidence of texture with time evidence of skid resistance with time evidence of colour retention with time evidence of durability with time .
the superintendent may request additional information regarding performance of the proposed coloured surface treatment and shall determine if the documented evidence is satisfactory .
only products with satisfactory documented evidence will be considered for award of the works .
the superintendent may require a sample of the material to be provided .
the sample shall be a minimum size of num mm x num mm which is representative of the material to be applied .
acceptance of the documented evidence and acceptance of the proposed coloured surface treatment does not guarantee the performance of the coloured surface treatment and does not relieve the contractor from any performance requirements .
restricted use of untried products on a trial basis shall be subject to the approval of the department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth superintendent .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num offensive odour the coloured surface treatment shall not emit offensive odours after opening to traffic .
the superintendent shall determine if the coloured surface treatment is producing offensive odours .
any coloured surface treatment which is deemed to be unacceptable shall be rectified with the agreement of the superintendent .
num material safety data sheets copies of material safety data sheets msds for priming materials binders aggregate coatings protective sealers and any other work materials shall be provided to the superintendent prior to the start of works .
any requirements for environmental protection measures as recommended by the material manufacturer shall be undertaken .
all materials shall be used and stored in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and msdss .
num site preparation all loose material grit stones vegetative matter and rubbish shall be removed from the area of works prior to placement of the coloured surface treatment .
the site may be further cleaned and prepared as required .
cleaning and preparation shall not cause structural damage to the pavement .
all cleaning agents and collected material shall be removed from site and disposed in accordance with environment protection authority requirements for the type of waste generated .
existing pavement markings shall be masked to ensure the coloured surface treatment is not applied to the markings .
all raised reflective pavement markers rrpms shall be removed from the area of works prior to any coloured surface treatment being placed .
new rrpms shall be reinstated after the application of the coloured surface treatment .
service pits and valve covers less than num mnum and drainage grates and frames shall also be masked .
larger pit and valve covers shall be covered with the coloured surface treatment .
all lifting mechanisms and joins between the lid and frame shall be masked and protected such that the coloured surface treatment does not impede lifting and replacing lids .
any damage caused to the surface by the removal of pavement markings and rrpms shall be repaired prior to placement of the coloured surface treatment .
hp the superintendent shall agree to the method of removal and any pavement repairs for pavement markings and rrpms prior to these works occurring .
all pavement markings covered by the application of coloured surface treatments shall be reinstated in accordance with section num .
this shall also apply to any pavement markings or rrpms which are covered partially or wholly by the coloured surface treatment due to inadequate masking .
department of state growth num placement coloured surface treatments shall be applied to produce a visually uniform coloured and textured surface .
the edges of the work shall provide a neat and clean line onto the adjacent surface .
hp coloured surface treatments shall not be placed until the superintendent agrees that the prepared road surface is ready for surfacing .
a priming materials priming materials where used shall be applied uniformly over the site .
the application rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area and result recorded .
all application rates for the work shall be provided to the superintendent .
b binder binder shall be spread to provide a uniform coverage and thickness over the site and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the spread rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area and the result recorded .
all application rates for the work shall be provided to the superintendent .
c aggregate aggregate shall be spread to provide a uniform thickness over the site .
the spread rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area and the result recorded .
all application rates for the work shall be provided to the superintendent .
d temperature the pavement temperature of the site shall be measured and recorded at least every num hours during the works .
the temperature shall be measured using an infrared temperature gauge accurate to numc .
the temperature results shall be provided to the superintendent .
all materials shall be placed within any temperature limits recommended by the manufacturer .
e accelerants accelerants may be used to reduce the time of curing for the coloured surface treatment .
the application rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area and the result recorded .
all application rates for the work shall be provided to the superintendent .
num schedule of details the details for each site of works for coloured surface treatments are detailed in table num .
table num schedule of details job no road name map ref location appro x area mnum num hr aad t other requirements no additional payment or deduction shall be made where the measured total area of each job department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth falls within num of the listed area .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth num cleanup all excess material shall be removed from the site and disposed in accordance with epa requirements .
all masking shall be removed prior to opening the site to traffic .
excess aggregate shall be removed from the finished surface prior to opening the site to traffic .
excess aggregate shall be removed from the roadway kerb and channel driveways and any adjacent trafficked and untrafficked areas prior to opening to traffic .
hp the superintendent shall agree the site is neat tidy and free of excess aggregate prior to opening to traffic .
all material which becomes loose after the initial cleanup shall be removed at num hours num days and num days after placement .
num acceptance of work coloured surface treatments shall provide a visually uniform surface with uniform aggregate retention and be free from delamination stripping and areas of wearscuffing .
any work that fails to meet the minimum requirements shall be rectified .
acceptance of work shall be on a lot basis .
discrete portions of a lot which are non homogeneous with respect to material and appearance shall be excluded from the lot and either treated as separate lots or replaced .
where the areas excluded from a lot as non homogeneous exceed num of the total lot area the whole of the lot shall be rejected .
a surface texture acceptance of work for surface texture shall be based on visual assessment however in marginal cases the superintendent may request that nominated areas be tested in accordance with the test method for assessment of surface texture testing as listed in section num .
a lot will consist of a single batch or area of like work which has been constructed under uniform conditions and is essentially homogeneous with respect to material and appearance .
a lot shall be the lesser of one days production or each num mnum .
the surface texture of each test site within the lot shall be a minimum of num mm .
b skid resistance the superintendent may require that the work be tested and assessed for skid resistance using the following method portable pendulum friction tester the coloured surface treatment shall be tested using a pendulum friction tester in accordance with as num wet method .
each lot shall have num randomly selected test locations selected in accordance with vicroads test method rcnum selection of test sites within a lot .
each lot shall achieve a minimum mean british pendulum number bpn of num with no individual test location having a bpn of less than num at any time during the defects liability period .
the method selected to assess skid resistance shall be the most practical for the extent and size of work .
the superintendent may require testing at any time prior to the end of the defects liability period .
the cost of skid resistance testing shall be included in the rate for supply and placement department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth of the surface treatment .
c colour the colour of the finished surface shall be a rating num approximate match or better with one of the following australian standard num num colours as listed in table num .
the initial colour shall be measured in accordance with australian standard num .
each lot of material shall be tested within num days of placement .
testing shall be undertaken onsite and under daylight conditions only .
each lot of coloured surface treatment shall provide a rating num approximate match or better with adjacent lots .
table num colour requirements use asnums num colour bus lanes nominally red preferred colour rnum raspberry acceptable alternatives rnum waratah rnum crimson bicycle lanes nominally green preferred colour gnum emerald green acceptable alternatives gnum traffic green gnum shamrock the same consistent colour shall be used along a continuous route or within a given locality .
num maintenance and repairs the contractor shall be responsible for monitoring and maintenance of the coloured surface treatment from the time of placement until the end of the defects liability period .
the contractor shall carry out any works necessary to protect and maintain the surface and repair all surface failures including loss of aggregate bleeding fatty areas flushing loss of skid resistance and delamination from the existing surface .
the contractor is not responsible for defects caused by either settlement or failure of the existing pavement or for damage including gouging and vehicle fire and repairs to the surface caused by traffic incidents .
areas of delamination less than num mnum are not required to be repaired unless the total of defective areas exceeds num of the total area .
areas of defect shall be agreed with the superintendent .
defective areas of coloured surface treatment shall be squaredup and removed and replaced .
repairs shall be undertaken within num weeks of notification by the superintendent .
urgent repairs shall be started onsite within num hours of notice by the superintendent .
hp the contractor shall advise the superintendent in writing of the proposed department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth treatment for any repairs before undertaking the work .
num excluded areas the following areas are excluded from the limits of work all service pits and valve covers less than nummnum traffic detector loops pedestrian crossings the white pavement markings and designated travel path of pedestrians .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num excavations this section crossreferences section num .
if section num is relevant it should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general excavation shall consist of all clearing and grubbing necessary to clear the way for proposed excavations the excavation of foundation pits or interiors of cofferdams or cylinders the preparation of foundation and shall include all sheeting and bracing drainage pumping or bailing and other necessary work and materials .
num timbering and support for excavations in soil or in rock containing unfavourable jointing bedding or weak seams which are deeper than num m the contractor shall provide adequate support or benching to prevent collapse of excavation faces andor heaving of excavation base .
works shall be undertaken in accordance with all relevant acts regulations and codes and in particular the work health and safety act num .
for excavations adjacent to railway property alongside roadways in or alongside waterways and excavations deeper than num m the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for review detailed drawings of bracing andor sheeting proposals including design calculations and methods of construction and removal not less than num business days prior to excavation commencing .
for excavations carried out adjacent to railway property obtaining approval of the appropriate railway authority and rail entities shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
hp no excavation adjacent to railway property shall commence without the approval of the superintendent .
all works and the quality of all materials used for the temporary support of excavations shall conform with the appropriate australian standards .
num excavation preparation water shall not be permitted to remain in the bottom of excavations during construction .
the quality of the material rock or soil exposed in the side walls and at the bottom of the excavation shall be inspected by a geotechnical consultant with suitable experience to confirm that the material is of the type and quality indicated on the drawings .
all loose material and pockets of unsound material mud andor water shall be removed to expose the foundation material being of the type and quality indicated on the drawings .
the bottoms of excavations shall be trimmed in horizontal beds or steps .
the steps shall have maximum vertical rise height to horizontal run length of num to num ratio .
where the excavation is for construction of footings the sides of footings shall be formed in accordance with section num formwork .
the contractor may dispense with formwork for the sides of the footing if all unsupported faces of the excavation are inspected by a geotechnical consultant who confirms the material exposed in the unsupported faces has the material strength to maintain the stability of the faces without external e.g .
formwork or internal support e.g .
soil nailing .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num where concrete is cast against an unformed surface an extra num mm cover shall be provided to the reinforcement .
the bottom of any excavation which has been disturbed by the action of water or any construction activity such that it does not meet the specification requirement shall be rectified by the contractor .
hp blinding sealing or foundation concrete shall not be placed until the bottom of the excavation has been reviewed by the superintendent .
within num hours of a request from the superintendent the geotechnical inspection reports shall be submitted to the superintendent for review .
the contractor shall provide appropriate facilities for the inspection of all work and shall be responsible for all costs associated with the provision of such facilities and the engagement of a geotechnical consultant who shall be prequalified with vicroads or approved by the superintendent .
department of state growth section num cofferdams this section crossreferences sections num or num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the design construction and removal of cofferdams .
a cofferdam is an opentopped temporary structure for the purpose of providing a safe workplace for undertaking construction activities in water .
cofferdams may be constructed from steel sheet piling or from precast reinforced concrete and may be framed internally .
the construction of caissons fully enclosed and submerged temporary structures is outside of the scope of this document .
num standards design and construction of cofferdams shall comply with the requirements of relevant australian standards .
section num provides a list of current companion documents referenced in the vicroads standard specifications for roadworks and bridgeworks .
in circumstances where as num and as num requirements differ the requirements of as num shall take precedence over those of as num .
num work in and adjacent to water hp the contractor shall submit an environmental management plan for construction of the cofferdam to the superintendent for review in accordance with the requirements of section num or num .
before entering a waterway for construction purposes the contractor shall obtain the written approval of the relevant authority .
the contractor shall observe all requirements imposed by the relevant authority and included in the written approval .
a copy of the written approval shall be provided to the superintendent prior to the commencement of work .
the contractor shall to the satisfaction of the relevant authority and the superintendent pump andor treat water as required to enable construction of the cofferdam install measures to prevent the escape of sediment andor construction materials into the water remove the cofferdam and associated temporary jetties and causeways and restore the waterway .
on completion of the works and prior to the award of practical completion the contractor shall obtain a written declaration from the relevant authority that the waterway has been left in a satisfactory condition .
the contractor shall continue to maintain the restored areas of waterway during the defects liability period and at the end of the defects liability period shall obtain a written statement of acceptance from the relevant authority which shall be submitted to the superintendent .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num design construction and removal of cofferdams hp not less than num days prior to commencement of construction of cofferdams the contractor shall submit the following to the superintendent for review a detailed drawings of the cofferdam b the method of construction and removal of the cofferdam .
the method of construction and removal shall include the following a sequence and method of construction dismantling and removal b procedure for and restrictions on the temporary removal of internal bracing c safety procedures during construction use and removal including delivery of materials and equipment into the cofferdam d details of access provisions during construction use and removal e emergency evacuation procedure and details of emergency equipment such as lifebelts and boats for all stages of construction use and removal f details of the training of all personnel involved in the construction and use of the cofferdam including safety training g a dewatering procedure including details of the dewatering equipment h a procedure for identifying and controlling leakages i a rewatering procedure j a procedure for discharge of water into waterways including protection of waterways from turbidity during dewatering k procedure to control blowin andor ground heave at the base of the excavation for each stage of the excavation .
hp the design of the cofferdam shall be proofengineered by a consultant who is pre qualified in accordance with the vicroads scheme for prequalification or approved by the superintendent .
the cofferdam shall be watertight of adequate strength and shall be anchored in position to prevent movement .
the construction use and removal of the cofferdam shall be conducted in a safe manner and proper provision shall be made for the safety of all persons involved .
a safe means of access shall be provided for the use of site personnel and the delivery of materials and equipment from dry land to the cofferdam .
unless otherwise specified in the contract cofferdams shall be selfsupporting and shall not be connected to or supported by any existing structure .
the contractor shall provide and maintain a standby pump throughout the period that the cofferdam is in use until its removal .
the standby pump shall be of the same capacity as the pump used to dewater the cofferdam .
unless otherwise specified in the contract the cofferdam and all its component parts shall be removed on completion of the structure and no part of the cofferdam shall be incorporated in the finished structure .
members of the public shall be prevented from accessing the cofferdam .
if a cofferdam is to be filled the filling shall comply with the relevant sections of this specification .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num cylinders this section crossreferences sections num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the construction of cylinders which comprise a circular precast concrete open caisson together with a cast in situ plain or reinforced concrete core .
cylinders shall be limited to a maximum depth of num metres and shall have a minimum diameter of num metres .
num standard design and construction of cylinders shall comply with the requirements of the australian standard for bridge design foundations and soil supporting structures as listed in section num .
where a cylinder footing has been designed in accordance with the australian standard for piling design and installation as listed in section num and design requirements differ between the two australian standards the requirements of bridge design foundations and soil supporting structures shall take precedence over those of the requirements of piling design and installation .
num design of cylinders if the contractor is required to design the cylinders the design shall be treated as falsework in accordance with the requirements of section num .
the procedure for construction of the cylinder including requirements for sealing shall be included on the drawings and shall be subject to the proofengineering requirements of section num .
the cylinder shall comprise precast concrete pipes that comply with the requirements of the australian standard for precast concrete pipes pressure and nonpressure .
the wall of the cylinder shall be treated as non loadbearing formwork and the design shall incorporate a layer of compressible material at the top of the cylinder to prevent the transmission of foundation loads into the cylinder wall .
the cylinder shall be robust and of sufficient strength to support temporary construction loads .
cylinders shall have the same durability and design life as the structural element that they support .
in situ concrete for cylinders shall comply with section num .
reinforcement for cylinders shall comply with section num .
num preparation of foundation excavation for cylinders shall comply with section num .
to prevent falls and the fall of objects into the cylinder a safety barrier and kickboard shall be provided around the top of the cylinder throughout construction and until the cylinder has been filled .
the barrier shall have a minimum height of num metre and shall be set back from the edge of the cylinder to allow access for working .
the kickboard shall be at the rim of the cylinder and shall be a solid barrier with a minimum height of num mm .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num excavations for cylinders founded in rock shall penetrate the rock to the dimension shown on the drawings or to a depth of num mm whichever is the greater for the full circumference of the cylinder .
the remaining exposed rock surface within the cylinder shall be trimmed and cleaned to remove any loose rock and soil .
excavation for the base of the cylinder shall be treated in accordance with the requirements for rock subgrade as stated in section num excluding the requirements for filling of depressions and capping .
num construction of cylinders cylinders shall be constructed in accordance with the drawings .
cylinders shall be vertical with a maximum tolerance on verticality of num mm per num metres of depth and to the level stated on the drawings .
deviation from the position shown on the drawings shall not exceed num mm in any direction .
cylinder sections shall be securely fixed together so as to prevent displacement and to exclude flowing water .
damaged or displaced cylinder sections shall be removed and the cylinder reassembled or replaced .
num sealing sealing of cylinders if required shall be in accordance with the drawings and shall be subject to the requirements of clause num .
num placing concrete hp concrete shall not be placed until the excavation and sealing has been approved by the superintendent .
cylinders shall be concreted within two days of completion of the excavation .
otherwise the excavation shall be resubmitted for the superintendents approval .
concrete shall be delivered and placed in accordance with section num .
placing of concrete under water is not permitted unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
num testing where testing is required in the specification or shown on the drawings the following testing shall be undertaken by the contractor integrity testing shall be carried out on cylinders in accordance with integrity test methods specified in as num .
integrity testing equipment shall be capable of checking crosssectional irregularities in cylinders and identifying the location and characteristics of any significant anomalies such as voids or contaminants .
acceptance criteria supervision and reporting of integrity testing shall be in accordance with the requirements of as num .
testing shall be carried out on each cylinder constructed .
raw data of pile integrity testing shall be provided to the superintendent within num hours of request of the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num driven piles this section crossreferences sections num num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general the following information shall be provided for each pile on relevant foundation drawings a pile diameter and founding level b design axial and lateral capacity ultimate limit state and serviceability limit state c design bending moment capacity ultimate limit state and serviceability limit state d inspection requirements foundation conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via end bearing and socket conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via skin friction e pile testing requirements e.g .
magnitude of test loads clause num f pile acceptance criteria criterion num the performance of the pile footing under the design serviceability load and criterion num a resistance equal to at least the design geotechnical ultimate limit state g reference of geotechnical investigation and design reports from which the above information has been established .
piles shall be driven in the locations and to the levels shown on the drawings .
care must be taken to ensure that piles are not damaged during transport handling and driving .
piles that are damaged shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
piles that the superintendent considers can not be repaired shall be rejected .
piles shall be clearly marked at num mm intervals starting from the pile toe .
piles shall be driven in accordance with as num bridge design .
details of australian standards as australiannew zealand standards asnzs and other documents referred to in this section are provided in section num .
num driving system piles shall be driven with sufficient energy to install the pile and to achieve an ultimate capacity in excess of the specified pile test load without causing damage to the pile .
where earth retention with or without compression capacity piles are to be driven and excavation will not be undertaken prior to testing the pile driving system shall be designed to have adequate energy to mobilise the entire length of the test pile .
the methodology used in determining the pile capacity below the ultimate retention height of the test pile should be provided to the superintendent for review prior to commencement of pile driving .
if a drophammer is used the height of fall of the hammer shall not exceed num m. the contractor shall provide details of the driving system including the make model and rated energy of the hammer the mass of the helmet and the proposed capblock and cushion materials .
these details including calculations which demonstrate that the proposed driving system has sufficient energy to achieve the specified pile test load shall be submitted to the superintendent for review not less than num days prior to the commencement of pile driving .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num driving during driving the tops of the piles shall be held and guided by a suitable helmet and protected by a cushioning material to avoid damage to the pile .
piles shall be guided into the specified position and shall not be bent or sprung into place during or after driving .
each pile shall be driven in a continuous operation and not left partly driven .
piles that are to be extended shall be spliced immediately after the driving of a particular section has been completed .
driving shall recommence as soon as the splice is completed .
the contractor shall ensure that piles achieve the specified accuracy of level and position .
the following tolerances shall apply to piles after driving a pile alignment deviation from the vertical or the specified rake shall not exceed num mm per metre length of pile b pile straightness deviation from vertical shall not exceed num mm per metre length of pile c pile position for piles in pile caps and the underside of crossheads pile head centre num mm of the specified position .
hp pile testing shall be carried out in the presence of the superintendent .
piles shall be driven to the levels shown on the drawings .
piles forced up by the driving of adjacent piles shall be redriven to the specified toe level .
piles shall achieve the specified ultimate load capacity .
set measurements shall be taken to verify capacity of each pile driven recorded as traces during driving to show the temporary compression of the pile and the permanent set .
traces must be taken relative to a stable hurdle supported securely by posts at least one pile diameter from each side of the pile .
where set measurements can not be undertaken due to ohs issues the contractor shall provide alternative methods to the superintendent for review at least num days prior to pile driving .
if the ultimate load capacity is not achieved at the specified level the pile shall have a restrike test undertaken in accordance with clause num restrike test ..
if directed by the superintendent the pile shall be driven until the specified ultimate load capacity is achieved .
if it is necessary to drive andor extend the head of a pile below the underside of the pile cap disturbance of the surrounding soil shall be minimised .
if it is necessary to drive piles through embankment fill the full depth of the fill shall be prebored prior to pile driving .
the diameter of the prebored hole shall not exceed the diagonal dimension of the pile minus num mm .
landfill sites containing domestic refuse shall be prebored prior to pile driving or sufficient refuse shall be removed down to the natural surface to create a stable and safe working area prior to pile driving .
where excavation of refuse is required the void created by removal of the refuse shall be backfilled with type b material and compacted in accordance with section num .
disposal of refuse shall be in accordance with section num section numstrikethrough inapplicable section .
after pile driving is completed all voids resulting from preboring shall be filled with grout or sand .
the area shall be reinstated and any damage made good .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num axial load capacity of driven piles piles shall achieve the capacity shown on the drawings which shall be confirmed by testing using the method described in clause num .
the pile test loads shown on the drawings shall be determined by the designer in accordance with as num bridge design and vicroads bridge technical note num .
hp pile testing shall be carried out in the presence of the superintendent .
the measured ultimate pile capacity achieved shall be determined by the contractor using the following a energy hiley formula strikethrough option a if inappropriate refer to guide notes and bridge technical note num and delete the contents of this bracket if the use of the hiley formula is permitted in accordance with bridge technical note num this shall not preclude the contractor from using wave equation methods of analysis .
i drop hammers hydraulic or cable lift r num ef.mr.h x mr enum.mp s num cnum cnum cnum mr mp ii diesel hammers r ef.en x mr enum.mp s num cnum cnum cnum mr mp where r measured ultimate pile capacity in kilonewtons mr mass of ram in kilograms h height of free fall of hammer in metres ef efficiency of fall of hammer mp mass of pile in kilograms including shoe and helmet en rated energy of hammer per blow in joule e coefficient of restitution s final set of pile in millimetres per blow using an average of num consecutive driving blows or the first num full retest blows cnum temporary compression allowance for pile head and cap in millimetres cnum temporary compression of pile in millimetres cnum temporary compression of ground in millimetres .
the values of the coefficients ef e and cnum which are dependent upon the type of equipment used and the rake of the piles shall be nominated by the contractor and reviewed by the superintendent .
coefficients cnum and cnum shall be measured by the contractor for each pile during driving simultaneously with the measurement of set per blow .
b wave equation methods strikethrough option b if inappropriate refer to guide notes and bridge technical notenum and delete the contents of this bracket i bearing graph method each pile shall be driven to a calculated set which shall be determined on the basis of wave equation analysis grlweap or approved equivalent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num ii dynamic testing and analysis if dynamic testing equipment pile driving analyser pda or approved equivalent is used during the process of pile driving the records shall be subjected to closed form dynamic solutions case method or equivalent and full wave equation analysis capwap or tnowave or approved equivalent using proprietary computer programs .
the contractor shall arrange for monitoring of piles with dynamic testing equipment during driving at a frequency of not less than one test for each pile group .
the selected pile shall be the initial pile driven in each group and shall be tested when the pile reaches final toe level .
pile stresses during driving shall not exceed num fc compression and numfc tension for concrete piles and numfy for steel piles .
for exposure classification bnum or c the driving tension for concrete piles shall not exceed numfc .
fc shall be the concrete strength at driving .
the measured stresses in the pile induced during pile driving and ultimate pile capacity calculations shall be submitted to the superintendent for review prior to driving further piles .
num pile driving records pile driving records shall be in accordance with section num as num .
the following records must be retained for each pile driven a manufacturing lot number and date of casting b location in pile group c length prior to driving d date of driving e toe level f traces of set measurements showing set and temporary compression g calculated ultimate pile capacity h measured stresses in the pile .
all records shall be provided to the superintendent within num hours of each pile having been driven into position .
num pile testing a hiley formula testing strikethrough option a if inappropriate refer to guide notes and bridge technical note num and delete the contents of this bracket the first pile driven in each group shall be tested and the ultimate capacity determined in accordance with the formula in clause numa .
the pile test will determine the driving set for each pile group by correlating the set with the driving system and the designers requirements for the pile test loads shown on the drawings .
all piles within that group shall be driven to a set not exceeding the driving set as determined by the pile test for that group .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b high strain dynamic testing strikethrough this option if inappropriate refer to guide notes and bridge technical note num and delete the contents of this bracket all high strain dynamic testing shall be undertaken by a prequalified consultant or a consultant approved by the superintendent .
the testing shall be approved by the superintendent .
the consultant shall be independent of the piling contractor and advised to the superintendent at least num weeks prior to testing .
i general highstrain dynamic pile testing shall be performed to confirm that the design pile capacity and integrity has been achieved .
the test procedure and test reports shall conform to the requirements of as num .
the pile driving system shall have adequate energy to mobilise a test pile by a single hammer blow .
testing shall be carried out by use of a pda or approved equivalent .
the data obtained from each pile shall be analysed using capwap or tnowave or approved equivalent .
the driving resistance and corresponding set per blow of the test pile shall be measured during pda testing to extrapolate the results of the test pile to the piles in the pile group .
the test results are required to demonstrate meeting the acceptance criteria shown on the drawings .
the measured ultimate capacity of the test pile shall be equal to or greater than the pile test load shown on the drawings .
ii driving criteria the driving criteria for each pile group shall be determined by testing the first pile driven in each group in accordance with clause numbi .
the pile test will determine the driving set for each pile group by correlating the driving system and design pile capacity .
all piles within that group shall be driven to a set not exceeding the driving set as determined by the pda test .
where a pier or abutment has more than one pile cap the piles within each pile cap shall be considered as a separate pile group .
for large pile groups the number of piles tested shall be a minimum of num in num and the distance of any pile from the test pile shall not exceed num metres .
an additional pile test shall be conducted where the driving conditions are no longer represented by the initial pile test for that pile group .
additional pile tests are required where the design pile toe level of individual piles within a pile group is more than num metres or during pile driving pile toe levels vary by more than num metres from the test pile or pile rake differs by more than num degrees from the test pile .
num restrike test restrike testing shall be conducted not less than num hours after initial driving .
driving resistance must be equal to or greater than the pile test load shown on the drawings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num concrete piles the date of casting shall be clearly marked on each pile .
piles shall be fitted with a steel or cast iron driving shoe as detailed on the drawings .
where no toe protection requirements have been specified on the drawings the pile shoe and band shall be made up from welded steel plate .
the pile shoe plate shall not be less than num mm thick .
the pile band shall be reinforced with a steel strap not less than num mm thick and num mm wide cast with the pile .
piles shall be carefully stored and handled to prevent damage overstress or permanent distortion .
piles that are damaged cracked or distorted shall be inspected by the contractor in conjunction with the superintendent .
the contractor shall submit proposals for the rectification of any defects to the superintendent .
piles that do not meet the requirements of the specification shall be rejected .
minimum age before driving steam cured num days after the date of casting moist cured num days after the date of casting provided that in all cases the specified concrete strength has been achieved .
num extensions to reinforced concrete piles reinforced concrete piles may be extended with either an additional length of precast reinforced concrete pile or with a cast in place reinforced concrete extension subject to a the pile extension having the same cross section and the same strength as the pile that is being extended b the angular deviation at the pile joint shall not exceed num in num c precast extensions may be used provided that i the mechanical joints must comply with the requirements of as num clause num and bridge technical note num ii design of mechanical joints must comply with the durability requirements of as num clauses num and num iii the precast extension must have a minimum length of num metres iv the joint location is determined by the structural design engineer d cast in place extensions may be used provided that i they are capable of developing the full structural capacity of the pile including the bending and tensile capacities and durability classification shown on the drawings ii welding of reinforcement if required as part of the extension shall be in accordance with asnzs num iii design of the extension shall be determined by the structural design engineer iv driving shall not commence until the concrete in the extension has achieved the specified concrete strength in the connecting pile and at least num of the concrete strength grade for the concrete in the extension .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num steel shell piles a driving where any pile is driven by application of the driving effort at the toe a layer of dry concrete cushion between num mm and num mm thick shall be placed in the bottom of the pile immediately before driving .
where it is not possible to complete the driving within num hours the pile shall be left for num days following which another fresh dry concrete cushion between num mm and num mm thick shall be placed on top of the original cushion before redriving .
the ratio of the mass of the hammer to the mass of the pile shall be a minimum of num .
the maximum height of fall of the hammer shall be determined by the contractor and in no case shall be greater than num m when driving at the toe of the pile or num m when driving at the head of the pile .
covers shall be securely fastened over the tops of shell piles until the concrete core has been placed for safety purposes and to prevent the entry of foreign materials .
covers may be removed only for the purpose of placing reinforcement and concrete .
b jointing i steel shells shall be extended in place with a full strength butt welded joint in accordance with asnzs num or as detailed on the drawings .
the extended steel shells shall not deviate about either principal axis from a straight line drawn between end points by an amount exceeding lnum or num mm whichever is the greater where l is the length between end points .
ii joints shall be watertight .
iii fabrication of each mechanical splice assemblies must be subject to the full inspection and test regime specified in section num with traceability of each splice to a compliance certificate and inspection and test plan .
hp welding shall not commence until the welding procedure has been qualified in accordance with section num. c reinforced concrete cores the concrete core shall not be cast until the steel shell is in its final position .
the concrete core shall be cast to the cutoff level of the pile shown on the drawings .
pile driving within a radius of num m of a newly cast concrete core is not permitted until at least num days has elapsed since the time of casting .
before reinforcement is placed the shell shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove all mud silt water or other foreign material including any loose uncompacted concrete .
water leakage shall be prevented by sealing of joints and other openings in the shell prior to concreting .
reinforcement cages shall be centred within the pile using proprietary spacers at suitable intervals .
reinforcement and concrete for shell piles shall comply with sections num and num. d inspection hp reinforcement andor concrete shall not be placed until the shells have been inspected by the superintendent .
the contractor shall provide adequate lighting to the satisfaction of the superintendent to enable the superintendent to inspect at each stage the pile after driving and cleaning the reinforcement cage and placement and compaction of concrete .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num steel hsection piles steel hsection piles shall be of section size and mass per unit length as shown on the drawings .
after driving the top of the pile shall be at least num mm above the level of the underside of the pile cap .
steel hsection piles shall be extended in situ by means of full strength butt welds .
welding of joints shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
the contractor shall provide details of welded splices for review by the superintendent not less than num days prior to the welding operation .
hp welding shall not commence until the welding procedure has been qualified in accordance with section num .
on completion of driving each pile any cavity formed around the pile or between the flanges of the pile by the displacement of soil shall be filled immediately with concrete or grout of suitable consistency to fully fill the cavity .
num defective piles where a pile exceeds the specified tolerances is damaged or is otherwise defective the strength serviceability and durability of the pile shall be reappraised and where found to be unsatisfactory the pile shall be repaired downgraded or replaced with one or more supplementary piles subject to the approval of the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num bored castinplace piles without permanent casing this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for the construction of reinforced concrete piles which are bored and castinplace without the use of permanent casing .
num standards material design and construction of bored and castinplace piles without the use of permanent casing shall comply with the requirements of relevant australian standards including but not limited to the following as num piling design and installation as num bridge design in circumstances where as num and as num requirements differ the requirements of as num shall take precedence over those of as num .
section num details the relevant references to australian standards as and other documents in this section .
num boring and temporary casing a general the following minimum information shall be provided for each pile on relevant foundation drawings i pile diameter and founding level ii design axial and lateral capacity ultimate limit state and serviceability limit state iii design bending moment capacity ultimate limit state and serviceability limit state iv inspection requirements the required foundation conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via end bearing and the required socket conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via skin friction v pile testing requirements e.g .
magnitude of test loads clause num vi pile acceptance criteria criterion num the performance of the pile footing under the design serviceability load and criterion num a resistance equal to at least the design geotechnical ultimate limit state department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num vii reference of geotechnical investigation and design reports from which the above information has been established .
each pile shall be bored to allow the construction of the pile to the size position and level shown on the drawings .
temporary pile casings shall be used unless the contractor can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent that an alternative construction method without casing will achieve the specified pile dimensional tolerances and cover to the steel reinforcement and that the durability and strength of the finished concrete will not be impaired by inclusions of foreign material or voids .
the contractor may be required to carry out any tests that are reasonably requested by the superintendent to demonstrate compliance with these requirements .
the cost of such testing shall be borne by the contractor .
all excavated material shall be removed from the site and disposed of as soon as practicable so that the site of the works is kept in a clean and tidy condition .
if excavations are to be left open the contractor shall ensure that they are made safe with appropriate fall protection measures such as guardrails with a footplate around the full perimeter of the pile hole a sleeve extending at least num metre above ground level or a secure pile hole cover .
fall protection shall be provided at all times during excavation and after excavation is completed .
the contractor shall provide effective measures to protect each pile hole from site runoff and from loose material falling in .
the contractor shall be responsible for ensuring services or adjacent structures are not damaged by the piling operations .
where percussion equipment is used the level of energy per blow of the drilling bit shall be kept to the minimum consistent with effective boring so as to minimize vibration and avoid damage to adjacent piles structures or services .
where piles are to be founded on rock they shall extend a minimum of two pile diameters into rock of the type and quality shown on the drawings but shall not finish above the levels shown on the drawings .
hp the contractor shall submit for review by the superintendent a quality procedure for the construction of the piles not less than num weeks prior to the commencement of the piling works .
piling works shall not take place until the quality procedure has been reviewed and approved by the superintendent .
the procedure shall provide details of materials and the plant and equipment to be used the boring operation the method of sealing the base of the pile against the ingress of water full details of the installation and removal of the temporary steel casings full details of the steel reinforcement including bar chair details and fixing to ensure minimum cover requirements and concreting operations including placement of concrete under water and in dry bores .
b temporary steel casings unless otherwise approved by the superintendent as per clause numa temporary casing shall be used to prevent collapse of holes during the boring operation .
if holes are bored prior to placing the steel casing in position the nominal size of the drilling bit used to bore the holes shall not be more than num mm larger than the outside diameter of the steel casing and any protective coating .
the toes of the steel casings shall be driven into solid rock where specified on the drawings or suitable alternative material as required to seal them sufficiently to prevent soil and water entering from outside the casing .
temporary casings shall be free from holes and distortion and the internal surfaces shall be free of any projections that may interfere with the placing and positioning of the steel reinforcement cage .
splices in the casing shall be waterproof and strong enough to sustain any stresses induced during installation and extraction of the casing .
fixing of the steel reinforcement cage onto the temporary steel casing shall not be allowed .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the type and thickness of the steel plate used in the temporary casing shall be selected by the contractor who shall be fully responsible for its structural adequacy .
the type and thickness of the temporary casings include providing safe access for personnel resisting all superimposed loads from driving extraction earth and water pressures and the effects of any distortion which is likely to occur to the casing shall be proofengineered by a proofengineer who is prequalified in accordance with the vicroads scheme for prequalification or a proof engineer approved by the superintendent .
c boring excavation boring excavations under bentonite or polymer fluids alone or in combination with temporary casings shall be the subject to approval by the superintendent .
any proposal to bore under bentonite or polymer fluids alone or in combination with temporary casings shall be supported with full details of materials plant and equipment to be used disposal of bentonite or polymer fluids and drilling cuttings and full details of the whole boring operation which shall be certified by the contractors geotechnical consultant who is prequalified in accordance with the vicroads scheme for prequalification or approved by the superintendent in the area of design and construction of deep foundation works under bentonite and polymer fluids .
bentonite and polymer fluids shall be of the biodegradable type and the contractor shall obtain approval of use of such materials from the relevant waterway management authority and government agencies .
num protection of adjacent piles the contractor shall ensure that the pile construction process does not result in damage to adjacent newly cast piles due to ground vibration .
the following minimum requirements shall also be met .
a no pile construction shall be commenced within num m clear distance of a newly cast pile until the concrete in the pile has attained a strength of num mpa b piles more than num m clear distance from a newly cast pile may be installed by boring at any time providing there is no likelihood of damage to the newly cast piles c installation of piles by methods which involve driven temporary casing or result in significant vibration shall not be carried out within the distance num m to num m until the concrete in the pile has attained a strength of num mpa and set for a minimum of num hours .
num inspection of pile excavation the contractor shall notify the superintendent for inspection of the pile excavation by the superintendent .
a minimum of num hours notice shall be given to the superintendent for arrangement of the inspection .
prior to inspection the pile excavation shall be dewatered and the walls and base of the pile cleaned out including the internal surface of the casing to remove all mud loose or foreign material .
in the event that the contractor is unable to dewater the pile hole for inspection full details of the proposed method of cleaning out the pile and the pile inspection shall be submitted to the superintendent for review .
the contractor shall obtain confirmation from its geotechnical consultant regarding the appropriateness of the proposed method before submitting to the superintendent for review .
hp the temporary casing where used shall not be removed nor shall reinforcement andor concrete be placed until the pile walls and base have been inspected by the superintendent and that the inspection has confirmed that the geotechnical strength of the materials in the pile wall base have satisfied the design assumptions .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the contractor shall provide all plant equipment temporary casing or protective inspection casingshield labour and for all other requirements necessary to provide safe and effective access for the inspection of the pile excavation .
no person shall enter the pile excavation unless the pile hole diameter is greater than num mm and appropriate precautions have been taken in accordance with work health and safety regulations num part num confined spaces worksafe code of practice confined spaces and other relevant codes of practice approved under the work health and safety act num .
num casting piles a general concrete used for the construction of bored piles shall comply with the requirements of section num .
steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of section num .
further to the requirements of clause num spacers and supports for bored pile steel reinforcement shall be placed at intervals of no more than num m along the full length of the steel reinforcement cage to ensure that the specified concrete cover to the steel reinforcement is maintained .
concrete placed in the dry shall be either self compacting concrete scc or highly workable concrete in accordance with the requirements of clause num clause num and clause numc .
where highly workable concrete is placed in the dry it shall be compacted with immersion type high frequency vibrators .
concrete shall be placed through a tremie tube and shall not be dropped from a height greater than num m through air .
concrete which is being discharged from a tremie shall be positively guided away from the pile reinforcement so that segregation is not caused by the flow of concrete impinging on the reinforcement .
alternative methods for placing concrete in the dry from those specified in this clause may be used subject to a review by the superintendent .
the casing shall be withdrawn with care during casting of the concrete .
care shall be taken to prevent soil and rock dislodging from the side of the hole and contaminating the concrete forming the minimum cover to the reinforcement .
the minimum height of concrete within the casing shall be adjusted to ensure that water is not permitted to enter from outside the casing and that the soil pressure at the toe of the casing is balanced by the mass of the concrete within the casing .
the free surface of the concrete shall be at least num m above the bottom of the casing .
if after driving the casing it is found not possible to seal the excavated pile from the inflow of water mud loose rock or similar materials the reinforcement and concrete may be placed under water subject to a review by the superintendent and the requirements of clause numb .
hp reinforcement andor concrete shall not be placed until the proposed method of removing mud loose rock or similar materials and the method of placement of concrete under water has been reviewed by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num piles shall be concreted within num hours of completion of the pile excavation .
for delays greater than num hours the contractor shall ream the walls and the base of the pile to remove not less than num mm thickness of material or any other foundation material which has softened in that time .
piles placed in the dry shall be constructed to a minimum of num mm above pile cutoff level to allow breaking back of contaminated concrete at the top of the pile .
b casting under water concrete placed under water shall be self compacting concrete scc in accordance with the requirements of clause num clause num and clause numc .
the concrete shall be of such consistency and shall be placed in such a manner that pockets of air or water or ground materials are not entrapped in the concrete and the space between the reinforcement and the side walls of the hole are completely filled with compacted concrete .
concreting using tremie methods shall not commence until the pile hole is filled with such head of water as to equalise the external water pressure from the surrounding ground .
where a tremie is used the hopper and pipe of the tremie shall be steel smooth bore clean and water tight throughout .
the tremie pipe shall be sealed with a plate taped to its outlet to prevent direct contact between the first discharge of concrete in the pipe of the tremie and the water .
the tremie pipe shall extend to the base of the pile hole before the tremie is charged with concrete .
where a pump is used in lieu of a tremie a sponge shall be inserted in the discharge line before the discharge hopper is loaded so that water and air in the line are prevented from mixing with the advanced column of fresh concrete .
the end of the discharge hose shall be held against the bottom of the hole until the sponge is released .
the whole operation shall be controlled to ensure that no voids are trapped in the pile concrete .
concreting shall not commence until the tremie pipe or pump discharge hose are fully charged .
the outlet of the tremie pipe or pump discharge hose shall not be lifted from the bottom of the hole until the hole has been filled with a minimum of num m depth of concrete .
thereafter concreting shall be kept a minimum of num m below the top surface of the concrete at all times and the contractor shall continuously monitor and ensure that the num m depth of embedment is to be maintained at all time .
the rate of withdrawal of the tremie pipe or pump discharge hose during concreting shall be predetermined by the contractor based on the actual pile hole diameter and the volume of concrete pumped into the pile hole .
the rate of withdrawal of the tremie pipe or pump discharge hose versus the volume of concrete placed shall be recorded by the contractor and the records shall be submitted to the superintended within num hours on completion of concreting of a pile .
the method used for concrete placement shall be such that a continuous supply of concrete is available at the top of the tremie tube or pump hopper during the entire process of placing concrete .
concreting shall be continued until sound concrete appears a minimum of num mm above the required cut off level .
the pile concrete shall not be cut back to its required level until a minimum of num hours after completion of placement of concrete .
num testing hp all testing shall be undertaken by a prequalified consultant in accordance with the vicroads scheme for prequalification or a consultant approved by the superintendent .
all testing shall be approved by the superintendent .
approval of the superintendent .
the consultant shall be independent of the piling contractor .
the contractor shall provide details of the pile testing consultant to the superintendent for review at least num weeks prior to the testing .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num a integrity testing integrity testing shall be carried out on bored and castinplace piles in accordance with integrity test methods specified in as num .
integrity testing equipment shall be capable of checking crosssectional irregularities in piles and identifying the location of discontinuity and characteristics of any significant anomalies such as voids or contaminants .
acceptance criteria supervision and reporting of integrity testing shall be in accordance with the requirements of as num .
testing shall be carried out on the first num piles constructed and subject to acceptable integrity test results being obtained num in num remaining piles shall be tested .
if any pile fails to meet the acceptance criteria all piles shall be tested .
integrity testing shall not be carried out until the concrete has achieved a compressive strength of at least num mpa and not before num days after casting of the pile .
raw data of pile integrity testing shall be provided to the superintendent within num hours of request of the superintendent .
b static load testing the contractor shall carry out static load testing on bored and castinplace shown on the drawings .
static load testing such as compression test tension test and lateral load test shall be undertaken in accordance with as num .
load testing shall not be carried out until the concrete achieves the specified num day compressive strength .
c dynamic pile testing in addition to integrity testing and static load testing the contractor shall carry out dynamic testing of piles to confirm that design pile capacity has been achieved .
at least one num load test shall be performed for every num piles or one load test per pile cap or bridge abutment whichever gives the greatest number of pile testing .
dynamic testing shall also be carried out on piles of which the pile toe levels vary by more than num metres from the test pile .
the contractor shall ensure that a pile driving rig with adequate capacity to mobilise the test pile with a single blow is employed during dynamic pile testing .
where the contractor intends to seek dispensation of pile testing the contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent that an appropriate geotechnical investigations has been carried out at the piling location with relevant geotechnical information at least num m below the design pile toe level .
the submission shall include a proof engineers certificate to confirm that where the pile is expected to develop its capacity the lowest bound value of material strength established from the investigation has been adopted and that a maximum geotechnical strength reduction factor of num has been adopted in the ultimate limit state geotechnical strength design in accordance with as num .
this information shall be provided to the superintendent for review at least num weeks prior to construction .
no consideration for dispensation of pile testing shall be given during or after construction .
the details of the proposed pile driving rig hammer size and drop heights shall be provided to the superintendent for review prior to undertaking the testing .
testing shall be carried out by use of a pile driving analyser pda and the data obtained from each pile shall be analysed using capwap tnowave or other approved equivalent software .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num d reporting the test procedure and test reports shall conform with the requirements of as num and two copies of a report showing the measured field parameters and the results of analysis to determine pile capacity shall be provided to the superintendent .
where confirmation of pile capacity using dynamic pile testing is obtained by restrike the report shall include the results of the initial drive and all subsequent restrike .
e acceptance criterion the integrity testing shall demonstrate that the measured crosssectional area of each test pile is not less than num of the corresponding pile shown on the drawings .
where piles are subjected to static load testing the following criterion shall be satisfied the plot of pile settlement with log time shall be linear or decreasing rate of creep and the creep rate shall be less than num mm per log cycle of time at the test load the maximum total pile settlement and lateral displacement at the design load shall not exceed the value shown on the drawings .
the test results are required to demonstrate meeting the acceptance criteria shown on the drawings .
the measured ultimate capacity of test piles by dynamic testing shall be equal to or greater than the pile test load shown on the drawings .
num tolerances the following tolerances shall apply to completed piles a pile head shall finish within num mm of the specified plan position b variation from the vertical or the specified batterrake shall not be more than num in num c where piling excavation has developed a curve or out of verticality the offset from the theoretical straight pile line shall not exceed num mm over a length of num metres or proportionally for greater or shorter lengths .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num continuous flight auger piles this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for the construction of uncased piles that are formed in the ground by excavation with a hollow flight auger with the auger progressively withdrawn and the void below the auger tip filled with concrete or cement grout injected under pressure .
the following minimum information shall be provided for each pile on relevant foundation drawings a pile diameter and founding level b design axial and lateral capacity ultimate limit state and serviceability limit state c design bending moment capacity ultimate limit state and serviceability limit state d inspection requirements the required foundation conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via end bearing and the required socket conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via skin friction e pile testing requirements e.g .
magnitude of test loads section num f pile acceptance criteria criterion num the performance of the pile footing under the design serviceability load and criterion num a resistance equal to at least the design geotechnical ultimate limit state g reference of geotechnical investigation and design reports from which the above information has been established .
cement grouted continuous flight auger cfa piles shall not be used in foundations for bridges and other structures on or over roads .
hp concrete cfa piles shall not be used in foundations for bridges and other structures on or over roads without the approval of the superintendent .
if the contractor proposes to use cfa piles it shall apply to the superintendent not later than four weeks before the commencement of piling .
the application shall include details of the following a plant and equipment for installation and monitoring b method statement for pile installation including how the specified tolerances will be achieved c inspection and test plans for pile installation and testing d training and experience of piling crew e training and qualifications of onsite and offsite engineering and geotechnical supervisory personnel f the method of achieving the required verticality and pile position g the method of measuring penetration rate and torque during augering h the pile design and founding level if this is not shown on the drawings or if the proposal differs from the drawings department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num i the procedure for checking that the pile toe has reached the anticipated founding stratum j the procedure for reviewing the design of the pile if ground conditions vary from the anticipated conditions k the method of monitoring the extraction rate of the auger l the method of measurement and monitoring of pressure in the delivery line to ensure that positive pressure is maintained at all times during concreting m the method of recording concretegrout flow and auger extraction rates to ensure that no section of pile contains less than the theoretical volume of concrete n the action to be taken if supply pressure andor flow rate is not maintained during concreting or the construction process is interrupted o the method of installation of the reinforcement cage including the method of cagecentering and ensuring minimum cover to reinforcement p details of the method of integrity testing including the name and qualifications of specialist subcontractors and details of the system for collection and reporting of testing results q method of disposal of spoil from excavation r where earth retention piles with or without compression capacity are to be constructed and excavation will not be undertaken prior to the testing as stipulated in clause num the pile driving system shall be designed to have adequate energy to mobilize the entire length of the test pile .
the methodology in determining the pile capacity below the ultimate retention height of the test pile shall be provided .
num standards concrete for cfa piles shall comply with the requirements of section num .
reinforcement for cfa piles shall comply with the requirements of section num .
cfa piles shall be designed and tested in accordance with the vicroads design parameters for driven piles as listed in section num under other reference documents .
materials design and construction of cfa piles shall comply with the requirements of relevant australian standards including as num methods of testing concrete as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout methods of sampling and testing admixtures for concrete mortar and grout as num piling design and installation as num methods of sampling and testing mortar for masonry constructions methods of sampling as num general purpose and blended cements as num bridge design in circumstances where as num and as num requirements differ the requirements of as num shall take precedence over those of as num .
section num details the relevant references to these documents .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num materials a general cfa pile materials shall comply with the drawings and the specification .
b concrete concrete shall be of the strength grade shown on the drawings and comply with section num. c steel steel reinforcement shall comply with section num .
num augering and installation of piles cfa piles shall be of the size and position shown on the drawings .
the finished pile toe and head levels shall be as shown on the drawings .
variation of the cfa pile founding level shall be subject to proofengineering by a pre qualified consultant in accordance with the vicroads scheme for prequalification or approved by the superintendent .
the contractor shall ensure that adjacent structures and services are not damaged during construction of the piles .
the pile shall be augered in one continuous operation to the depth shown on the drawings .
the concrete delivery hose shall be primed and pressurised and the toe of the auger shall then be withdrawn progressively .
the boring rate penetration rate and torque shall be monitored and recorded throughout the augering process .
the contractor shall produce a field log of the materials encountered over the full depth of the excavation .
the materials retrieved at num metre depth intervals during the course of the drilling shall be recorded and inspected by the contractors geotechnical consultant who shall confirm that they are consistent with the design assumptions and in accordance with the contractors installation procedure prior to casting .
if it is necessary to increase the depth of the pile to achieve the required pile capacity the contractor shall a determine the required increase in depth of the pile in accordance with the contractors procedure for review and confirmation that the pile has achieved the required design capacity b determine the required increase in depth of the pile in accordance with the contractors procedure for reviewing the design of the pile if ground conditions at the anticipated depth vary from the anticipated conditions c obtain confirmation from the contractors geotechnical consultant of the required increase in depth of the pile d provide a full account of the need for the increase to the superintendent for review .
where piles are founded on rock they shall extend the specified minimum distance into rock of the type and quality shown on the drawings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the contractor shall provide a work method statement and procedure for construction of the cfa pile if there is a risk of an uncontrolled leakage of concrete into a watercourse or other sensitive area due to presence of weak stratum .
as a minimum the contractor shall provide a temporary steel casing down to a level below which there is no risk of such leakage .
the contractor shall consult its geotechnical consultant whom shall verify the appropriateness of the construction procedure .
the contractor shall provide the geotechnical consultants report to the superintendent for review .
pile shafts shall be formed by injecting concrete continually as the auger is extracted .
the method of maintaining positive pressure in the pumping equipment and the method of maintaining an oversupply rate for concrete shall be in accordance with the contractors installation procedure .
the auger extraction rate concrete pressure and concrete oversupply shall be monitored and recorded throughout the augering process .
the concrete pressure and rate of concrete delivery shall be maintained as the auger is withdrawn in order to ensure that the pile excavation is completely filled and is free of voids and inclusions .
the reinforcement cage shall be placed and centralised in the pile as soon as is practicable after the pile has been concreted and while the concrete is still plastic .
the reinforcement shall then be allowed to descend under its own weight until the correct level is reached .
if the reinforcement cage can not be installed to the required level under the effects of gravity a small vibratory drive head may be used to complete the installation of the cage subject to approval by the superintendent and provided the contractor is able to demonstrate that such vibration will not cause segregation or bleeding in the concrete nor adversely affect the integrity of the steel cage .
further to the requirements of clause num spacers and supports for cfa pile steel reinforcement shall be placed at intervals of no more than num m along the full length of the steel reinforcement cage to ensure that the specified concrete cover to the steel reinforcement is maintained .
care shall be taken to prevent soil or rock dislodging from the side of the excavation or from the ground around the top of the excavation that may contaminate the concrete and that may reduce the effective diameter of the pile or the minimum cover to reinforcement .
piles shall be constructed to ground level or a minimum of num mm above pile cutoff level to allow breaking back of concrete at the top of the pile .
num protection of adjacent piles the contractor shall ensure that adjacent newly cast cfa piles are not damaged during the installation of subsequent piles or by other construction activities and plant movements .
pile excavation within num metres or three pile diameters whichever is the greater of a newly cast pile shall not commence until the concrete in the newly cast pile has attained a strength of num mpa .
num tolerances the following tolerances shall apply to completed cfa piles a centre of the pile head shall be in the specified plan position num mm b maximum deviation from vertical shall be within num in num of the pile height and c minimum cover to reinforcement shall be determined in accordance with the exposure classification and as num and shall be shown on the drawings minimum cover to reinforcement shall be not less than num mm under any circumstances .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num testing hp all testing shall be undertaken by a pre qualified consultant in accordance with the vicroads scheme for prequalification or approved by the superintendent .
the consultant shall be independent of the piling contractor .
the contractor shall provide details of the pile testing consultant to the superintendent for review at least num weeks prior to the testing a integrity testing the contractor shall conduct integrity testing of all cfa piles .
integrity testing shall be conducted in accordance with the integrity test methods specified in as num .
integrity testing equipment shall be capable of identifying crosssectional irregularities voids and inclusions .
acceptance criteria supervision and reporting of integrity testing shall be in accordance with the requirements of as num. b load testing the contractor shall conduct dynamic testing of cfa pile capacity .
the frequency of pile testing shall be in accordance with vicroads design parameters for driven piles as listed in section num under other reference documents .
at least one load test shall be performed on each pile group .
dynamic testing shall also be carried out on piles if the pile toe level varies by more than num metres from the test pile or as shown on the drawings .
testing shall be carried out by use of a pile driving analyser pda and the data obtained from each pile shall be analysed using capwap tnowave or other approved equivalent software .
where the contractor intends to seek dispensation of pile testing the contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent that an appropriate geotechnical investigations has been carried out at the piling location with relevant geotechnical information at least num m below the design pile toe level .
the submission shall include a proof engineers certificate to confirm that where the pile is expected to develop its capacity the lowest bound value of material strength established from the investigation has been adopted and that a maximum geotechnical strength reduction factor of num has been adopted in the ultimate limit state geotechnical strength design in accordance with as num .
this information shall be provided to the superintendent for review at least num weeks prior to construction .
no consideration for dispensation of pile testing shall be given during or after construction .
the contractor shall arrange for monitoring of piles with dynamic testing equipment during driving at a frequency of not less than one test for each pile group .
the pile driving system shall have adequate energy to mobilise a test pile by a single hammer blow .
pile stresses during testing driving shall not exceed num fc compression and numfc tension .
for exposure classification bnum or c the driving action shall not produce tensile stresses in concrete in excess of numfc .
fc shall be the concrete strength at driving .
the test procedure and test reports shall conform to the requirements of as num .
the test results are required to demonstrate meeting the acceptance criteria shown on the drawings .
the measured ultimate capacity of the test pile shall be equal to or greater than the pile test load shown on the drawings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num defective piles if the cfa pile capacity is less than pile test load shown on the drawings it shall be replaced .
a pile shall be rejected if at any point of the pile it is found to contain voids andor inclusions with the combined projected area more than num of the design crosssectional area of the pile or has a crosssectional area that is less than the nominal diameter of the pile .
if the pile exceeds the specified geometrical tolerances it shall be rejected .
if it is not possible to install the cage to the level required the reinforcement cage shall be removed and the pile shall be replaced .
num reporting reports of the following shall be supplied to the superintendent on completion of cfa pile installation a pile installation records of all activities or actions taken under items a to q as listed in clause num .
raw data of pile integrity testing shall be provided to the superintendent within num hours of request of the superintendent .
b pile testing field measurements and conclusions from the following i pile integrity testing field measurements and pile capacity determination from the following i pda testing ii wave equation analysis c nonconformances nature and disposition of all nonconformances .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num castinplace socketed piles with permanent casing this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general the following minimum information shall be provided for each pile on relevant foundation drawings a pile diameter and founding level b design axial and lateral capacity ultimate limit state and serviceability limit state c design bending moment capacity ultimate limit state and serviceability limit state d inspection requirements the required foundation conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via end bearing and the required socket conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via skin friction e pile testing requirements e.g .
magnitude of test loads section num f pile acceptance criteria criterion num the performance of the pile footing under the design serviceability load and criterion num a resistance equal to at least the design geotechnical ultimate limit state g reference of geotechnical investigation and design reports from which the above information has been established .
this section covers the requirements for the construction of reinforced concrete piles by progressively driving or by other means of installing permanent steel casings into the ground excavating all materials from inside the casing placing reinforcement and then filling the casing with concrete .
num standards material design and construction of bored and castinplace socketed piles with the use of permanent casing shall comply with the requirements of relevant australian standards including asnzs num structural steel welding welding of steel structures as num piling design and installation asnzs num structural steel hotrolled plates floorplates and slabs as num bridge design section num details the relevant references to australian standards as and other documents .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num materials and piling procedure the contractor shall determine and be responsible for the wall thickness of the casing and the thickness of the casing toe strengthening plate but under no circumstances shall the wall thickness be less than num mm nor the quality of steel be less than grade num in accordance with asnzs num .
the steel casing materials shall be supported by test certificates from a nata accredited laboratory stating that all materials comply with the requirements of the relevant standard including mechanical tests and chemical analysis where applicable .
the contractor shall determine and be responsible for the structural adequacy of the steel casing .
the type and thickness of the steel casing shall be certified as being suitable for its intended purpose which may include providing safe access for personnel resisting all superimposed loads from driving extraction earth and water pressures and the effects of any distortion which is likely to occur to the casing .
casing lengths shall be welded together to exclude any flow of water andor soil .
concrete used for the construction of bored piles shall comply with the requirements of section num .
steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of section num .
the contractor shall submit for review by the superintendent a quality procedure for the construction of the piles not less than num weeks prior to the commencement of the piling works .
the procedure shall provide details of materials and the plant and equipment to be used the boring operation the method of sealing the base of the pile against the ingress of water full details of installation of the permanent steel casings full details of the steel reinforcement including spacer and support details and fixing to ensure minimum cover requirements and concreting operations including placement of concrete under water and in dry bores .
further to the requirements of clause num spacers and supports for bored pile steel reinforcement shall be placed at intervals of no more than num m along the full length of the steel reinforcement cage to ensure that the specified concrete cover to the steel reinforcement is maintained .
hp piling works shall not take place until the contractors proposed materials and procedures have been reviewed and accepted by the superintendent .
num excavation a general excavation shall consist of the excavation of the interiors of the pile casings and sockets and the disposal of all excavated materials and shall include all sheeting bracing drainage pumping or bailing and other necessary work and materials to enable the construction of the piles .
all excavated material shall be removed from the site and disposed of as soon as practicable so that the site of the works is kept in a clean and tidy condition .
if excavations are to be left open the contractor shall ensure that they are made safe with appropriate fall protection measures such as guardrails with a footplate around the full perimeter of the pile hole a sleeve extending at least num metre above ground level or a secure pile hole cover .
fall protection shall be provided at all times during excavation and after excavation is completed .
the contractor shall provide effective measures to protect each pile hole from site runoff and from loose material falling in .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the contractor shall be responsible for ensuring services or adjacent structures are not damaged by the piling operations .
where percussion equipment is used the level of energy per blow of the percussion tool shall be kept to a minimum consistent with effective boring so as to minimise vibration and to avoid damage to the walls of the sockets adjacent piles structures or services .
after completion of excavation the internal surfaces of casings shall be cleaned to remove soil adhering to the inside of the casing prior to placement of the steel reinforcement .
fixing of the steel reinforcement cage onto the steel casing shall not be allowed .
b excavation to bottom casing level the method of pile excavation and installation of the casing shall ensure that the ground is in contact with the casing at all times and no overexcavation or backfilling will be permitted .
casings shall be installed to provide penetration into the underlying bedrock to the levels or the dimensions shown on the drawings .
if the excavation is to be carried out under water the level of water in the casing shall be maintained within num metre of ground natural surface level or above the level of the adjacent surface water .
casings shall be installed so that the completed work complies with the tolerances specified .
c socket formation and inspection socket bases shall be trimmed in near horizontal planes and all loose material including rock fragments and other debris shall be removed .
immediately prior to concreting the base of the socket shall be cleaned .
methods of cleaning i.e .
airlifting or other alternatives shall be submitted to the superintendent for review .
the contractor shall control the lifting speed of the drilling equipment to ensure that no scouring and overbreak of the excavation occurs .
hp following formation of the socket the pile shall be dewatered to enable inspection by the superintendent or the contractors geotechnical representative in design and construct contracts of the geology of the sides and base of the socket and to ensure that the base is free of debris .
reinforcement andor concrete shall not be placed prior to this inspection .
the contractor shall provide all plant equipment including an inspection shield and labour necessary to provide safe and effective access for the inspection of the pile excavation .
no person shall enter the pile excavation unless the appropriate precautions have been taken in accordance with work health and safety regulations num part num confined spaces worksafe code of practice confined spaces and other relevant codes of practice approved under the work health and safety act num .
if during dewatering investigations reveal that the casing is not properly sealed or that the sides of the sockets have collapsed or that the overlying materials such as sands gravels or silts have entered the socket or that the casing has deformed from its circular shape the contractor shall cease pumping and immediately refill the casing with water .
in this case the contractor shall submit for the superintendents review details of the proposed procedures for overcoming the difficulties and for completing the construction of the pile including the method of inspecting the sides and base of the socket and to ensure that the base is free of debris in accordance with this specification department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num protection of adjacent piles the contractor shall ensure that the pile construction process does not result in damage to adjacent newly cast piles due to ground vibration .
the following minimum requirements shall also be met a no pile construction shall be commenced within num m clear distance of a newly cast pile until the concrete in the pile has attained the strength of num mpa b piles more than num m clear distance from a newly cast pile may be installed by boring at any time providing there is no likelihood of damage to the newly cast piles c installation of piles by methods which involve driven casing or construction methods which result in significant vibration shall not be carried out within the distance num to num m until the concrete in the pile has set for num hours .
num staging of concrete casting concreting of piles shall be carried out in two stages as follows a stage num concreting for stage num involves placing concrete under water from the base of the pile socket to within num m num m below the bottom of the pile reinforcement or to a level num m num m above the bottom edge of the casing whichever is the higher .
these limits apply to the level of sound concrete after removal of unsound concrete as specified for construction joints .
sockets shall be concreted within num hours of completion of the socket excavation .
for delays greater than num hours the contractor shall ream the socket to remove not less than num mm minimum thickness of material or any other foundation material which has softened in that time .
concrete placed under water shall comply with the requirements of clause numa .
b stage num this includes concrete placed in the dry for the remainder of the pile .
construction joint treatment between the two stages shall be as specified for construction joints .
num placing concrete at least num weeks before commencing concreting operations the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for review details of all the plant and equipment proposed for use a method statement of how the work will be carried out including action required in the event of concreting of tremie action breakdown and details of the record sheets proposed for monitoring the operations .
a pile socket stage num concreting using tremie methods shall not commence until the pile hole is filled with a head of water so as to equalise the external water pressure from the surrounding ground .
where a tremie is used the hopper and the pipe of the tremie shall be steel smooth bore clean and water tight throughout .
the tremie pipe shall be sealed with a plate taped to its outlet to prevent direct contact between the first discharge of concrete in the pipe of the tremie and the water .
the tremie pipe shall extend to the base of the pile hole before the tremie is charged with concrete .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num where a pump is used in lieu of a tremie a sponge shall be inserted in the discharge line before the discharge hopper is loaded so that water and air in the line are prevented from mixing with the advanced column of fresh concrete .
the end of the discharge hose shall be held against the bottom of the hole until the sponge is released and the whole operation controlled to ensure that no voids are trapped in the pile concrete .
concreting shall not commence until the tremie pipe or pump discharge hose are fully charged .
during concreting the outlet of the tremie pipe or pump discharge hose shall be kept a minimum of num m below the top surface of the concrete at all times and the contractor shall continuously monitor and record the depth of the embedment .
the method used for concrete placement shall be such that a continuous supply of concrete will be available at the top of the tremie tube or pump hopper during the entire process of placing concrete .
concreting shall be continued until sound concrete appears a minimum of num mm above the required cutoff level .
the pile concrete shall not be cut back to its required level until a minimum of num hours after completion of placement of concrete .
concrete placed under water shall be self compacting concrete scc in accordance with the requirements of clause num clause num and clause numc .
the concrete shall be of such consistency and shall be placed in such a manner that pockets of air or water or ground materials are not entrapped in the concrete and the space between the reinforcement and the side walls of the hole are completely filled with compacted concrete .
b pile stem stage num concrete shall be placed in the dry and shall be compacted by immersion type high frequency vibrators .
concrete shall be placed through a tremie tube and concrete shall not be dropped from a height greater than num m through air .
concrete which is being discharged from a tremie shall be positively guided away from the pile reinforcement so that segregation is not caused by the flow of concrete impinging on the reinforcement .
alternative methods for placing concrete in the dry from those specified in this clause may be used subject to a review by the superintendent .
concrete placed in the dry shall be either self compacting concrete scc or highly workable concrete in accordance with the requirements of clause num clause num and clause numc .
where highly workable concrete is placed in the dry it shall be compacted with immersion type high frequency vibrators .
where the socket is stable and is to be cast in the dry stage num and stage num may be cast continuously in accordance with the requirements of clause numb .
piles placed in the dry shall be constructed to a minimum of num mm above pile cutoff level to allow breaking back of contaminated concrete at the top of the pile .
num testing hp all testing shall be undertaken by a consultant in accordance with the vicroads scheme for prequalification or a consultant approved by the superintendent .
all testing shall be approved by the superintendent .
the consultant shall be independent of the piling contractor .
the contractor shall provide details of the pile testing consultant to the superintendent for review at least num weeks prior to the testing .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num a integrity testing integrity testing shall be carried out on bored and castinplace piles in accordance with integrity test methods specified in as num .
integrity testing equipment shall be capable of checking crosssectional irregularities in piles and identifying the location and characteristics of any significant anomalies such as voids or contaminants .
acceptance criteria supervision and reporting of integrity testing shall be in accordance with the requirements of as num .
testing shall be carried out on the first num piles constructed and subject to acceptable integrity test results being obtained num in num remaining piles shall be tested .
if any pile fails to meet the acceptance criteria all piles shall be tested .
integrity testing shall not be carried out until the concrete has achieved a compressive strength of at least num mpa and not before num days after casting of the pile .
raw data of pile integrity testing shall be provided to the superintendent within num hours of request of the superintendent .
b static load testing the contractor shall carry out static load testing on bored and castinplace shown on the drawings .
static load testing such as compression test tension test and lateral load test shall be undertaken in accordance with as num .
load testing shall not be carried out until the concrete achieves the specified num day compressive strength .
c dynamic pile testing in addition to integrity testing and static load testing the contractor shall carry out dynamic testing of piles to confirm that design pile capacity has been achieved .
at least one num load test shall be performed for every num piles or one load test per pile cap or bridge abutment whichever gives the greatest number of pile testing .
dynamic testing shall also be carried out on piles of which the pile toe levels vary by more than num metres from the test pile .
the contractor shall ensure that a pile driving rig with adequate capacity to mobilise the test pile with a single blow is employed during dynamic pile testing .
where the contractor intends to seek dispensation of pile testing the contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent that an appropriate geotechnical investigations has been carried out at the piling location with relevant geotechnical information at least num m below the design pile toe level .
the submission shall include a proof engineers certificate to confirm that where the pile is expected to develop its capacity the lowest bound value of material strength established from the investigation has been adopted and that a maximum geotechnical strength reduction factor of num has been adopted in the ultimate limit state geotechnical strength design in accordance with as num .
this information shall be provided to the superintendent for review at least num weeks prior to construction .
no consideration for dispensation of pile testing shall be given during or after construction .
the details of the proposed pile driving rig hammer size and drop heights shall be provided to the superintendent for review prior to undertaking the testing .
testing shall be carried out by use of a pile driving analyser pda and the data obtained from each pile shall be analysed using capwap tnowave or other approved equivalent software .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num d reporting the test procedure and test reports shall conform with the requirements of as num and two copies of a report showing the measured field parameters and the results of analysis to determine pile capacity shall be provided to the superintendent .
where confirmation of pile capacity using dynamic pile testing is obtained by restrike the report shall include the results of the initial drive and all subsequent restrike .
e acceptance criterion the integrity testing shall demonstrate that the measured crosssectional area of each test pile is not less than num of the corresponding pile shown on the drawings .
where piles are subjected to static load testing the following criterion shall be satisfied the plot of pile settlement with log time shall be linear or decreasing rate of creep and the creep rate shall be less than num mm per log cycle of time at the test load the maximum total pile settlement and lateral displacement at the design load shall not exceed the value shown on the drawings the test results are required to demonstrate meeting the acceptance criteria shown on the drawings and the measured ultimate capacity of test piles by dynamic testing shall be equal to or greater than the pile test load shown on the drawings .
num tolerances the following tolerances shall apply to piles in their specified positions a pile position at the top of concrete shall be within num mm of the specified plan position b variation from the vertical shall not be more than num in num c variation of diameter within casing num to num mm d reduced level of top of sound concrete after trimming num mm e reduced level of base of socket num to num mm f variation in socket diameter for piles shall not exceed num mm less than the nominal pile diameter .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num structural concrete this section crossreferences sections num num num num num num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for durability strength and surface finish for structural concrete including the requirements for mix design supply and delivery of concrete sampling and testing placing compaction finishing curing and protection .
additional requirements for concrete for posttensioned pretensioned precast sprayed concrete and other types of concrete construction are specified in the relevant sections .
requirements for general nonstructural concrete paving works are specified in section num .
concrete using general purpose portland cement type gp or blended cement type gb shall comply with the requirements of as num general purpose and blended cements .
in addition blended cement type gb shall consist of a specified minimum quantity of portland cement in combination with any one or two of ground granulated blast furnace slag slag fly ash or amorphous silica sf and as specified in this section .
all concrete shall be special class performance concrete in accordance with appendix b of as num specification and supply of concrete and the requirements of this section .
structural concrete shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this specification to prevent any adverse effects arising from excessive drying shrinkage and cracking alkaliaggregate reactivity soluble salts inadequate cover curing and compaction and from exposure to the specified inservice conditions .
num standards australian standards and vicroads codes of practices are referenced in an abbreviated form e.g .
as num and rc num. a australian standards as num methods of testing concrete as num methods of sampling and testing aggregates as num specification and supply of concrete as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout admixtures for concrete as num aggregates and rock for engineering purposes concrete aggregates as num supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement as num part num fly ash as num part num slag ground granulated iron blastfurnace as num part num amorphous silica as num liquid membraneforming curing compounds for concrete as num general purpose and blended cements as num bridge design set department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b vicroads codes of practices code of practice rc num code of practice for quarry investigations .
code of practice rc num code of practice for selection of test methods for the testing of materials and work .
c vicroads test methods rc num slump flow tnum time and jring passing ability for self compacting concrete scc rc num determination of aggregate moisture content and estimated free water aggregate moisture rc num potential alkalisilica reactivity accelerated mortar bar method rc num alkali aggregate reactivity using the concrete prism test .
d additional test methods astm cnumcnumm standard guide for petrographic examination of aggregates for concrete .
e additional referenced specifications aticspec spnum cementitious materials for concrete published by atic australian technical infrastructure committee section num details the relevant references to these documents .
num definitions batch one load or charge of a transit concrete mixer or agitator .
blended cement general purpose blended cement type gb complying with the requirements of as num and as specified in this section .
cement material complying with the requirements of as num and as specified in this section .
cementitious material portland cement or a mixture of portland cement with one or more supplementary cementitious materials or in combination with other supplementary material as approved by the superintendent .
concrete cover distance between the outside of the reinforcing steel and the nearest permanent surface of the concrete member excluding any surface finishing material .
watercementitious material wc ratio the ratio of the amount of water to the total amount of cementitious materials by mass in a freshly mixed cubic metre of concrete .
the water shall be the total free water contained in the batch aggregates in excess of their saturated surfacedry condition .
concrete grade a grade of concrete with a specified minimum cementitious material content a maximum wc ratio and a minimum compressive strength at num num and num days .
it is designated by the letters vr vicroads followed by a three digit number indicating the minimum cementitious material content in kgm and a two digit number indicating the specified minimum compressive strength at num days .
department of state growth department of state growth august numaugust num section num page num of num exposure classifications as per table num of as num bridge design concrete and summarised as follows a mild c very severe bnum moderately severe u special consideration bnum severe portland cement general purpose portland cement type gp complying with the requirements of as num .
sample a portion of fresh concrete drawn from a batch and from which test cylinders and other test specimens are made and from which other concrete testing is undertaken as required .
all sampling is carried out in accordance with as num .
self compacting concrete scc concrete that is able to flow and consolidate under its own weight completely fill the formwork or bore hole even in the presence of dense reinforcement whilst maintaining homogeneity and without the need for additional compaction and which complies with the requirements of table num .
also called self consolidating concrete or superworkable concrete .
supplementary cementitious material fly ash fa ground granulated blast furnace slag slag or amorphous silica sf complying with the requirements of as num as num and as num respectively .
triple blend blended cement type gb consisting of a minimum quantity of portland cement in combination with any two supplementary cementitious materials i.e .
any two of fly ash slag or amorphous silica .
vpv apparent volume of permeable voids as determined by test method as num .
num durability durability requirements with respect to exposure classification as detailed in as num bridge design concrete and concrete grade shall be as shown on the drawings and as specified in this section .
the durability requirements for concrete in exposure classification u shall be as shown on the drawings and this specification .
the concrete shall be designed manufactured and delivered sampled and tested placed compacted finished and cured in accordance with the requirements of this section to achieve a service life of at least num years in the specified inservice exposure conditions with minimal maintenance .
num minimum compressive strength the minimum compressive strength requirements for each concrete grade are shown in table num .
table num concrete grade minimum compressive strength mpa num days num days num days vrnum num num num vrnum num num num vrnum num num num vrnum num num num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the num day minimum compressive strength requirement shall not apply to concrete mixes containing supplementary cementitious materials which exceed the cement replacement values stated in clause numf .
num maximum vpv values at num days the maximum vpv values at num days for each concrete grade for both test cylinders and concrete test cores cut from cast in situ and sprayed concrete shall be as shown in table num .
table num concrete grade maximum vpv values at num days test cylinders compacted by vibration test cylinders compacted by rodding test cores vrnum num num num vrnum num num num vrnum num num num vrnum num num num for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of this clause vpv test results may be rounded down to the nearest whole number for the corresponding concrete grade .
num concrete mix design a general the contractor shall be responsible for the mix design of all concrete including any other nominated requirements so that the specified durability strength and other requirements of the hardened and plastic concrete are achieved .
the contractor shall ensure that arrangements for the supply of concrete are made with the concrete supplier at the commencement of the works to ensure that a fully compliant concrete mix design which is supported with all required test results meets the specified time frames of this section .
b mix design details hp the contractor shall submit the concrete mix design details for review by the superintendent not less than num weeks prior to the placement of concrete .
concrete shall not be placed until the mix design has been reviewed by the superintendent and allocated a registration number on the register of state growth approved concrete mixes .
the concrete mix design details shall include the following i the source type and proportions of the constituent materials ii the cementitious material registration scheme cmrs registration numbers for the cementitious materials used in the mix as specified in clause numc iii aggregate gradings water absorption and saturated surfacedry densities iv chemical admixtures details and manufacturers recommended dosage rates and method of use department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num v the nominated slump and where a superplasticiser is used the final slump vi for self compacting concrete scc additional details as specified in clause numm vii the maximum water content and maximum wc ratio viii level of control accuracy and method of determination of both the coarse and fine aggregate moisture content consistent with the requirements of clause numd ix documentary evidence of previous performance and relevant test results which shall not be more than num months old including num num num and num day compressive strengths complying with the minimum compressive strength requirements given in table num num vpv values at num days complying with the requirements given in table num and clause numl num drying shrinkage test results as specified in clause numj num soluble salts content as specified in clause numk x alkali aggregate reactivity test results as specified in clause nume and which shall not be more than num years old in accordance with the minimum frequency of testing as stated in table num xi the method of placement and the elements of the structure in which the concrete is to be placed xii full details of concrete curing methods as specified in clause num xiii a unique identification number for the concrete mix design to satisfy the requirements of clause num .
concrete mix designs not complying with the requirements of this section will require the approval of the superintendent .
the concrete mix design shall be strictly adhered to by the contractor .
in the event of changes to the agreed concrete mix design the contractor shall submit a new concrete mix design to the superintendent for review or approval as appropriate .
c trial mix in the absence of recent documentary evidence that the concrete mix design complies with the requirements of this section a trial mix shall be undertaken in accordance with as num .
the relevant results of the trial mix and the associated concrete mix design details indicating compliance with the specified requirements shall be submitted for review by the superintendent .
d mix constituents the concrete shall consist of a mixture of cementitious material fine aggregate coarse aggregate and water .
the concrete may also contain chemical admixtures details of which shall be submitted with the mix design .
if the coarse aggregate or fine aggregate is composed of more than one material or size of material the mix proportions for each shall be specified separately .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num e cementitious material content and watercementitious material wc ratio the minimum mass of total cementitious material per cubic metre of finished concrete and the corresponding maximum wc ratio shall be as shown in table num .
table num concrete grade cementitious material content min kgmnum wc ratio max vrnum num num vrnum num num vrnum num num vrnum num num the cementitious material content of concrete to be placed under water shall not be less than num kgm with a maximum wc ratio of num .
the wc ratio of the proposed concrete mix design shall not be less than num for concrete cast in situ works and num for concrete utilised in precast works .
f minimum portland cement content the minimum mass of portland cement in concrete mixes containing slag fly ash or amorphous silica shall be num num or num respectively of the total mass of cementitious material in the concrete mix .
the inclusion of slag fly ash or amorphous silica in concrete mixes shall only be in single or double combination with portland cement .
in a triple blend concrete mix the portland cement content shall be a minimum of num and the individual contribution of slag fly ash or amorphous silica shall be a maximum of num num or num respectively of the total mass of the cementitious material in the concrete mix .
other cementitious materials may be used subject to approval by the superintendent .
g concrete structures in marine and other saline environments concrete structures located in marine and other saline environments shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum compliant cementitious material options as shown in table num .
where proportioning of cementitious material in concrete mixes uses higher replacement levels of supplementary cementitious materials the contractor shall submit for review by the superintendent a supporting documented detailed methodology addressing potential lower early strength development longer formwork removal times and development of lower lifting strengths to ensure compliance with the specification .
additional protective measures for concrete structures constructed in marine and other saline environments are covered in clause num. h concrete structures subject to sulphate and chemical attack concrete structures subject to sulphate and chemical attack represented by an acidity of ph of num and higher shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum compliant cementitious material options as shown in table num provided that the mobility of any groundwater if present is in an approximately static condition .
for ph lower than num the environment shall be assessed as exposure classification u and be subject to special consideration in accordance with clause num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num where proportioning of cementitious material in concrete mixes uses higher replacement levels of supplementary cementitious materials the contractor shall submit for review by the superintendent a supporting documented detailed methodology addressing potential lower early strength development longer formwork removal times and development of lower lifting strengths to ensure compliance with the specification .
i use of supplementary cementitious materials for special applications supplementary cementitious materials requirements for other special applications shall be as specified in the drawings and specification .
j limitations on drying shrinkage one sample per trial mix shall be taken .
each sample shall consist of num specimens tested in accordance with as num .
the shrinkage strain of each sample as determined from the average value of the num specimens shall not exceed num microstrain and num microstrain after num days and num days of drying respectively .
drying shrinkage requirements for special applications shall be as specified in the drawings and specification .
k soluble salts i chlorideion content the maximum acidsoluble chlorideion content of concrete as placed expressed as the percentage of the total mass of cementitious material in the concrete mix shall not be greater than num for prestressed concrete num for reinforced concrete num for all mortars and grouts including posttensioning grout .
ii sulphate content the sulphate content of concrete as placed expressed as the percentage by mass of acidsoluble sonum to the total cementitious material in the concrete mix shall not be greater than num .
notwithstanding the requirements of this clause the sulphate content for steam and heat accelerated cured concrete expressed as the percentage by mass of acidsoluble sonum to the total cementitious material in the concrete mix shall not be greater than num .
sulphate and chlorideion content shall be determined by testing of hardened concrete in accordance with as num .
table num concrete members exposure classification concrete grade wc ratio max proportioning of cementitious material mass in concrete mixes piles fenderkeeper walls wing walls head walls above deck parapets etc bases slabs c vrnum num num gp num sf or higher replacement levels of at least num fa or numgp num slag num sf or num slag num gp pile caps pier columns pier crossheads abutment crossheads c vrnum num deck slab approach slab bnum vrnum num moderate replacement levels in accordance with clause numf beams crown units c vrnum num num gp num sf or num gp num fa department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num l testing and acceptance of concrete mix design on the basis of num day vpv value test cylinders shall be cured in accordance with as num .
a minimum of num cylinders per sample per trial mix shall be taken .
each cylinder shall be tested for vpv at num days in accordance with test method as num .
the specification will be satisfied if the vpv value for each sample as determined from the average value of the test cylinders is not greater than the specified maximum num day vpv value in table num .
should the vpv value of any one sample representing the concrete exceed the specified maximum num day vpv value as shown in table num the contractor shall take steps to modify the concrete mix design and retest to ensure that the maximum specified vpv value is not exceeded .
m mix design for self compacting concrete scc the mix design requirements for scc shall be as specified in this clause and clause numb except that the nominated slump requirements as stated in clause numbv shall not apply for scc .
further to the requirements of clause numb mix design details of scc shall include the nominated slump flow tnum measure of viscosity and passing ability which shall comply with the requirements for scc given in table num .
notwithstanding the requirements of clause numf higher amounts of fly ash and slag may be used in scc mixes where further optimisation of the mix is required to comply with this section including the required cohesiveness workability flowability and self compactability of the concrete without segregation .
scc shall be used only for the manufacture of precast concrete members and the construction of bored piles as specified in clause numc .
num cement fly ash slag and amorphous silica a cement cement shall comply with the requirements of as num and aticspec spnum .
cement per batch of concrete shall be from one manufacturer and of one brand type and grind .
cement more than num months old shall not be used in the works unless it is retested to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of as num and aticspec spnum .
b fly ash slag and amorphous silica fly ash slag and amorphous silica shall comply with the requirements of as num as num and as num respectively and aticspec spnum and shall be from one manufacturer and of one brand type and fineness .
c preregistration and testing of cementitious materials cementitious materials used in the works shall be preregistered under the cementitious material registration scheme cmrs in accordance with aticspec spnum .
the cmrs registration numbers for the cementitious materials used in the works shall be submitted as part of the concrete mix design review as specified in clause num .
in addition to the information required as part of routine quality control nata endorsed analytical test data demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this section shall be submitted for review by the superintendent .
summaries of cementitious material test data shall be submitted for review by the superintendent .
the data shall be traceable to the concrete suppliers batching plants .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num water the quality of water to be used in the concrete mix and for the curing of concrete shall comply with the requirements of clause num of as num .
however the amounts of chloride in the water shall be not greater than num .
in addition recycled water used in the concrete mix shall have total dissolved solids of not greater than num milligrams per litre .
sources of recycled water containing differing levels or other contaminants shall be subject to approval by the superintendent on the basis of predetermined test results and evidence of previous performance .
recycled or nonpotable water shall be sampled and tested as a minimum at six monthly intervals to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this clause and as num .
num chemical admixtures chemical admixtures shall comply with the requirements of as num unless otherwise specified in this section .
they shall be used in accordance with the requirements of clause num of as num and the manufacturers recommended method of use and shall not reduce the strength of concrete below that specified .
chemical admixtures shall be accurately measured by means of dispensers which are subject to regular maintenance and are calibrated as a minimum at three monthly intervals .
chemical admixtures shall not contain calcium chloride calcium formate chlorine sulphur sulphides or sulphites .
where two or more chemical admixtures are proposed for incorporation in a concrete mix their compatibility shall be certified by the manufacturers .
air entraining admixtures shall not be used unless approved by the superintendent .
where the use of air entraining admixture is approved the contractor shall determine the air content of the freshly mixed concrete at the point of discharge in accordance with as num and clause num of as num and it shall not exceed the nominal value of num .
the concrete represented by a sample taken in accordance with clause num shall be deemed to comply with the approved air content if the measured air content is within num of the approved air content .
num aggregates a general fine and coarse aggregate for concrete shall comply with the requirements of as num .
the maximum amount of water absorption for fine aggregate coarse aggregate combined coarse aggregate and combined fine aggregate shall not exceed num .
aggregates shall be stored in such a manner that they will not segregate become contaminated by foreign matter or become intermixed .
stockpiles shall be arranged to prevent entry of adjacent surface or ground water and allow free drainage of rain water .
b fine aggregate i description the fine aggregate shall consist of clean hard durable naturally occurring sands or a combination of naturally occurring sands and manufactured sands and shall be free from clay dust lumps soft or flaky particles shale salt alkali organic matter soil or other deleterious substances .
any manufactured sands used as fine aggregate shall be crushed from rock that produces aggregate complying with the requirements of clause num .
manufactured sands produced from any igneous or metamorphic rock shall have a degradation factor crusher fines of not less than num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num a maximum of num of manufactured sand from a source approved by the superintendent will be permitted .
consideration may be given by the superintendent to approve the use of up to a maximum of num of manufactured sand if objective documented evidence is provided that concrete made with such higher amount of manufactured sand complies with all other requirements of this section both in the fresh and hardened state including evidence of acceptable performance regarding tendency for segregation bleeding plastic shrinkage satisfactory compaction and finishing properties .
ii testing for impurities fine aggregate shall be tested for impurities in accordance with as num .
the clay and fine silt levels of natural sands shall be monitored as a routine quality control measure and records shall be available for review by the superintendent .
action shall be taken where levels exceed normal consistency limits derived from routine quality control testing .
iii grading of fine aggregate fine aggregate shall be uniformly graded and shall comply with the limits in table num when tested with standard sieves .
if required fine aggregates can be combined in such proportions that the resulting fine aggregate mix shall comply with the grading requirements .
table num sieve size as mm percentage passing by mass num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num iv consistency of grading the grading of fine aggregate shall not deviate from the submitted grading by more than num .
consideration may be given by the superintendent to approve the use of fine aggregate with grading outside the specified limits if objective documented evidence is provided that concrete made with such fine aggregate grading complies with all other requirements of this section both in the fresh and hardened state including evidence of acceptable performance regarding tendency for segregation bleeding plastic shrinkage satisfactory compaction and finishing properties .
c source rock source rock shall comply with the requirements of section num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num d coarse aggregate i description coarse aggregate shall consist of clean hard durable angular rock fragments of uniform quality .
it shall be free from clay clay lumps salt organic matter or other substances deleterious to concrete or steel .
ii testing requirements for coarse aggregate .
coarse aggregate shall not contain num more than num by mass of unsound rock or num more than num total by mass of unsound rock plus marginal rock .
the flakiness index of the coarse aggregate shall not exceed num. iii grading of coarse aggregate coarse aggregate size ranges when tested by means of standard sieves shall have a maximum nominal size between num and num mm and shall comply with the requirements of as num. iv effective size of coarse aggregate concrete in various parts of the structure shall contain coarse aggregate with the following effective maximum sizes joint and pedestal concrete num mm precast concrete num mm for minimum cover of num mm num mm for minimum cover greater than num mm all other concrete num mm the effective minimum size will be num mm for crushed material and num mm for rounded materials .
v use of pebble aggregate notwithstanding the requirements of clause numd and section num pebble aggregate may be used in the manufacture of structural concrete including concrete intended for use in prestressed and posttensioned components subject to the following requirements num where the la of pebble aggregate or blended aggregate containing pebbles is greater than num but equal to or less than num the wet and dry strength variation shall be equal to or less than num and the sodium sulphate soundness shall be equal to or less than num num pebble aggregate or blended aggregate containing pebbles with an la greater than num shall not be used in the works num the minimum frequency of testing for wet and dry strength and sodium sulphate soundness shall be in accordance with the requirements of table num e alkali aggregate reactivity unless otherwise approved by the superintendent all aggregates shall be assessed and tested for alkali reactivity as follows i petrographic examination aggregates shall be assessed for any unstable silica minerals by petrographic examination in accordance with astm test method cnum and department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num ii potential alkali silica reactivity the potential alkali silica reactivity of the coarse and fine aggregates shall be determined using either the vicroads accelerated mortar bar test method rc num or the vicroads concrete prism test method rc num as described in the vicroads code of practice rc num .
num accelerated mortar bar test method rc num coarse and fine aggregates shall be deemed to be nonreactive if the average expansion of the mortar bars made with the proposed aggregates and general purpose portland cement type gp does not exceed num at num days in the case of coarse aggregates and num at num days in the case of fine aggregates .
individual results shall not differ from the mean by more than num .
should the average expansion of the mortar bars exceed num at num days in the case of coarse aggregates and num at num days in the case of fine aggregates the aggregates will be classed as reactive and either new aggregates shall be proposed for use and retested for compliance or if it is proposed to use aggregates that have been classed as reactive all of the following requirements shall be satisfied the concrete mix be designed such that the alkali content does not exceed num kgmnum nanumo equivalent a blended cement be used in the concrete mix that satisfies the minimum requirements of table num .
concrete mixes containing the minimum proportions of supplementary cementitious material as shown in table num shall be deemed to comply with this clause .
num concrete prism test method rc num aggregates shall be classified reactive when the average expansion at num months is greater than num and non reactive when it is equal to or less than num .
aggregates classified as reactive by the concrete prism test method in a concrete mix design shall not be used in that particular concrete mix design .
alternative aggregates andor alternative concrete mix designs shall be used subject to compliance with the requirements of this specification .
table num supplementary cementitious material minimum proportion of supplementary cementitious material in single combination with portland cement in the concrete mix to mitigate alkali aggregate reactivity minimum proportion of supplementary cementitious material in double combination with portland cement in the concrete mix to mitigate alkali aggregate reactivity fly ash slag amorphous silica fly ash num slag num amorphous silica num fly ash slag num num fly ash amorphous silica num num slag amorphous silica num num where blended aggregates are used the aggregates from different sources shall be tested individually .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num notwithstanding the requirements of this clause when fine and coarse aggregates are procured from the same source only one alkali silica reactivity evaluation per source shall be undertaken .
any proposed blended cement deviations from the minimum blended cement requirements of table num shall demonstrate compliance with both the maximum mortar bar and concrete prism expansion limits stated in this clause and as determined by both the vicroads accelerated mortar bar test method rc num and the vicroads concrete prism test method rc num .
num minimum testing requirements for aggregates aggregates shall be tested at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that concrete complies with the specified requirements .
the frequency shall not be less than that shown in table num .
where the contractor has implemented a system of statistical process control and can demonstrate that a lower frequency can assure the quality of the product the superintendent may agree to a lower frequency than that shown in table num .
table num test minimum frequency of testing grading of fine aggregates on each day one per num tonne or part thereof grading of coarse aggregates on each week one per num tonne or part thereof water absorption of fine and coarse aggregates at num monthly intervals unsound rock content on each day one per num tonne or part thereof flakiness index of coarse aggregate num mm and larger at monthly intervals degradation factor of crusher fines at monthly intervals organic impurities other than sugar at monthly intervals alkali reactivity of aggregate sources at num yearly intervals wet and dry strength and sodium sulphate soundness for pebble aggregates at num monthly intervals num manufacture and delivery of premixed concrete a general the contractor shall be responsible for the manufacture and delivery of all concrete which shall comply with the approved or registered concrete mix design and the requirements of as num .
the minimum quantity of a load of premixed concrete in the mixer or agitator delivered to site shall be num mnum .
the quantity of concrete delivered in any mixer or agitator shall not exceed the rated capacity of the agitator drum .
concrete shall not be mixed when the air temperature is lower than numc or greater than numc .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num water may be added to the freshly mixed concrete prior to commencement of discharge provided no more than num minutes have elapsed from the time of adding cement to the aggregate and a means of accurately measuring the volume of water is available to ensure that the maximum design amount of water and the agreed maximum wc ratio are not exceeded .
in addition concrete samples shall be taken after the water has been added in accordance with clause numb .
the consistency of the concrete shall be measured by a slump test after the water has been added in accordance with clause numc .
no water shall be added after the commencement of discharge of concrete .
concrete which has begun to stiffen shall not be used in the works .
concrete which has been driedout after leaving the mixing plant shall not be used in the works .
notwithstanding this requirement concrete may be driedout after leaving the mixing plant provided the site of intended discharge is located within a close proximity to the mixing plant to ensure the maximum discharge time of num minutes as stated in clause numf from the time of original mixing of the concrete is not exceeded and quality documentation is provided to verify that the affected load of concrete fully complies with this section .
prior to the discharge of concrete at the site the mixer or agitator shall be operated at mixing speed until the concrete achieves the required uniformity but for not less than a period of three minutes .
where superplasticisers or other admixtures are added to the concrete on site the concrete shall be mixed for a period of not less than five minutes prior to the discharge at the site b self compacting concrete scc further to the requirements of clause num scc shall incorporate the various cementitious materials coarse and fine aggregate and any additional fine materials water and chemical admixtures in proportions to achieve the rheological characteristics of flow and selfcompaction .
scc shall be produced using high range polycarboxylate type water reducers which include a viscosity modifying capability that impart psuedoplastic or thixotropic behaviour upon the concrete in order to inhibit segregation .
conventional superplasticisers may be used provided a viscosity modifying admixture is also used and it is clearly demonstrated that the required flow is being achieved without segregation .
scc shall not be vibrated or subjected to any physical disturbance after deposition .
the slump flow tnum time measure of viscosity and passing ability of the self compacting concrete scc shall be determined in accordance with the vicroads slump flow and jring test method rc num as described in the vicroads code of practice rc num .
the slump flow tnum time and passing ability of the scc shall comply with the requirements of table num .
sampling and testing for scc shall be in accordance with the requirements of clause numn .
table num properties of scc measurement observations slump flow num num mm spread the aggregate shall be evenly distributed throughout the concrete paste within the spread and shall not exhibit signs of segregation tnum time measure of viscosity achieve a spread of num mm within num to num seconds the final spread shall not exceed num mm in diameter passing ability num mm the concrete shall not exhibit signs of segregation department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c highly workable concrete highly workable concrete shall be superplastisised with a nominated slump of between num mm and num mm and shall be compacted in accordance with this section .
highly workable concrete placed under water shall contain an antidispersing admixture .
sampling and testing for highly workable concrete shall be in accordance with clause num including the requirements for superplasticised concrete as stated in clause numc .
d moisture content of aggregates the moisture content of the fine and coarse aggregates shall be determined prior to concrete production for the day and whenever conditions change or fresh aggregates are delivered .
corresponding corrections shall be made to the mass of all aggregates and the volume of water used in the mix .
the moisture content of the fine and coarse aggregates shall be determined to constant mass in accordance with the vicroads aggregate moisture content test method rc num as described in the vicroads code of practice rc num .
moisture meters or other equivalent devices may also be used provided they are calibrated as a minimum on a monthly basis .
e delivery docket in addition to the information required by clause num of as num the following information shall also be recorded on the delivery docket i the total water in the batch including num the moisture content of both fine and coarse aggregates as specified in clause numd num batch water num water added at the slump stand num total amount of water permitted to be added on site num water added on site before commencement of discharge including water used to wash down the mixing blades of the mixer or agitator ii cement brand and type including num proportions of components by mass num total mass of cement iii chemical admixtures including num types num amounts iv slumps including num nominated slump num estimated slump num measured slump v any other additions to a batch vi the unique identification number allocated to the concrete mix design in accordance with clause numbxiii .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num f period for completion of discharge concrete shall be placed and compacted within num minutes of the commencement of mixing .
this time may be extended beyond the num minutes provided a hydration control admixture is added to the concrete mix to delay the hydration process and provided the concrete complies with the specified requirements .
where a hydration control admixture is added to the concrete mix to delay hydration the stated extended discharge time shall not be exceeded .
concrete shall not be incorporated into the works if its consistency is outside the acceptable limits as specified in clause numc .
g water left in the mixer or agitator water left in the mixer or agitator from the previous load shall be discharged prior to reloading new concrete in accordance with the requirements of section numcii water in mixing chamber of as num and in order to ensure that the maximum wc ratio is not exceeded in accordance with requirements of this section .
for the purposes of verification of this requirement quality documentation shall be signed and dated by the batcher of the mixing plant .
h addition of water at the slump stand addition of water to the mixed batch of concrete at the slump stand shall be undertaken in a disciplined manner such that slump stand water meters are initially zeroed and actual amounts of water added into the agitator drum are accurately recorded .
only hoses connected to a functioning and accurately calibrated slump stand water meter shall be used to add water to the freshly mixed concrete in the agitator drum .
records of actual amounts of water added into the agitator drum at the slump stand shall be available for review by the superintendent .
i calibration of weighing and metering equipment all batch plant weighing and all water metering equipment shall be subject to regular maintenance and independently calibrated by an accredited organisation as a minimum at three monthly intervals .
chemical dispensers shall be calibrated as a minimum at three monthly intervals .
the accuracy of all weighing and metering equipment shall comply with the requirements of section num of as num .
num standby mixing plant the contractor shall arrange for alternative supplies of concrete from standby mixing plants capable of being operated immediately in case of breakdown together with adequate supplies of cementitious material fine and coarse aggregates for an approved compatible mixes .
hand mixing will not be permitted .
num traceability of concrete all concrete batches truckloads used in the works shall be traceable from the batch plant to its general location in the structure by a unique identification number .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num concrete control sampling and testing a general all concrete shall be sampled and tested in accordance with as num unless otherwise specified in this section .
each sample of concrete shall be tested for compressive strength slump air entrainment when required slump flow tnum time and passing ability when scc is used vpv value drying shrinkage and soluble salts at concrete mix design stage as specified in this section .
b frequency of sampling and testing whenever concrete is being cast in a structural element or a portion of it in one continuous casting operation the minimum number of test samples shall be in accordance with table num .
a continuous casting operation is one in which the maximum time interval between the end of discharge of one truckload of concrete and the beginning of discharge of the next truckload does not exceed num minutes .
whenever a group of structural elements is being cast in separate operations where the time interval between the end of discharge of one truckload of concrete and the beginning of discharge of the next truckload exceeds num minutes the minimum number of test samples shall be one num per truckload of concrete samples shall be taken at the point of discharge prior to placement in a random and representative manner and at approximately equal portions of the volume of concrete cast in one continuous operation .
unless otherwise specified in this section or directed by the superintendent no sampling shall be undertaken from consecutive truckloads of concrete cast in one continuous operation .
table num volume cast in one continuous operation cubic metre minimum number of samples num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num for each additional num m one additional sample shall be taken .
the contractor shall develop and implement a site sampling and testing procedure in accordance with the minimum frequency requirements of this section for assurance of concrete quality and shall ensure that records are available for review by the superintendent .
c consistency the consistency of the concrete shall be determined by a slump test of a concrete sample in accordance with as num and clause num of as num except as specified below .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num for concrete containing a superplasticiser the consistency of all batches of concrete after the addition of the superplasticiser shall be determined by a slump test of a concrete sample .
testing of every batch shall continue until five consecutive batches of concrete have achieved the specified requirements .
after satisfying this requirement the contractor may then make a submission to the superintendent for agreement to reduce the frequency of slump testing of superplasticised concrete to be in accordance with table num provided a high level of process control including a high level of control of total water content in the mix in accordance with specified requirements is supported with objective documented evidence .
if the contractor has satisfied the above initial testing requirement and is slump testing superplasticised concrete at the frequency in table num and any batch fails to achieve the specified standard the contractor shall test all subsequent batches of superplasticised concrete until three consecutive batches have achieved the specified standard at which time the frequency of slump testing may again be reduced to the minimum frequency requirements of table num .
for the purpose of determining the actual slump of superplasticised concrete and the required testing parameters for scc as stated in clause numb and clause numn the discharge of the first num mnum of concrete prior to taking the test sample shall not be required .
the concrete represented by the samples shall be deemed to comply with the nominated mix design slump if the measured slump is within the limits given in table num of clause num of as num .
if the measured slump is not within the limits given in table num of clause num of as num one repeat test shall be made immediately from another portion of the same sample .
if the value obtained from the repeat test falls within the limits given in table num of clause num of as num the concrete represented by the sample shall be deemed to comply with the appropriate nominated mix design slump otherwise it shall be rejected .
the slump of the concrete shall be checked and recorded within num minutes of adding cement to the aggregate or immediately prior to discharge when the actual haul time exceeds num minutes andor when water is added to the mixed batch in accordance with clause numa .
concrete used for the slump test and the required testing for scc shall not be reused to make concrete test cylinders .
each batch truckload of concrete delivered to site shall be visually inspected to ensure consistency of concrete supply and the estimated slump shall be recorded on the identification certificate for the batch .
both the visual inspection and slump estimate shall be carried out prior to the addition of any water which may be added on site and prior to any addition of a superplasticiser .
d test cylinders for compressive strength each sample of concrete for standard compression tests shall comprise a minimum number of i num cylinders for reinforced and prestressed pretensioned concrete ii num or num cylinders for prestressed posttensioned concrete when application of the posttensioning force will be after or before num days respectively .
a minimum of num cylinders per sample shall be tested at num days .
for all concrete a minimum of num cylinder per sample shall be tested at num days .
this requirement shall not apply for pretensioned concrete .
for prestressed pretensioned concrete a minimum of num cylinder per sample shall be tested prior to the application of the pretensioning force .
for prestressed posttensioned concrete a minimum of num cylinders per sample shall be tested prior to the application of the posttensioning force .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num e curing of test cylinders test cylinders shall be cured in accordance with as num .
cylinders shall be transported to the testing laboratory in moisture proof containers .
for steam or radiant heat cured components test cylinders shall be cured with the components or in the test cylinder heating box respectively for the duration of the curing cycle as specified in clause numg and clause numh .
following the steam curing cycle curing of the cylinders shall continue in accordance with the requirements of as num. f compression testing prior to application of prestress for posttensioned concrete components the posttensioning force shall only be applied when two cylinders per sample are tested and the average compressive strength of these cylinders is equal to or greater than the specified compressive strength as shown on the drawings and the lower cylinder result is greater than num of the specified compressive strength .
for pretensioned concrete components the pretensioning force shall only be applied when each cylinder per sample tested has achieved the specified compressive strength as shown on the drawings .
in the event that the above requirements are not satisfied application of prestress shall be deferred until such time as the compressive strength of an additional cylinder per sample achieves the specified compressive strength for pretensioned concrete or the cylinders tested at num days satisfy the requirements of clause numg for posttensioned concrete .
g testing and acceptance of concrete on the basis of num day compressive strength i test cylinders a minimum of two cylinders per sample shall be tested at num days after casting .
the specification will be satisfied if the compressive strength of each sample as determined from the average value of the test cylinders is not less than the specified minimum num day compressive strength and provided that the compressive strength of any cylinder in each sample is not less than num of the specified minimum num day compressive strength .
should the strength of any one sample representing the concrete fall short of the specified minimum num day compressive strength as shown in table num the concrete represented by that sample may be rejected or the contractor may elect to test concrete cores subject to approval by the superintendent .
nondestructive tests may be used to determine the insitu strength of suspect concrete subject to approval by the superintendent .
ii test cores where required by the superintendent test cores shall be cut from the completed structural element portion of element or group of elements represented by the test cylinder samples .
a minimum of three cores per sample shall be tested .
all cores shall be clearly labelled to identify them with the structural element and location they represent .
the dimensions and testing of the concrete cores shall be in accordance with as num .
testing shall be undertaken to ensure that the core locations are remote from existing steel reinforcement .
where cores are cut from concrete decks and slabs core locations shall be remote from wheel paths .
cores containing steel reinforcement shall not be tested .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num core locations shall be submitted for approval by the superintendent .
cores shall not be cut from prestressed concrete after the prestressing force has been applied or transferred to the concrete unless the proposed coring is certified by the proof engineer .
the certification shall state that the proposed coring will not be detrimental to the prestressed concrete member .
the core holes shall be cleaned and repaired with a shrinkage compensating polymer modified cementitious repair material in accordance with the requirements of section num .
the exposed surface of the repaired hole shall be similar in texture and colour to the surrounding concrete .
the specification will be satisfied if the compressive strength of each sample as determined from the average value of the test cores is not less than the specified minimum num day compressive strength and provided that the compressive strength of any core in each sample is not less than num of the specified minimum num day compressive strength .
should the strength of any one sample representing the concrete fall short of the specified minimum num day compressive strength as shown in table num the concrete represented by that sample may be rejected .
h testing and acceptance of sprayed concrete on the basis of num day vpv value a minimum of two cores per sample shall be cut from the sprayed concrete test panels and permanent sprayed concrete and tested at num days at the minimum specified sampling frequency .
each core shall be num mm diameter and a minimum of num mm long cut transversely into two equal slices and tested for vpv at num days in accordance with test method as num .
the vpv value for each core shall be determined from the average value of the test slices .
the specification will be satisfied if the vpv value for each sample as determined from the average value of the test cores is not larger than the specified maximum vpv values at num days as shown in table num. i testing and acceptance of concrete mix design on the basis of num num and num day compressive strengths a minimum of two cylinders per sample per trial mix shall be tested .
the specification will be satisfied if the compressive strength of each sample as determined from the average value of the test cylinders is not less than the specified minimum num num and num day compressive strengths and provided that the compressive strength of any cylinder in each sample is not less than num of the specified minimum num num and num day compressive strengths .
should the strength of any one sample representing the concrete fall short of the specified minimum num num and num day compressive strengths as shown in table num the contractor shall take steps to modify the concrete mix design and retest to ensure that the specified minimum compressive strengths have been achieved .
j testing and acceptance of nonconforming concrete in the event that any of the specified requirements of this section can not be clearly demonstrated to have been satisfied the contractor shall undertake appropriate measures to resolve the nonconformances to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
the superintendent may at his discretion require additional vpv testing and compressive strength testing to be undertaken from the remainder of the fresh concrete supply or the in situ hardened concrete or both as described below .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num i fresh concrete in addition to the compressive strength requirements as specified in this section additional samples of concrete as detailed in clause numb and table num of at least two cylinders shall be tested for vpv at num days in accordance with test method as num .
the specification will be satisfied if the vpv value for each sample as determined from the average value of the additional test cylinders does not exceed the specified maximum num day vpv value in table num .
should the vpv value of any one sample representing the concrete exceed the specified maximum num day vpv value as shown in table num the contractor shall modify the concrete mix design and undertake other measures as required at its own expense to satisfy the specification requirements for subsequent concrete supply by further sampling and testing .
the hardened concrete represented by the samples shall be subject to rejection rectification by the contractor the requirements as described below or as determined by the superintendent .
ii hardened concrete in addition to the requirements of clause numgii for compressive strength of test cores a minimum of two cores per sample shall be cut from the relevant completed structural element portion of element or group of elements represented by a set of test cylinder samples and tested at num days .
each core shall be num mm diameter x num mm long cut transversely into two equal slices and tested for vpv at num days in accordance with test method as num .
the vpv value for each core shall be determined from the average value of the test slices .
for elements where the thickness is less than num mm the core length shall be the full thickness of the element .
the specification will be satisfied if the vpv value for each sample as determined from the average value of the test cores does not exceed the specified maximum vpv value at num days as shown in table num .
all cores shall be clearly labelled to identify them with the structural element and location they represent .
testing shall be undertaken to ensure that the core locations are remote from the existing steel reinforcement .
where cores are cut from concrete decks and slabs core locations shall be remote from wheel paths .
cores containing steel reinforcement shall not be tested .
core locations shall be submitted for approval by the superintendent .
for coring from prestressed concrete the requirements of clause num shall be satisfied .
where the vpv value of any one sample representing the concrete exceeds the specified maximum num day vpv value as shown in table num the contractor shall carry out rectification works .
these works shall achieve the specified level of durability otherwise the concrete represented by that sample may be rejected .
nondestructive tests may be used to investigate nonconforming concrete of observed or suspect quality subject to approval by the superintendent .
k testing and acceptance of concrete on the basis of num day vpv value notwithstanding the requirements of clause numj where a concrete pour exceeds num mnum a sample consisting of at least two cylinders shall be sampled at the point of discharge and tested for vpv at num days in accordance with test method as num .
for concrete structures located in marine and other saline environments or which are subject to sulphate and chemical attack at least two cylinders per sample shall be tested for vpv at num days as detailed in clause numb and table num .
should the vpv value of any one sample representing the concrete exceed the specified maximum num day vpv value as shown in table num the concrete represented by that sample and subsequent concrete supply shall be subject to the requirements of clause numj for testing and acceptance of nonconforming concrete .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num l determination of early age compressive strength further to the requirements of clause numd additional test cylinders shall be taken for the assessment of early age compressive strength where early application of loading or early removal of formwork is proposed or where concrete is to be placed over or adjacent to and connected with a previous section prior to achieving the minimum num day compressive strength .
the contractor shall nominate the total number of cylinders per sample in excess of the minimum number of cylinders specified in clause numd .
further to the requirements of clause nume when additional test cylinders per sample above the specified minimum number are taken to vary a requirement of this specification such as early application of loading or early removal of formwork the test cylinders shall be cured with the concrete member under conditions no more favourable than the most unfavourable conditions for the portion of the concrete which the test cylinders represent .
m maturity testing for estimating the in situ strength of concrete further to the requirements of clause numd and clause nume various types of maturity testing may be used to determine the early age in situ strength development of concrete over a required time period for the purpose of facilitating early formwork removal lifting precast units out of moulds or early application of loading subject to the approval of the superintendent .
based on the specific application a proposed maturity method of assessing early in situ strength shall be submitted for review by the superintendent .
each proposal shall be supported with a documented detailed methodology and documented evidence of previous performance including accuracy in determining the in situ strength development of concrete .
the proposed method of maturity testing shall include i the type of equipment to be used to monitor the in situ temperatures or the control temperatures for temperature match curing tmc to develop a maturity relationship correlation between compressive strength and maturity for the specific concrete mix and prevailing curing conditions ii method of recording the timetemperature relationship including the type of data loggers iii the period of monitoring iv the proposed number and location of temperature sensors to be used which shall include as a minimum the interior and near surface of the concrete element .
n sampling and testing for self compacting concrete scc sampling and testing for scc to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of table num shall be in accordance with clause num except that the slump flow tnum measure of viscosity and passing ability of scc shall be sampled and tested at the same frequency as superplasticised concrete as stated in clause numc .
when making test cylinders for scc the test sample shall be placed into the cylinder moulds from a height not exceeding num mm from the top of the mould .
the placing of the concrete into the moulds shall be done in one continuous motion .
with the exception of light tapping of the sides of cylinder moulds with a plastic mallet rodding or vibration shall not be applied to test cylinders made up of scc .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num temperature evaporation limits and concreting operations a general all freshly finished concrete surfaces shall be protected where required from the sun wind or rain until curing is implemented .
where extreme conditions of temperature humidity wind andor rain are expected during and after placing the concrete the contractor shall implement special precautions to protect the concrete .
the temperature of concrete measured immediately prior to placing shall not be less than numc or greater than numc .
the contractor shall minimise evaporative moisture losses from the freshly placed and unprotected concrete in accordance with the requirements of clauses nume and numf .
b hot weather concreting concrete shall not be placed when the air temperature measured at the point of placement is above numc .
steel formwork reinforcing steel and any other steel surfaces that will come in contact with the concrete shall be cooled to below numc by shading or spraying with water before the concrete is placed .
for decks and slabs the concrete surfaces shall be protected immediately after screeding and finishing operations are progressively completed in order to minimise evaporative moisture losses until curing by one or a combination of the methods specified in clause num is implemented .
c cold weather concreting concrete shall not be placed in the works when the air temperature measured at the point of placement is below numc .
concrete which has been damaged by frost as a result of failing to maintain the temperature of the concrete surface above numc will be rejected .
d wet weather concreting the contractor shall take measures to protect the freshly placed concrete from rain .
concrete affected by rain will be rejected .
e evaporation limits for concreting operations the contractor shall be responsible for measuring and recording the air temperature relative humidity concrete temperature and wind velocity measured one metre above the as placed concrete at the point of concrete placement from commencement of placing the concrete and continue until curing has commenced .
this information shall be used in conjunction with figure num to determine the rate of evaporation of water from the freshly placed and unprotected surface of the concrete .
the rate of evaporation shall be monitored by the contractor until such time as curing commences .
when the value of the rate of evaporation as determined from figure num exceeds num kgm per hour the contractor shall take precautions to minimise evaporative moisture losses such as the application of an aliphaticalcohol based evaporative retarding compound or controlled fog spray .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num figure num evaporation of water from freshly placed concrete f application of evaporative retarding compound the evaporative retarding compound when required is to be applied immediately after initial screeding .
the remaining finishing operations can be carried out after application of the compound .
an evaporative retarding compound shall be used for concrete decks and slabs .
application of the evaporative retarding compound shall be implemented in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
details of the proposed evaporative retarding compound and its application procedure including minimum application rates shall be submitted to the superintendent for review not less than four weeks prior to the commencement of concreting works .
num placing and compacting concrete a placing general the contractor shall submit the concrete construction quality procedure and inspection and test plans which demonstrate compliance with the requirements of sections num num num and num for review by the superintendent not less than num weeks prior to the placement of concrete .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num hp concrete shall not be placed until i the contractors concrete construction quality procedure and inspection and test plans have been reviewed by the superintendent ii the evidence that the forms reinforcement any stressing materials and embedments conforming to the requirements of this specification and the drawings has been reviewed by the superintendent iii all foreign material has been completely removed from the forms .
concrete shall be transported handled and placed so as to prevent segregation loss or leakage of materials .
concrete shall not be dropped freely from a height exceeding two metres .
where placing concrete would otherwise necessitate a drop exceeding two metres suitable tremie pipes chutes or other concreting devices shall be used to place the concrete to prevent segregation .
concrete shall not be moved horizontally by the use of vibrators .
concrete shall be supplied at an adequate rate in a continuous operation to ensure that all the concrete in the forms can be kept plastic until placed in its final position and compacted and all temporarily exposed surfaces covered by and knit in with fresh concrete so that no cold joints are formed .
equipment and personnel shall be adequate to maintain the rate of concrete placement adopted .
in continuous concrete pours the maximum time lag between truck loads on site shall not exceed num minutes .
no strain shall be placed on any projecting reinforcing steel or embedment for a period of at least num hours following completion of concreting .
for construction of deck slabs the fixed screed supports shall be placed parallel to the longitudinal centreline of the bridge .
concrete above deck shall not be placed until the deck formwork or the falsework for the span has been released andor any posttensioning and grouting operations are completed .
prior to placing concrete any absorbent surfaces including blinding concrete and construction joints shall be thoroughly moistened and excess free water shall be removed .
b pumping of concrete prior to commencement of placing concrete the initial discharge of concrete shall be pumped to waste until a consistent workable mix is discharged .
aluminium pipes shall not be used for the delivery of concrete .
c placing concrete in bored piles under water and in dry bores the contractor shall submit the procedure for placing concrete in bored piles under water and in dry bores for review by the superintendent at least four weeks prior to concreting .
concrete shall not be placed in bored piles under water or in a dry bore until the proposed method of placement of concrete has been approved by the superintendent .
the minimum concrete grade for concrete placed in bored piles under water or in dry bores shall be vrnum in accordance with the requirements of this section .
the proposed mix shall be either a self compacting concrete scc or a highly workable concrete as specified in clauses numb and numc respectively .
highly workable concrete shall be compacted in accordance with the requirements of this section .
placing of concrete in bored piles underwater or in a dry bore shall be carried out by tremie methods in accordance with section num .
concrete shall not be placed in water which has a temperature less than numc .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num d compaction screeding and finishing of concrete i compaction care shall be taken to fill every part of the forms or excavations to force the concrete under and around the reinforcement without displacing it to work coarse aggregate back from the face and to remove air bubbles and voids .
concrete shall be deposited in horizontal layers not more than num mm thick except in the manufacture of prestressed concrete elements .
for prestressed elements the concrete shall be built up to the full depth of the section and the concrete face moved forward progressively .
during and immediately after placing the concrete shall be effectively compacted by vibrators of adequate size number and frequency .
vibration shall be applied to the full depth of each layer and extended into the top num mm of the underlying layer .
vibration shall continue at each point until air bubbles cease to emerge from the concrete then withdrawn slowly .
concrete shall not be vibrated to the point where segregation of the ingredients occurs .
where internal vibrators are used they shall be inserted vertically at successive locations at spacings not exceeding the manufacturers stated zone of influence and shall not be allowed to rest on the steel reinforcement .
concrete decks or slabs shall be compacted by immersion vibrators and vibrating screeds such that uniform consolidation is achieved throughout the deck and slab area .
where approved by the superintendent proprietary power vibrating screeds of suitable widths may be used in narrow or constricted areas or where required by the deck and slab layout with each new vibrating run overlapping the previous one by a minimum of num mm such that uniform consolidation is achieved throughout the deck and slab area .
ii screeding of exposed surfaces immediately after placing and compaction exposed surfaces other than decks and slabs shall be screeded off to the specified levels and finished with a wooden float to an even uniform surface .
construction joints shall be left rough in accordance with clause num .
during screeding surplus concrete shall be maintained ahead of the screed to ensure full and uniform compaction to exposed concrete surfaces .
concrete deck and slab surfaces shall be screeded on a longitudinal direction using vibrating screeds on screeding guides .
the screeding guides shall be accurately set and rigidly fixed in position .
guides shall be capable of sustaining construction loading without undue or permanent deflection .
the contractor shall submit its proposed method of compaction adjacent to screed guides and its proposed method and timing of repairs at screed guide supports for review by the superintendent .
iii finishing of exposed surfaces final finishing of exposed concrete surfaces shall be carried out after all bleed water has been removed and the concrete has become sufficiently hard to support the finishing operation .
driers i.e .
dry sand cement or stone dust shall not be used to absorb free water .
finishing of concrete decks or slabs shall be effected with a power trowel fitted with rotating steel floats .
any drying cracks which appear prior to initial set and before or during finishing operations shall be immediately closed as required with either a wooden or steel float .
curing shall commence immediately following the progressive completion at any location of final finishing operations .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num concrete casting sequence the casting sequence shall be as shown on the drawings or as specified in this specification .
a deck casting sequence the deck casting sequence shall be as shown on the drawings or as specified in this specification .
at least seven days shall elapse between the casting of adjacent sections .
the maximum deck casting length shall be num metres .
b box girder or voided slab casting sequence the contractor shall submit details of his proposed casting sequence and falsework for review by the superintendent .
casting sequence details shall include the length of segments the order of casting and whether segments are to be cast monolithically or in stages .
box girders or voided slabs shall be cast in longitudinal segments with a maximum segment length of num metres .
at least seven days shall elapse between the casting of adjacent segments .
segments incorporating a transverse diaphragm shall be cast monolithically with the full cross section of the webs floor and deck slab extending a distance of at least five metres from the face of the diaphragm .
segments which do not incorporate transverse diaphragms shall be cast monolithically with the full cross section of webs floor and deck slab or alternatively may be cast in two stages with a construction joint provided between the webs and the deck slab .
if the latter method is adopted the deck slab shall be cast not later than num calendar days after the casting of the webs and floor slab .
num construction joints and bonding of new concrete the location and details of construction joints shall be as shown on the drawings .
the placing of concrete shall proceed continuously from joint to joint .
any point at which the placing of concrete has stopped and the concrete has taken its initial set shall be treated as a construction joint .
construction joints shall be perpendicular to the principal lines of stress and in general shall not be located in regions of maximum bending or maximum shear .
where applicable concrete in the existing structure shall be broken back as shown on the drawings .
any cracked or damaged concrete remaining after breaking back shall be removed and replaced with new concrete .
before placing new concrete against concrete which has set the forms shall be retightened .
concrete against which new concrete is to be placed shall be roughened by removing all laitance and sufficient mortar to expose the coarse aggregate to a depth of num mm .
the roughened surface shall be cleaned of foreign matter laitance and loose or porous material .
the surface shall be thoroughly moistened with water and any excess water removed immediately prior to placing of concrete .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num insertions and greased joints abutting surfaces of concrete shall be separated by grease or other surface coatings or insertions of bituminous impregnated felt or fibreboard as shown on the drawings so as to prevent the surfaces from bonding or binding together .
dowels shall be placed as shown on the drawings and prior to placing the surrounding concrete .
num control of early age thermal cracking of large and restrained members measures shall be taken to control early age thermal cracking of concrete for large and restrained members including but not be limited to crossheads diaphragms columns abutments footings and pile caps where a the least dimension of a member exceeds num mm and b one or more faces of a concrete member is restrained by previously placed hardened concrete or by other external restraints and the crosssectional area of the member is equal to or less than the crosssectional area of the restraining element .
except where justified by analysis and testing the temperature differential across the concrete member being constructed shall not exceed numc during the period of curing .
the contractor shall implement special precautions to reduce differential temperature buildup prior to the temperature differential between the concrete core and that of the exposed concrete surface exceeds numc .
thermocouples shall be placed at a range of positions within the large and restrained concrete member to determine the maximum temperature and differential temperature across the section of concrete .
thermocouples with an accuracy of numc shall be cast into each large concrete member located in the centre of the core and num mm below the exposed surface and monitored at continuously regular intervals by data loggers until the temperature difference falls such that control measures are no longer required .
the temperature data acquired and proposed control measures to reduce differential temperature within the specified limits shall be submitted for review by the superintendent .
temperature differential monitoring shall be undertaken on at least one representative member from each type of large and restrained members provided that any required control measures to reduce the differential temperature within the specified limits is adopted for the subsequent construction of members of the same type .
the temperature of all concrete members following concrete placement shall not exceed numc .
num curing a general curing of concrete shall be carried out using one or a combination of the methods as specified in clauses numc numd nume numf numg and numh .
the curing of exposed concrete surfaces shall commence immediately after finishing operations are progressively completed at any location and shall continue uninterrupted for not less than the periods specified in table num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num hp the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for review full details of the proposed methods of curing as part of the concrete mix design submission not less than four weeks prior to placement of concrete .
the contractor shall not proceed with the placement of concrete until the curing methods has been reviewed and approved by the superintendent .
details submitted shall include the following information for the proposed methods of curing i water curing materials method and timing of curing ii curing compound technical specification of the proposed curing compound including the timing rate of application and method of removal where required iii polyethylene sheet material and method of application sealing and control iv maintaining formwork in place timing method of sealing the formwork and curing exposed surfaces v steam or radiant heat curing full details of control methods and proposed curing cycle .
b period of curing the period of curing shall be not less than the number of days given in table num .
table num periods of curing excluding steam and radiant heat curing concrete grade exposure classification type of cement periods of curing days average air temperature during curing numc to numc above numc vrnum a bnum gp num num gb num num vrnum bnum gp num num gb num num vrnum vrnum c gp num num gb num num for concrete decks and slabs the periods of curing shall be extended by num days .
notes num .
type of cement gp general purpose portland cement gb general purpose blended cement num .
when the average air temperature during the specified periods of curing falls below numc the periods of curing shall be extended by num days .
num .
where a higher concrete grade is adopted than that shown for a particular exposure classification the periods of curing for the higher concrete grade may be adopted .
c water curing all surfaces of the concrete shall be kept moist for the specified periods of curing by continuous spraying ponding wet hessian felt matting or sand blankets .
wet curing materials used on vertical surfaces shall be effectively wrapped during the whole curing period .
the water used shall conform to the requirements of clause num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num d curing compounds prior to the use of curing compounds full details of the proposed curing method shall be submitted to the superintendent including the time and rate of application documented evidence of the effectiveness of the compound as a curing agent supported by test certificates from a nata accredited laboratory and method of removal where required .
the test certificates of compliance shall relate only to the formulation on which the tests were made and shall be valid for not more than three years from the date of issue .
curing compounds shall not be used on concrete decks or slabs unless an aliphatic alcohol based evaporative retarding compound is also applied after initial screeding in accordance with clause numf .
pva based curing compounds shall not be used .
curing compounds shall comply with as num .
such compounds shall be pigmented sufficiently to allow visual inspection to ensure full application on the surface .
the pigment shall not be visible fourteen days after application .
curing compounds shall not have a deleterious effect on the concrete or stain the surface of the concrete .
the curing compound shall be applied by a pressurised sprayer to give a uniform cover .
the sprayer shall incorporate a device for continuous agitation and mixing of the compound in its container during spraying .
the curing compound shall be applied using a fine spray at the rate stated on the certificate of compliance or at a rate of num litresmnum per coat whichever is the greater .
the application rate shall be checked by calculating the amount of curing compound falling on felt mats each approximately num mnum in area placed on the concrete surface .
two coats shall be applied at the full rate .
the time between the first and second coat shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation or on the basis of a trial application .
curing compounds shall not be applied to construction joints unless the joint is to be roughened or sandblasted at a later date .
curing compounds shall not be applied to surfaces which are to be subsequently coated unless they are compatible with the coating waterproofing or surfacing system or provision is made for removal of the compound from these surfaces prior to the application of the coating waterproofing or surfacing system .
the curing membranes shall be maintained intact for not less than the specified period of curing .
any damage to the curing membranes during the period of curing shall be repaired immediately at the original rate of application .
e polyethylene sheet polyethylene sheet shall be of sufficient strength to withstand wind and any imposed foot traffic or physical loading .
torn or punctured sheeting shall not be used .
laps shall be num mm minimum and edges and laps shall be sealed by tape or held down by boards or other means .
all edges and laps shall be sealed against evaporative moisture losses for the duration of curing .
water shall be sprayed under the sheeting at the edges and at laps on the day after placing concrete and at regular intervals to maintain moist conditions .
polyethylene sheet shall not be used on concrete decks or slabs unless used in conjunction with water curing .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num f curing by maintaining formwork in place where formwork is left in place to satisfy the formwork removal times as specified in clause num or where formwork is left in place for the specified period of curing or part thereof the exposed surfaces of the concrete shall be cured and the formwork shall be sealed against evaporative moisture losses for the duration of curing .
where formwork is removed prior to the completion of the curing period curing shall recommence within half an hour and continue until the total curing time is not less than the periods of curing specified in table num. g steam curing i general method of control and the proposed curing cycle to achieve the specified concrete compressive strength shall be submitted to the superintendent .
after the initial maturity period units shall be cured in an atmosphere saturated with water vapour at a pressure not exceeding atmospheric pressure .
the contractor shall take measures to allow for the potential lower num day compressive strength obtained from test cylinders cured initially under in situ conditions as compared to those cured in accordance with the requirements of as num. ii steam covers to prevent drying out steam covers shall be placed over the units immediately following the casting and screeding operations in such a manner as to ensure free circulation of the steam around the concrete mass .
iii curing cycle after an initial maturity of numc hours but not less than two hours after batching the last batch of concrete for the units steam shall be admitted to the steam covers at such a controlled rate that the maximum average temperature rise shall not exceed numc per hour .
note the initial maturity period is calculated by dividing numc hours by the concrete temperature of the last batch of concrete placed in the unit .
the concrete temperature is as measured on an indicating thermometer .
in addition the temperature rise in any one fifteen minute period shall not exceed numc .
if the admission of steam to the steam covers is delayed by more than the initial specified maturity of numc hours after the completion of placing of concrete water curing as specified in clause numc shall be applied until steaming commences .
steaming shall continue at a rate such that the temperature rise shall not exceed numc per hour until a temperature under the steam covers of not greater than numc has been reached .
the corresponding maximum temperature of the concrete shall not exceed numc .
after the elapse of sufficient time at the maximum temperature for the required concrete properties to have been reached steam shall be completely shut down .
steam covers shall not be removed nor any part of the concrete units and test cylinders disturbed or operated upon in any way until the temperature under the steam covers has fallen to within numc of the ambient temperature .
also the rate of loss of temperature under the steam covers after shutting off steam shall not exceed numc per hour .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num iv temperature controls temperature shall be recorded by means of recording thermometers supplied and installed by the contractor .
these thermometers shall be maintained in good condition and calibration .
the temperature sensitive parts of the thermometers shall be so positioned under the steam covers as to cause the thermometers to record the minimum temperature under the covers .
one recording thermometer shall be used for each unit or group of units in line up to a total length of num m. for greater lengths additional recording thermometers shall be used and the distance between the temperature sensitive parts of the thermometers shall not exceed num m. the recording thermometers shall be set in operation immediately upon completion of the casting and screeding the temperature sensitive part of each thermometer being installed in position at the same time .
charts shall not be removed from any recording thermometers nor the recording thermometers disturbed or moved in any way until after the removal of the steam covers .
charts from temperature recording thermometers shall be retained .
the following information shall be recorded on the chart num date on which steaming commenced num unique identification and description of concrete unit num temperature correction if any num time correction if any num batching of concrete num temperature of concrete when placed num ambient temperature at time of removal of steam covers num name of contractor or manufacturer .
v steam delivery under no circumstances shall steam jets be allowed to impinge upon any part of the concrete units or of a test specimen or of their formwork or moulds .
neither shall any steam delivery pipe be attached directly to any formwork or moulds in such a manner as may cause localised overheating of the concrete .
sufficient steam jets or steam entry points shall be provided to ensure that a substantially uniform temperature is maintained under the steam covers such that the difference in temperature between any two points adjacent to the concrete units is not more than numc .
vi extent of steam curing unless otherwise specified steam curing shall be continuously applied until at least the num day compressive strength for the specified concrete grade is obtained .
vii partial steam curing where steam curing is used only to obtain sufficient compressive strength for removal of forms or for lifting curing shall be continued by one or a combination of the methods specified in clauses numc d and e for a minimum period of seven days from the time of finishing the concrete .
where partial steam curing is employed as above curing shall recommence within half an hour of the cessation of steam curing .
the minimum requirements of clause numgiii shall be complied with .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num viii curing of test cylinders concrete compression test cylinders shall be placed near the concrete units and shall be so positioned under the steam covers as to be midway between two adjacent points of steam entry subject always to their being no closer to any points of steam entry than half the width of the concrete units .
test cylinders shall be positioned in a group at the lower face of the concrete unit and shall in no case be placed on top of the concrete unit or its formwork .
test cylinders shall remain in position under the steam covers until the steam curing cycle is complete .
test cylinders shall be suitably covered in such a way as to minimise moisture and temperature losses between the time of removal from the steam covers and the time of forwarding to an accredited laboratory for testing .
cylinders shall be transported in moisture proof containers .
h radiant heat curing i general the application of heat shall be effected by the circulation of hot water which is fed through a series of conduits attached externally to the steel form .
a heating box used for the curing of concrete test cylinders shall be connected to the hot water heating system .
ii curing cycle the curing cycle of the radiant heat curing method shall be in accordance with clause numgiii except that reference to steam curing shall be replaced by the application of hot water .
the top surface of the finished concrete shall be kept moist throughout the curing cycle .
iii temperature controls the water temperature shall be controlled by a thermostat and shall not exceed numc .
the corresponding maximum temperature of the concrete shall not exceed numc .
the temperature difference between ingoing and outgoing water shall be maintained at less than numc .
temperature controls shall be in accordance with clause numgiv except that reference to steam covers shall be replaced by curing covers .
in addition to the specified requirements of clause numgiv the contractor shall also monitor the temperature of the test cylinder heating box by means of a recording thermometer .
the difference in temperature between the test cylinder heating box and any point along the hot water heating system shall not exceed numc .
iv curing covers to prevent drying out curing covers shall be placed over the units after the top surface of the concrete has taken its initial set and the watering hose has been placed on the concrete .
v extent of radiant heat curing radiant heat curing shall be continuously applied until at least the num day compressive strength for the specified concrete grade is obtained .
vi curing of test cylinders concrete test cylinders shall be placed in the heating box which is connected into the mould heating system as soon as the curing starts and shall remain in position until the curing cycle is complete .
test cylinders shall be suitably covered to minimise moisture and temperature losses between the time of removal from the heating box and the time of forwarding to an accredited laboratory for testing .
cylinders shall be transported in moisture proof containers .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num i delayed ettringite formation to control the risk of delayed ettringite formation at later ages the maximum concrete temperature during the curing period shall not exceed numc except where analysis has been performed that justifies a particular maximum temperature limit for concrete .
num cracking of concrete a maximum acceptable crack widths the concrete shall have no cracks at any stage after construction measured at the concrete surface of width greater than the relevant value given in table num for the corresponding exposure classification .
where such cracks exist they shall be identified as a nonconformance .
not withstanding the requirements of this clause the acceptable crack width at the concrete surface of precast prestressed concrete elements shall not exceed num mm .
table num exposure classification maximum acceptable crack widths mm a num bnum num bnum num c u num the contractor shall undertake an assessment of the cracked concrete structure to evaluate the influence of cracks on the load bearing capacity serviceability and durability .
in addition the contractor shall establish the causes of the cracks crack width the moisture condition of the crack and whether a crack is active or inactive and submit a crack repair procedure for the superintendents review prior to any repair works being undertaken .
the assessment of the cracked concrete structure shall be undertaken by a technical specialist with a minimum of num years practical experience in the diagnostic assessment and investigation of concrete structures .
the repair of concrete cracks shall be in accordance with section num. b repair of inactive cracks repair of inactive cracks shall be as follows i cracks up to num mm wide shall be repaired by pressure injection of low viscosity epoxy resin .
ii vertical cracks num mm wide shall be repaired by pressure injection of low viscosity epoxy resin .
horizontal cracks num mm wide shall be repaired either by pressure injection of epoxy resin or other repair methods which comply with the requirements of section num provided a supporting assessment and evaluation by an appropriately experienced consultant has been submitted to the superintendent for review .
iii cracks over num mm shall be repaired with filling materials and methods in accordance with the requirements of section num .
where the repair of such cracks is likely to result in the complete detachment of fractured pieces of concrete away from the main concrete component such fractures shall be treated as patch repairs and repaired with polymer modified cementitious repair materials in accordance with the requirements of section num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c repair of active cracks liveactive cracks shall be repaired using flexible filler materials and methods in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num removal of formwork a general formwork shall be removed carefully and in such a manner as to avoid damage to the member or the concrete surfaces and maintain safety at all stages of removal .
b formwork removal times formwork and formwork supports shall not be disturbed or adjusted during the concreting operation and shall remain in position and undisturbed until the minimum removal times given in table num have elapsed after completion of the placing of concrete .
table num concrete components minimum period before removal of formwork and formwork supports soffits of beams soffits of decks soffits of slabs soffits of cantilevers soffits of diaphragms soffits of pier and abutment crossheads and soffits of other structural components .
num days or until such time as the concrete has reached the specified num day compressive strength whichever is the greater .
a vertical faces of components when height of each days cast is num days i columns greater than num metres ii walls greater than num metres .
b load supporting sides of sloping walls of box girders .
a vertical faces of components when height of each days cast is num days i columns num to num metres ii walls num to num metres b vertical faces of beams and pier and abutment crossheads c vertical faces of pad footings .
vertical faces of components when height of each days cast is num days i columns less than num metres ii walls less than num metres .
sides of slabs and piles .
num day where type gb cement is used the times for removal of formwork and formwork supports shall be increased by num day .
this requirement shall not apply to vertical faces of beams and crossheads columns and walls when the height of each days cast is less than num metres or num metres respectively or the sides of slabs and piles .
where the timing for the removal of formwork and formwork supports is based on compressive strength as given in table num test cylinders shall be prepared cured and tested as specified in clause num .
in addition the curing requirements of clause num shall apply to the newly exposed surfaces .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num erection of prestressed and reinforced concrete beams prestressed and reinforced concrete beams shall not be erected until the specified num day concrete compressive strength for the pier and abutment crossheads has been achieved and not before num days after casting .
beams shall not be placed until at least seven days after pedestals have been cast .
where fixed bearings are specified beams shall not be placed until at least four days after fixing the dowels .
beams shall be placed so that anchor dowels at fixed bearings are engaged in the holes provided in the sole plates of beams .
beams shall be braced to prevent overturning at all stages of construction .
should a contractor desire to place slabs using construction equipment operating from a previously placed span of slabs the written approval of the superintendent shall be obtained .
num construction of pedestals pedestals with a depth of less than num mm shall be constructed using a proprietary single component self consolidating and dual compensating plastic and hardened state nonshrink cementitious grout or a single component low shrinkage mortar specifically formulated for the construction of pedestals complying with the minimum compressive strength requirements as specified on the drawings and in this specification .
only whole bags of material shall be used .
test certificates material data sheets and health and safety data sheets shall be available for all materials .
pedestals shall be cured in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
proprietary cementitious materials which are specifically formulated and marketed as concrete repair materials shall not be used for the construction of pedestals .
three num num mm test cubes shall be taken from the first batch of material mixed then three num num mm cubes for every num kg of material used thereafter to test for compressive strength .
the cubes shall be cured for seven days under laboratorycontrolled conditions .
two num cubes shall be tested at seven days and the third cube at num days to confirm compliance with the minimum compressive strength requirements as specified on the drawings and in this specification and the material manufacturers technical data sheet .
test cubes shall be made cured and tested in accordance with as num .
the contact face of the concrete shall be flat and have a surface roughness between an amplitude of num mm to num mm with a surface presenting similar to grade numgrit sandpaper .
num protective measures for the construction of structures in marine and other saline environments further to the requirements of clause numg the following protective measures shall be implemented during the construction period to prevent the ingress of chlorides in the concrete in its early maturing and strength developing period .
a protection against ingress of chlorides i all reinforcement and embedded metallic fixtures shall be protected against chloride contamination .
ii all reinforcement shall be cleaned with water complying with the specification prior to casting the concrete to ensure that salt deposits are removed .
b curing further to the requirements of clause num the period of continuous curing for all cast inplace concrete shall be not less than num days .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num combinations of water adding techniques such as ponding or continuous sprinkling or by continuous application of mist spray retention of formwork in place and polyethylene plastic in combination with wet hessian shall be used to provide effective curing to the exposed surfaces of concrete of the various castinplace components .
curing compounds shall not be used for the construction of structures in marine and other saline environments .
c extended protection of concrete during the curing period formwork shall be kept in place for the minimum period in accordance with the requirements of clause num prior to removal .
immediately following the removal of formwork and for the remainder of the curing period polyethylene sheet in combination with wet hessian shall be used to protect the surfaces of concrete being cured against ingress of chlorides from salt water or sea spray .
d electrical continuity of the steel reinforcement steel reinforcement shall be made electrically continuous in all substructure concrete components including piles to allow for future application of a cathodic protection system if required .
e application of protective coatings the following protective coatings shall be applied in accordance with section num. i concrete surfaces extending between num m below the low water level and num m above the high water level an epoxy protective coating shall be applied to all exposed surfaces of concrete extending between num m below the low water level and num m above high water level .
the epoxy protective coating shall be grey in colour and shall be a solvent free high build epoxy system providing good chemical abrasion and corrosion resistance for horizontal and vertical surfaces of concrete or steel .
the epoxy coating shall be applied in a minimum of two coats to a dry film thickness of num microns .
the epoxy coating shall be a two pack solvent free epoxy coating with a volume solids content of num and shall exhibit the following chemical resistance characteristics to a range of aggressive chemicals including num sodium hydroxide sulphuric acid nitric acid and hydrochloric acid num num tartaric acid and acetic acid num num lactic acid num and num resistance to saturated salt saturated citric acid petrol and kerosene .
the appearance of the finished product has a high priority and the application of the coating system must ensure a uniformity of colour .
ii concrete surfaces num m above the high water level a dual protective coating system consisting of a porelining penetrant i.e .
silane solid silane or silane cream and two coats of a filmforming decorativeanticarbonation top coat shall be applied to all exposed surfaces of concrete extending from num m above the high water level including columns pier and abutment crossheads all exposed beam surfaces sides and exposed soffits of deck slabs parapet units end posts fender walls keeper walls and wingwalls in accordance with the requirements of section num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num in addition to the general requirements of clause numa and clause numci the dual protective coating system shall satisfy the following requirements num silane porelining penetrants shall consist of at least num active ingredients and shall be applied in two applications and the application rate shall be a minimum num litresmnum per application .
solid silane or silane cream porelining penetrants shall consist of at least num active ingredients and shall be applied in one thick application and the application rate shall be a minimum num litresmnum .
num the filmforming topcoat shall satisfy the requirements of clause numb for decorative anticarbonation coatings except that its dry film thickness shall be at least num micron .
f reinforcement supports and spacers notwithstanding the requirements of clause num steel reinforcement shall be supported by premium grade extruded fibre concrete supports and spacers manufactured under factory controlled conditions .
the contractor shall submit for review by the superintendent not less than num days prior to the proposed use of the steel reinforcement supports and spacers a signed statement including relevant test reports demonstrating equivalent performance of the supports and spacers to the concrete used in the works and compliance with the specification .
supports and spacers made of plastic wood metal plastic coated metal and site made concrete or factory produced non extruded fibre concrete shall not be used .
spacers shall be placed sufficiently close together to ensure that the specified cover is maintained before and during concrete placement and to prevent any potential crushing of the spacers or penetration into the formwork .
g other concrete durability enhancing measures other concrete durability enhancing measures such as controlled permeability formwork cpf stainless steel reinforcement and corrosion inhibiting admixtures cathodic prevention and glass reinforced concrete permanent formwork shall be as specified in the drawings and specification .
num protective measures for concrete structures subject to sulphate and chemical attack concrete structures subject to sulphate and chemical attack with a ph lower than num or where highly mobile ground water conditions exist or high exchangeable soil acid conditions prevail the environment shall be assessed as exposure classification u and be subject to special consideration .
as a minimum when conditions as stated in this clause prevail additional protective measures in addition to the requirements of clause numh shall include the application of suitable protective coatings in accordance with section num andor other physical protection subject to approval by the superintendent .
reinforcement supports and spacers shall be in accordance with clause numf .
num surface finish a general for any particular class of concrete surface finish the method of construction and the materials used in the concrete and formwork shall remain consistent and shall be such as to meet the requirements of this specification .
contractors should note that the standard of surface finish is dependent on the quality of formwork the compaction of the concrete and the manner in which the formwork is removed .
the higher the standard of surface finish required the greater care will be required to be given to these factors .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the use of mortar topping will not be permitted .
the following surface finishes are specified class num class num class num sandblast rope tooled and bush hammered exposed aggregate scabbled broomed offform .
except where other surface finishes are specified on the drawings surface finishes class num class num and class num shall be used as follows i substructure the back of abutments culverts and wingwalls shall have a class num surface finish .
all exposed surfaces of abutments wingwalls and piers from num mm below ground level shall have a class num surface finish except that in cellular structures the faces of wingwalls and ends of piers or walls only shall have a class num surface finish .
upper surfaces of concrete bearing pedestals shall have a class num surface finish .
ii superstructure the underside of deck between beams shall have a class num surface finish .
the faces and undersides of the beams the edges and the underside of the cantilevered deck slab shall have a class num surface finish .
the interior and exterior faces of kerbs and the upper surfaces of the kerbs shall have a class num surface finish .
for box girder bridges the inside surface of box girder webs floor and deck shall have a class num surface finish .
all external surfaces of the box girder and voided slab shall have a class num surface finish .
iii above deck surface all surfaces above the tops of kerbs shall have a class num surface finish .
end posts shall have a class num surface finish .
precast parapet units and associated castinplace concrete shall have a class num surface finish .
iv precast concrete precast crown units shall have a class num surface finish .
precast parapet units shall have a class num surface finish .
precast piles shall have a class num surface finish .
precast components other than crown units and parapet units shall have a class num surface finish .
b rejection of surfaces finishes any concrete surface that does not comply with the requirements of this specification shall be subject to the following alternatives i rejection of the concrete in which case the concrete shall be demolished and replaced ii acceptance of the defective concrete surface will be withheld subject to remedial measures being carried out .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c class num surface finish for a class num surface finish no defects which structurally affect the concrete or reduce the cover to the steel reinforcement will be permitted .
all mortar fins shall be tooled away to expose a surface of dense sound concrete .
bolts wires and other embedments shall be set back to the minimum clear cover specified and the ends filled with shrinkage compensating mortar .
concrete spacer blocks shall be manufactured with concrete of the same mixture as the parent concrete in the structure .
d class num surface finish a class num surface finish shall achieve a concrete surface of uniform colour and free from any major surface defects .
the design of the formwork shall be such as to give a deflection under the loads imposed on it of not more than num mm between studs or frame supports .
the formwork shall be constructed so as to prevent water runoff carrying stains on to previously cast concrete surfaces .
the finished concrete surface shall be protected from mortar slurry physical damage spillage and water borne staining .
steel shall be protected to prevent rust staining of the concrete surface .
no defect which structurally affects the concrete or reduces the cover to the steel reinforcement or other embedded components will be permitted .
e class num surface finish a class num surface finish shall achieve a concrete surface of uniform colour and texture and free from surface defects .
the design of the formwork shall be such as to give a deflection under the loads imposed on it of not more than the following i num mm between adjacent framing members ii num mm over the vertical face for the full depth of a panel or height of a lift whichever is the lesser iii num mm over a num m length horizontally .
f sandblast finish the following grade of sandblasting shall be applied as shown on the drawings i brush finish sandblasting shall remove the surface laitance and expose only the cement matrix .
there shall be no projection of the coarse aggregate from the concrete surface .
ii light finish sandblasting shall expose the fine aggregate with occasional exposure of coarse aggregate .
projection of the coarse aggregate shall not exceed num mm above the finished concrete surface .
iii medium finish sandblasting shall be such as to expose the coarse aggregate which shall project no more than num mm above the finished concrete surface .
iv heavy finish sandblasting shall expose the coarse aggregate so as to provide a rough and uneven finished surface .
the maximum projection of the large aggregate shall be num mm above the finished concrete surface .
g tooled and bush hammered surface finish the types of tooled andor bush hammered surface finishes are as follows i light bush hammering sufficient only to break the concrete surface to remove surface mortar without fracturing the coarse aggregate .
usually achieved by the use of a combed head roller chisel or disc bush hammer .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num ii medium bush hammering sufficient to expose the coarse aggregate pattern but without any pitting or spalling of concrete .
iii heavy jack picking a coarse texture achieved through jack picking the concrete surface .
substantial lumps of concrete are spalled from the concrete surface .
the contractor shall manufacture suitable test panels for each type of finish to be used prior to placing concrete .
h exposed aggregate finish for unformed surfaces the prepared surface shall have an exposed coarse aggregate finish free from loose aggregate and laitance .
i scabbled finish scabbling shall remove all laitance and loose or porous material without leaving excessive depressions .
exposed aggregate shall be firmly embedded in the concrete .
j broomed finish all deck and approach slab surfaces shall have a coarse broomed finish .
the direction of brooming shall be at right angles to the bridge centre line .
num repairs to formed surfaces and other defects the method of repair of minor surface imperfections including porous spots shallow honeycombing rough areas and blow holes not conforming to the class of surface finish as specified in clause num and the method of cementitious patch repair of other concrete defects shall be in accordance with section num .
epoxy materials shall not be used for the patch repair of concrete .
the exposed surface of the repaired area shall be similar in texture and colour to the surrounding concrete .
num mortars and grouts for general applications where required for general applications other than those specified elsewhere in this specification cementitious mortars and grouts shall be shrinkage compensating proprietary products with a consistency appropriate for the required use and able to be placed and compacted to achieve full encapsulation .
cementitious mortars and grouts shall have a minimum num day compressive strength of not less than num mpa .
cementitious grouts shall be as a minimum type c class dual shrinkage compensating .
only whole bags of material shall be used .
test certificates material data sheets and health and safety data sheets shall be available for all materials .
the mortar and grout applications shall be cured in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
mortars and grouts shall be sampled and tested in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
num measurement of concrete cover to reinforcement a concrete cover measurement survey of reinforced and precast concrete members shall be undertaken after construction on a representative and randomly selected number of exterior surface areas using a commercially available concrete cover meter in at least one num mnum test area for every num mnum or part thereof .
a minimum of num cover meter measurements shall be undertaken within the test area and the least distance from the reinforcement to the concrete surface recorded to the nearest millimetre .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num any concrete members which exhibit cover less than the specified minimum shall be identified as a nonconformance and the affected locations marked and mapped .
the contractor shall undertake an assessment of the low cover concrete to evaluate the influence of the low cover on the durability of the structure and submit a proposed corrective action to rectify the nonconformity for review by the superintendent .
as a minimum acceptable rectification shall include but not be limited to the application of approved protective treatments in accordance with the requirements of section num .
the cover meter shall be supported with a current calibration certificate and shall be capable of detecting the presence of reinforcement and indicating the depth from the concrete surface to the nearest point on the surface of the reinforcement with an accuracy of num mm at a depth of num mm .
num placement of fill material against concrete fill material shall not be placed against concrete within num days of casting in accordance with the requirements of clause num of section num .
proposed placement of fill material against concrete prior to num days from casting shall comply with the early application of loading requirements of clause numl or maturity testing requirements of clause numm .
num slipformed concrete barriers construction of concrete barriers by slipforming shall be subject to approval by the superintendent .
num tolerances a general the tolerances listed in tables num num num and num are the allowable deviations of the finished product from the dimensions shown on the drawings .
these tolerances will be a basis for acceptance of the work .
b soffits the soffits of arches box girders beams and deck edges shall be continuous curves or straight lines as shown on the drawings free from all visible irregularities .
c slipformed concrete kerbs and barriers cast in situ slipformed concrete kerbs and barriers and cast in situ offstructure concrete barriers shall comply with the tolerance requirements for precast concrete units as stated in table num .
in addition the vertical and horizontal alignment between adjacent segments shall not exceed num mm .
table num general tolerances item tolerance mm placing of reinforcement num placing of posttensioning sheathing num concrete cover num to num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num cast in situ concrete item tolerance mm unless shown otherwise i footings plan dimensions formed footings and pile caps num to num unformed footings when approved by the superintendent num to num thickness num mm num to num num mm num to num top of footing or pile cap reduced level num to num departure from the plan position in any direction num ii cylinders variation from the vertical num mm in num m departure from the plan position in any direction num iii variation in cross section of columns piers pier and abutment crossheads slabs walls beams and similar parts excluding deck slabs and end posts num m num to num num m num to num iv variation of cross section of end posts num to num v deck thickness of deck slabs excluding allowance for correction of camber or hog num to num deck surface reduced level num to num vi deck joints width of slot num to num vii variation from vertical or specified batter of columns piers walls handrail posts and arrises unexposed concrete num mm in num m num exposed concrete num mm in num m num viii variation from grades indicated on drawings for railings kerbs and arrises num mm in num m num ix reduced level of tops of pier and abutment crossheads and piers with pedestals num to num without pedestals num to num difference in level across width of crosshead num x bearing pedestals reduced level num to num variation from grade across the width of individual pedestals shall not exceed num in num deviation from flat surface num to num xi departure from plan position at any level columns piers walls pier and abutment crossheads beams slabs kerbs railing and other similar parts num relative displacement of adjoining components shall not exceed num xii departure from alignment rows of columns faces of piers or walls num handrails faces of hand rail posts kerbs num xiii maximum allowance for irregularities in exposed concrete surfaces sections less than num m in dimension when measured with a straightedge across the dimension of the section num sections greater than num m in dimension when measured with a straightedge across the dimension of the section except that when sections are greater than num m in dimension a num m straightedge shall be used num xiv irregularities in railings num mm in num m xv slab surface finish num mm in num m department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num pretensioned concrete item tolerance mm unless shown otherwise i cross section dimension num m num to num num m num to num out of square num m num in num or desirable num maximum num ii strand and reinforcement placing of reinforcement num placing of prestressing strand num concrete cover num to num iii squareness of ends deviation from a plane perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of a member or from the specified end plane dimension num mm num mm num mm num mm per metre num mm maximum iv length diagonal length for precast unit num overall length or length centre to centre of bearings for beams and slabs num x specified length max num centre to centre spacing of holes for transverse rods or both num v profile in a vertical plane hog the deviation in hog of any unit from the mean hog of all units shall not vary by more than num of the length of the units .
the absolute value for hog for any unit shall not be less than zero .
hog measurements shall be made at transfer of prestress .
vi profile in a horizontal plane bow the deviation of a unit from the required profile shall not exceed num of the length of the unit or a maximum of num mm .
vii twist the angular rotation of any cross section relative to an end cross section shall not exceed num in num. viii sole plates the plane of the sole plate or bearing surface shall not vary from that shown on the drawings by more than num in num in any direction .
ix deviation the distance of any point from a flat plane held against that surface .
num mm in num m department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num precast concrete units item tolerance mm i general placing of reinforcement num placing of sheathings for posttensioned segmental components num concrete cover num to num ii cross section dimension num m num to num num m num to num out of square maximum num iii squareness of ends deviation from a plane perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of a member or from the specified end plane dimension num mm num mm num mm num mm per metre num mm maximum for parapet units and new jersey barriers the deviation from a place perpendicular to the longitudinal axis shall not exceed num mm .
iv length diagonal length for precast unit num overall length or length centre to centre of bearings for beams and slabs num x specified length max num centre to centre spacing of holes for transverse rods or bolts num overall length for parapets and new jersey barriers num v profile in a vertical plane camber the deviation of a unit from the design camber after allowance has been made for the deflection due to the mass of the member shall not exceed num of the length of the unit with a maximum of num mm .
measurement of camber shall be made at the midpoint of the member which shall be supported at the bearing positions .
vi profile in a horizontal plane bow the deviation of a unit from the required profile shall not exceed num mm or num of the length of the unit whichever is the greater .
bow in precast parapet units and new jersey barriers shall not exceed num mm .
section num steel reinforcem this section crossreferences section num .
s department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num grades of steel reinforcement grades of steel reinforcement used shall comply with the following requirements .
a carbon steel reinforcing material unless otherwise shown on the drawings steel for reinforcing bars shall be grade numn complying with the requirements of asnzs num .
steel for welded steel reinforcing mesh shall be grade numl complying with the requirements of asnzs num. b stainless steel reinforcement where the use of stainless steel reinforcement is indicated on the drawings stainless steel reinforcement shall consist of ribbed deformed bars or coil deformed wire or welded mesh complying with the requirements of bs num grade num .
the chemical composition of stainless steel reinforcement shall conform to one of designations num num or num to bs en num as identified by table num bs num .
wire used to tie stainless steel shall conform to one of the designations num num or num to bs en num as identified by bs num .
num steel reinforcement supply the contractor shall be responsible for the preparation of the steel reinforcement schedule for all steel reinforcement required for the contract .
the contractor shall make appropriate allowances when preparing the steel reinforcement schedule to achieve the specified tolerances on member dimensions concrete cover and location of steel reinforcement and any posttensioning sheathing or other fitments taking into account the practical variations in the tolerances noted and other margins normally applied by steel reinforcement suppliers .
steel reinforcement shall be supplied cut to length bent to shape free from loose millscale free from loose or thick rust or any other surface contamination that adversely affects the steel and its intended use .
all operations to process and fabricate steel reinforcement such as cutting bending shaping placing joining and similar tasks shall be in accordance with as num part num .
steel reinforcement shall not be coated unless specified in which case the nature and type of the coating to be used and the conditions of application shall be separately specified .
when carbon steel reinforcement is specified on the drawings to be hot dip galvanised the hotdip galvanising shall be in accordance with as num .
use of epoxy coated steel reinforcement shall not be permitted .
stainless steel reinforcement shall be supplied handled and stored separately from other steels .
tools used for cutting bending and transport of stainless steel reinforcement shall not have been used for other materials .
num certification and testing a third party certification manufacturers and suppliers of steel reinforcement materials must be in possession of a current certificate of approval issued by the australian certification authority for reinforcing steel acrs .
evidence of compliance with this clause shall be submitted to the superintendent within num days of award of the contract .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b no third party certification hp approval shall be obtained in writing from the superintendent for the use of steel reinforcing materials that are not covered by the longterm quality level of asnzs num at least num days prior to the intended first date of use of such steel .
steel reinforcing materials that are not covered by the longterm quality level of asnzs num shall not be ordered or placed in the works without approval .
the contractor shall nominate the members in which the reinforcing steel is to be used and the country and mill of origin and the specification to which the steel is produced and clearly demonstrate how it is equivalent to that specified by asnzs num .
where use of steel reinforcement is not covered by the longterm quality level of asnzs num testing shall be carried out in accordance with clause bnum of asnzs num including the frequency of sampling and testing and to the appropriate australian standard as listed in asnzs num .
where the certification of the steel is incomplete the contractor shall arrange for testing to be carried out as required in clause numc to demonstrate compliance of the material at the rate of one test per num lineal metres of material .
c testing all testing shall be carried out by officers experienced in the test methods described in the contract in a laboratory accredited by the national association of testing authorities nata for those test methods .
all test reports shall be endorsed in accordance with the nata terms of accreditation for that laboratory for chemical composition and physical properties and welding procedure qualification if required .
for imported steel all tests shall be carried out in a laboratory accredited by and with endorsement of the relevant national accreditation authority which has mutual recognition arrangements with nata .
num bending bending or rebending of steel reinforcement shall be done in accordance with the requirements of as num part num and be read in conjunction with vicroads bridge technical note btnnum .
bars shall not be bent or straightened in a manner that will cause damage to the bars .
bars with kinks or bends not shown on the drawings or in the steel reinforcement schedule shall not be used .
heating of grade numn bars to a maximum of numc is permitted under controlled workshop conditions subject to methods in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the bars shall be heated uniformly through their crosssection and beyond the portion to be bent in each direction for a distance at least equal to the bar diameter .
the internal bend diameter of any hotbent bar shall meet the requirements of as num part num .
heated bars shall not be cooled by quenching .
if during heating the temperature of the bar exceeds numc the design yield strength of the steel after bending shall be taken as num mpa .
onsite heating of steel reinforcement will not be permitted .
hot bending of stainless steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with methods recommended by the manufacturer .
tools used for bending stainless steel reinforcement shall not have been used for fabricating other materials .
pins used for bending stainless steel shall be made from stainless steel .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num rebending on site rebending of steel reinforcement shall be by approved means .
steel reinforcement that has been bent and subsequently straightened shall not be bent again within num bar diameters of the previous bend .
minimum internal diameter of rebend bars shall be in accordance with as num part num .
hp rebending of steel reinforcement shall not commence until the procedure has been reviewed and approved by the superintendent and shall be witnessed by the superintendents representative .
num identification steel reinforcement and welded steel reinforcing mesh shall be bundled and tagged with a label identifying the bar reference number .
num handling storage and surface condition steel reinforcement that has been damaged in any way shall not be incorporated into or used in the works .
steel reinforcement shall be stored in conditions that minimise or prevent the formation of surface rust .
steel reinforcement shall be kept free from rust oil grease tar paint mud or any other deleterious substance which may reduce bond between the steel reinforcement and concrete .
thin powdery rust and tightly adhering rust are not considered detrimental and need not be removed .
mill scale which flakes off when the steel reinforcement is struck by a hammer or which can be readily dislodged by hand wire brushing shall be removed .
steel reinforcement that has surface pitted by corrosion where the loss of crosssection is greater than the tolerance on mass per metre of bar num shall not be used in the works .
stainless steel reinforcement shall be supplied handled and stored separately from other steels .
stainless steel reinforcement shall be stored so that it is not contaminated by debris from processing operations grease oil iron or other steels .
num placing all steel reinforcement shall be securely held during placing and compacting of the concrete .
steel reinforcement supports shall be made of durable materials strong enough to withstand the imposed loads without movement of the steel reinforcement shall be positively attached to the steel reinforcement and of such size as to maintain the specified cover .
wooden supports metal supports and plastic coated metal supports which extend to the surface of the concrete shall not be used .
placing bars on layers of fresh concrete as the work progresses and adjusting bars during the placing of concrete will not be permitted .
the specified minimum concrete cover shall be maintained at tie wire positions .
the contractor shall ensure that the method of placement of stainless steel reinforcement does not allow it to become contaminated by contact with other steel .
in particular welding or cutting of black steel bars or any other structural steel shall not occur after any stainless steel has been placed .
stainless steel embedment items shall be fixed in place by tying with stainless steel wire of the same grade or by anchoring to the forms using stainless steel fixings of the same grade .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num splicing steel reinforcement shall be supplied in the full lengths shown on the drawings .
alternatively and where directed by the superintendent the contractor shall splice the bars by lapping .
in lapped splices the bars shall be placed in contact and the specified cover shall be maintained .
the lap shall be long enough to develop the full strength of the bar and unless shown on the drawings shall be not less than the tensile or compressive development length determined in accordance with as num part num .
splicing of steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with as num part num .
num projecting steel reinforcement where shown on the drawings projecting steel reinforcement shall be provided for the purpose of splicing to the adjacent sections of reinforced concrete .
care shall be taken to avoid damage to the projecting bars after they have been set and any damage to the bars or their setting shall be repaired by the contractor .
projecting steel reinforcement in newly poured concrete shall remain undisturbed for a minimum period of num hours following the completion of placing concrete in order to avoid damage to the concrete surrounding the bars .
num tack welding a carbon steel reinforcement tack welding of steel reinforcement will be permitted for grade numn and grade numn carbon steel reinforcement bars provided welding is not within num mm of the tangent point of a bend in the steel .
all tack welding shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num part num .
in cases where the application of asnzs num part num indicates that welding procedure testing is required for tack welding the tack welding procedure shall be qualified in accordance with appendix c of asnzs num part num. b stainless steel reinforcement tack welding of stainless steel reinforcement is not permitted .
num welded splices in carbon steel reinforcement a general welding of carbon steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with asnzs num part num .
steel reinforcement shall be spliced by welding only at the locations shown on the drawings .
the steel reinforcement projecting from the ends of beams shall be spliced as shown on the drawings .
pairs of bars with misalignments less than num mm may be realigned prior to welding .
splices for pairs of bars with misalignments greater than num mm shall be packed prior to welding .
care shall be taken during welding to avoid excessive heating of the reinforcing bar .
the earth lead shall be attached to the steelwork being welded at all times to prevent leakage of currents .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b welding procedure qualification hp welding of splices in steel reinforcement including to other steelwork and to continuity bar reinforcement shall not commence until the welding procedure has been qualified and reviewed by the superintendent .
the qualification process shall be in accordance with asnzs num part num and with the following additional requirements i production of a weld test plate witnessed by either a structural steelwork surveillance officer accredited to vicroads technical bulletin tbnum guide to surveillance of structural steelwork or the contractors welding supervisor ii submission to the superintendent of test certificates demonstrating compliance of the procedure with asnzs num part num including a photograph of the weld section prepared and etched to as num .
the welding procedure shall provide a weld with the specified throat thickness free from inclusions and imperfections and with satisfactory fusion and surface appearance .
c inspection and quality of welds inspection of the welding of steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with asnzs num part num .
the quality of welds shall conform to asnzs num part num and any imperfections shall be assessed in accordance with asnzs num part num sections num and num .
num welding stainless steel reinforcement a general welding of stainless steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with asnzs num part num and part num .
stainless steel reinforcement shall be welded only in a welding workshop specifically set up for the purpose .
such facility shall maintain conditions preventing any contamination of the stainless steel and consumables used in the proper performance of the welding for the full duration of the contract .
all consumables shall be stored conditioned and handled in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
hp prior to the commencement of works the contractor shall submit to the superintendent the results of an independent assessment that the purpose specific welding shop has been established .
reports of reassessment shall be submitted to the superintendent at num month intervals until welding and fabrication works are completed .
welding procedures and consumables shall comply with the bar manufacturers recommendations .
weld preparations shall be clean and free of any contamination prior to welding .
b welding procedure qualification hp welding of splices in stainless steel reinforcement including to other steelwork and to continuity bar reinforcement shall not commence until the welding procedure has been qualified and reviewed by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the qualification process shall be in accordance with asnzs num part num and part num and with the following additional requirements i production of a weld test plate witnessed either a structural steelwork surveillance officer accredited to vicroads technical bulletin tbnum or the contractors welding supervisor and ii submission to the superintendent of test certificates demonstrating compliance of the procedure with asnzs num part num and part num including a photograph of the weld section prepared and etched to as num and test certificates demonstrating that the weld procedure does not result in the loss of ductility and corrosion resistance as specified in subparagraph e below .
c inspection and quality of welds welds shall be examined by liquid penetrant methods to as num at a frequency of num of the welds manufactured .
inspection of the welding of stainless steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with asnzs num part num .
the quality of welds shall conform to category numb to asnzs num part num table num and any imperfections shall be assessed in accordance with as num part num sections num and num .
all arc strikes shall be treated as welds and inspected num by liquid penetrant methods to as num and shall be assessed in accordance with as num part num sections num and num. d cleaning of welds when specified completed welds shall be cleaned and passivated by wire brushing and pickling to finish category ii to asnzs num part num table num .
pickling compounds shall be chloride free .
e ductility and corrosion resistance of welds welds on stainless steel reinforcement shall be tested for corrosion resistance against pitting and intergranular corrosion in accordance with asnzs num part num appendix e. corrosion resistance testing shall be carried out on test specimens sampled from the weld procedure qualification tests and on three product samples each prepared and tested at equally spaced quantity intervals during the works .
num mechanical splices mechanical splices shall not be permitted at critically loaded sections of the structure .
preference shall be given to lapped or welded splices .
however a mechanical splice may be permitted where the designer considers on the basis of engineering considerations that a lapped or welded splice is unsuitable .
in this case the mechanical splice shall be designed in accordance with vicroads bridge technical note btnnum .
the contractor shall submit full details of tests that demonstrate compliance of the proposed mechanical splice with the requirements of vicroads bridge technical note btnnum to the superintendent .
the tests shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate australian standard in a nata accredited laboratory .
when tested in accordance with as num mechanical bar splices shall develop at least the nominal ultimate tensile or compressive strength of the smaller of the bars being tested .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num details of the type and location of mechanical splices together with the supporting test data shall be submitted to the superintendent not less than num days before their proposed use in the works .
mechanical splices shall not be incorporated in the works until the superintendent has accepted their proposed use .
mechanical splices for stainless steel reinforcement shall be manufactured from stainless steel that conforms to one of the designations num num or num to bs en num as identified by table num bsnum .
the strength of the mechanical splice shall not be less than the strength of the smaller bar to be joined by the splice .
num contact between dissimilar metals embedded in concrete contact between carbon steel and galvanised steel reinforcement or carbon steel and stainless steel reinforcement or other similar metal embedments shall not be allowed .
where contact between such dissimilar metals embedded in concrete is unavoidable the two different metals shall be electrically isolated to prevent galvanic or bimetallic corrosion .
electrical isolation may be effected by utilising pvc conduit sleeves suitable soft plastic wrapping or tapes or by other approved means .
steel reinforcement and other metal embedment items shall only be fixed in place with tie wire made of the same metal and same grade .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num posttensioning of concrete units this section crossreferences sections num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for supply placing stressing and grouting of posttensioning systems .
castinplace concrete for posttensioned construction shall comply with the requirements of section num structural concrete .
precast concrete units for posttensioned construction shall comply with the requirements of section num precast concrete units .
num posttensioning system at least num days prior to the commencement of manufacture of precast concrete units or placing formwork for in situ elements for posttensioning the contractor shall submit full details of the proposed prestressing system to the superintendent for review .
these details shall include a drawings and calculations that demonstrate the suitability of the proposed prestressing system for the structure .
where appropriate values shall be substantiated by test results b source of the tendon c minimum breaking load of the tendon d maximum permitted relaxation of the tendon e modulus of elasticity of the proposed tendon material f maximum values of the friction curvature and wobble coefficients as defined in as num g predicted extension for each tendon h predicted drawin at anchorages i anchorage details including any additional reinforcement at the anchorage zone j type of duct and duct material k internal and external diameter of duct plus the type of coating l methods of restraining and joining the duct m proposed tensioning system .
num supply of tendons a materials strand shall be obtained from an australian certification authority for reinforcing steel acrs accredited supplier .
hightensile steel wires strands or bar tendons for use in posttensioning and the testing of these materials shall comply with asnzs num steel prestressing materials .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the contractor shall submit the following for the material in each coil of wire or strand or lot of bars test certificates for tensile testing loadextension graphs together with the manufacturers certificate of compliance with the australian standard a relaxation test certificate for material taken from the same production facility and of the same type of material as that to be used in the works .
relaxationtest certificates for similar tendon material produced within the past year will be accepted to the superintendent at least seven days prior to the delivery of the coil or lot .
tests shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate australian standard in a laboratory accredited by the national association of testing authorities nata or approved equivalent for those test methods by personnel experienced in the test methods described in the contract .
at the discretion of the superintendent additional relaxation testing of samples by the university of melbourne acrs laboratory may be required .
all tests shall be endorsed in accordance with the nata registration for that laboratory .
hightensile steel wires or strands shall be supplied in coils of sufficiently large diameter to ensure that the wires or strands are straight when unwound from the coil .
b sampling where required under clause num the contractor shall arrange for the tendon material to be tested .
samples of wire strand or bar shall be taken by the contractor at the site of the works or at the suppliers fabrication shop provided that all tendons fabricated from one coil or lot are bundled together and clearly identified with the coil or lot number .
the contractor shall arrange testing of samples representative of each coil or lot .
these samples shall be taken not less than num metres from the end of any coil or bar .
for split coils comprising two or more production runs of strand each production run of strand shall be sampled and tested separately .
c testing samples shall be tested in a nata accredited laboratory for compliance with asnzs num .
all test reports shall be endorsed in accordance with the nata terms of accreditation for the laboratory .
d assembly of tendons splicing of strands wires or bars forming a tendon is not permitted .
tendon couplings shall only be used where shown on the drawings .
welding is not permitted on or near tendons nor shall any heat be applied to tendons .
tendons which have been affected by welding weld splatter andor heat will be rejected and must be replaced by the contractor .
flame cutting of wire strand or bars within num mm of an anchorage or jacking position is not permitted .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num a durable label shall be tied to each tendon .
the label shall be stamped with the length of the tendon and the coil number of the wire or strand from which the tendon was cut .
e storage coils of wire and strand and bars shall be stored above ground level and shall protected from mechanical damage or contamination with deleterious substances until their incorporation into the structure .
wire strand or bars that show any evidence of damage kinks or bends shall not be used .
wire strand or bars which is heavily corroded or pitted will be rejected .
wire strand or bars with light surface rusting is acceptable .
wire strand or bars shall be kept free from loose rust oil grease tar paint mud or any other deleterious substances .
material for tendons and assembled tendons shall be protected from contamination mechanical damage and deterioration from exposure to harmful substances and conditions .
num supply of anchorages anchorages shall be tested by a nata accredited laboratory for compliance with the requirements of as num prestressing anchorages .
the contractor shall supply the test certificates to the superintendent on delivery of the anchorages .
spiral or other reinforcement specified by the manufacturer for use in conjunction with anchorage devices shall be of the size and dimensions recommended by the manufacturer for the posttensioning system .
anchorages shall be kept free from dirt mortar loose rust tar paint oil or any other harmful substances .
all steel components including threads shall be protected from corrosion by greased wrappings or plugs until required for use .
damaged anchorage components shall not be used .
num mm minimum diameter grout holes shall be provided at both anchorages and shall be placed at the highest point of the anchorage .
each of the grouting holes shall be equipped with a plug valve or similar device capable of withstanding a pressure of num mpa without loss of water air or grout .
num supply of ducts ducts shall be of a type suitable for the nominated posttensioning system and shall be strong enough to withstand the placing and compaction of the concrete without suffering damage or deformation .
the duct and any splices shall be sealed to resist the entry of grout .
steel duct shall have a corrugated profile and shall be galvanized .
plastic duct shall be corrugated and shall have sufficient thickness to resist abrasion during installing and stressing of the tendon .
enlarged portions of the duct at couplings or anchorages shall be of sufficient length to provide for the extension of the tendons .
vents with plug valves shall be provided at intervals not greater than num metres along the duct .
additional vents with plug valves shall be provided at high and low points in the duct .
ducts shall be stored off the ground in dry clean conditions to prevent contamination .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num external and internal duct surfaces shall be kept free from loose rust oil grease tar paint mud or any other harmful substances that might impair the bond between the duct and the concrete or grout contaminate the tendons or alter the coefficient of friction of the duct .
care shall be taken to ensure that the duct is not damaged or kinked .
duct that is damaged shall be discarded .
num traceability of materials wire strand bars and anchorages shall be labelled in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num or as num .
individual lengths of wire strand or bar shall be traceable from the point of manufacture of coils or lots to their final location by a unique identification number .
anchorages shall be traceable from the place of manufacture to their final location by a unique identification number .
num placing of ducts ducts shall be placed in the positions shown on the drawings to the tolerances stated in section num .
duct shall be securely fixed at intervals not exceeding num mm in flanges and num mm in webs in order to maintain a smooth duct profile within the specified tolerance throughout the length of the tendon during concreting operations .
duct shall be fixed by methods which will not damage or deform it .
any temporary openings in the duct shall be plugged and all joints between the duct and any other part of the prestressing system shall be effectively sealed to prevent the entry of grout dust water or other harmful substances .
the contractor shall supply any additional reinforcement that is required to securely fix and support the duct and restrain the duct against flotation .
the minimum straight length of duct at anchorages and at coupling points required by some posttensioning systems shall conform to the manufacturers recommendations .
welding shall not be done near ducts .
ducts shall be free from internal projections or reductions in diameter at joints .
temporary tendons mandrels inflated tubes or other methods shall be used to stiffen the duct during placing and compaction of concrete .
num placing of anchorages in order to prevent movement during placing and compaction of concrete anchorage devices shall be fixed securely in position .
care shall be taken during concreting to prevent displacement or damage to ducts .
anchorage devices shall be set square to the line of action of the tendon and to the profile and tolerances shown on the drawings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num recesses shall be designed in accordance with the posttensioning system manufacturers recommendations including the cover requirements to the ends of anchored tendons the minimum recess dimensions including the clearance between the edge of the anchor plate and the recess wall or the edge of the concrete the required side slopes of the recess and the requirement for access behind the anchorage to allow for the assembly installation and operation of the jack .
details of the proposed anchorage recesses shall be submitted to the superintendent with the formwork design .
the anchorage devices shall be cleaned prior to and immediately after the placing of concrete .
any mortar or concrete which adheres to bearing or wedging surfaces shall be removed .
where tendons were inserted prior to concreting the tendon shall be pulled back and forth about num m several times immediately after concreting in order to ensure that the tendon has not been lockedin by a groutleakage and is free to move .
num cleaning of ducts after concreting immediately after concreting ducts shall be checked for obstructions denting by concrete vibrators and deformation .
ducts shall then be flushed with water and a steel dolly drawn through .
prior to installation of tendons a steel dolly shall be drawn through the ducts and any obstruction which might impede the passage or movement of the tendons in the ducts shall be removed .
num placing of tendons except where deadend anchorages are cast in concrete tendons shall not be installed until immediately prior to stressing .
tendons shall be pulled or pushed through the ducts in a manner that avoids damage or contamination to either the tendon or the ducts .
damaged tendons shall be replaced .
damaged ducts shall be repaired .
contaminated ducts shall be cleaned by methods that do not affect the bond of the duct with the tendon .
num required strength and age of concrete for stressing a strength and age the posttensioning force shall not be applied to a member until it has attained the compressive strength stated herein or on the drawings nor shall it be applied at an earlier age than seven days after casting when moist curing methods are used or two days after casting when steam cured provided that in the latter case the temperature of the member has returned to normal .
consideration will be given to the application of stage stressing at an earlier date to overcome handling or shrinkage problems or to permit early removal of temporary supports falsework .
details of proposals shall be submitted to the superintendent for review .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b posttensioning before num days the frequency and acceptance of sampling and testing of standard test cylinders shall be as specified in section num .
two cylinders from each sample shall be tested prior to application of prestress .
the specification will be satisfied if the average cylinder strength is not less than the specified strength and the lower cylinder strength is not less than num of the specified strength .
a third cylinder will be reserved for the purpose of determining concrete strength at the proposed time of posttensioning .
num safety precautions the contractor shall identify and manage the hazards to site personnel other persons who might be affected by the stressing operation and nearby property and shall take the highest standard of care to ensure the safety of all affected persons and property in accordance with the provisions of the work health and safety act num and all applicable regulations made and codes of conduct approved under that act .
the contractor shall establish nogo zones with warning signs and substantial barricades in order to provide a protective barrier for site personnel other persons and property and to prevent the entry of unauthorised persons into the hazard zone around and behind the jacking equipment .
jacking and other site personnel shall not be permitted to stand behind the jack or close to the line of the tendons while stressing is in progress .
during stressing operations warning signs that conform to as num shall be displayed at both ends of the member being tensioned .
the stressing jack shall be adequately supported and restrained in order to ensure that it can not cause injury to personnel operating the jacking equipment should the jack lose its grip on the tendons or should the tendon fail .
num posttensioning equipment one week prior to stressing the contractor shall submit to the superintendent calibration certificates conforming to the requirements of as num grade b for the jack and pressure gauges or other force measuring devices to be used .
hydraulic pumps shall be power driven .
the power unit shall be adjusted to ensure that the rate of extension of the tendon is within the limits specified .
the measuring equipment used shall allow the jacking force to be determined to within the accuracy required by as num for a class b machine or system .
the measuring equipment shall allow elongation to be determined with an accuracy of num .
where pressure gauges are used a suitable device shall be fitted to protect the gauge against sudden release of pressure .
a tee connection shall be provided to allow attachment of a second gauge to enable checking of the primary gauge if requested by the superintendent .
num basis of measurement of tensioning forces at least one week prior to the start of posttensioning the contractor shall provide to the superintendent calculations for extensions corresponding to the upper and lower limits of the tendon force diagram shown on the drawings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the calculations shall take into account the following the measured length of the tendon between the faces of anchorage plates drawin at the anchorage devices on release of the jacks an allowance for extensions between the anchorage plate and the point at which extensions will be measured on the jack elastic shortening of the member losses due to stressing of subsequent tendons the modulus of elasticity determined from the test samples .
where tendons are to be jacked initially from one end only the calculations shall provide details of the predicted extensions at both ends of the member .
the applied tensioning force shall be determined by direct measurement of the jacking force at the gauge and shall be checked by measurement of the elongation of the tendon .
the actual elongations of the tendon shall lie between the calculated elongations corresponding to the upper and lower limit of the tendon force diagram .
num tensioning forces required the required tensioning force and corresponding friction and wobble coefficients shall be as shown on the drawings in the form of a tendon force diagram .
where the coefficients for the adopted prestressing system vary from the values shown on the drawings the specified tensioning forces shall be revised by the contractor and submitted to the superintendent for approval .
the final force in a tendon shall be within num of the value shown in the drawings .
the final force in a member shall be within num of the value shown on the drawings .
should the modulus of elasticity of tendons differ by more than num the required elongation shall be adjusted accordingly .
if on completion of tensioning each tendon to the required force the check measurement of elongation differs from the predicted value by more than num the contractor shall nominate some or all of the following remedial steps subject to review by the superintendent .
the contractor shall suspend stressing until the completion of the superintendents review recalibration of equipment testing of tendon material to check the modulus of elasticity that tendons be released and restressed with the adoption of a modulus of elasticity applicable to the second stressing lubrication of tendons to reduce friction losses .
only watersoluble oils shall be used in ducted systems and these shall be washed out before grouting where one jack was used previously to tension the tendon from one end the tendon may be tensioned from both ends using two jacks other methods as agreed .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num tensioning procedure a general the contractor shall give the superintendent a minimum of seven days notice of each stressing operation .
hp all stressing operations shall take place in the presence of the superintendent .
tendon ducts and anchorages shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to commencement of tensioning .
the protruding ends of tendons shall be cleaned in order to remove deposits of oil rust mortar or soil which would lessen the grip of wedges or of anchorage devices .
tendons shall be checked before tensioning to ensure that they are free to move inside the duct .
the jacks shall be set accurately in the line of the tendons .
the stressing operation shall be performed by suitably trained and experienced personnel who are familiar with the approved system using the best available practices in accordance with the manufacturers advice .
the stressing force shall be applied smoothly and evenly .
the sequence of stressing shall be as shown on the drawings .
no member shall be left partly stressed unless the drawings require the member to be stressed in stages .
the force which is applied initially to take up the slack of the tendon shall be sufficient to seat the jack firmly but shall not exceed the amount normally associated with the particular method of prestressing .
after taking up the slack the tendon shall be accurately marked at both ends and the elongation or drawin shall be measured in relation to these marks .
readings of force and elongation shall be taken at regular intervals during the tensioning of a tendon .
the elongation readings shall be plotted in order to determine the zero error and a correction for the zero error shall then be made to the final elongation .
where tendons consist of a number of individual components each component shall be marked so that any slip may be observed .
where one or more components or tendons of a group stressed together slips during stressing operations the superintendent may permit a compensating increase in the elongation of the remaining tendons of the group provided that the jacking force does not exceed num of the minimum ultimate tensile strength of the remaining tendons .
in the case of a tendon breaking or slipping after tensioning so that the allowable tolerances above are exceeded the tendon shall be released replaced if necessary and restressed .
under no circumstances shall the maximum jacking force exceed the rated capacity of the jacking equipment or num of the specified minimum ultimate strength of the tendon whichever is the lesser .
allowance shall be made for drawin of the tendon at the anchored end and where tendons are coupled allowance shall be made for drawin or movement at the coupling .
tendons shall be marked to allow measurement of elongation at both the jacking end and where possible at the anchored end .
friction losses shall be measured .
on completion of stressing wedges shall be seated and the stressing force shall be released gradually .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num subject to the above tendons may be tensioned by one of the following methods .
b tensioning with one jack short tendons with low friction losses may be tensioned with a single jack .
c tensioning with two jacks longer tendons in which friction losses are significant may be tensioned from both ends of the tendon either simultaneously or sequentially .
i tensioning simultaneously from both ends tensioning shall continue until the required force in the tendon is reached .
the extensions at the two jacks need not be the same but the sum of the elongations should equal the predicted total elongation subject to the provisions of clause num. ii tensioning initially from one end sequentially jacks shall be positioned at both ends of the tendon .
the trailing jack shall be set so that the force transmitted to it can be recorded .
stressing shall commence at the leading jack and shall continue until the force at this end is approximately num of the required tendon force .
the force at the trailing jack shall then be increased until the force in the leading jack is reached .
stressing shall then continue simultaneously at both jacks until the required force in the tendon is reached .
the extensions at the two jacks need not be the same but the sum of the elongations should equal the predicted total elongation subject to the provisions of clause num .
the designer may in consultation with the contractor and the supplier of the pre stressing system vary the level of the initial jacking force at the leading end provided that the required final jacking force is achieved .
d data to be recorded the following data shall be recorded where applicable identification number of each dynamometergauge pump and jack identification particulars of tendons initial forces or pressures when tendons are marked for measurement of elongation forces or pressures together with corresponding elongations obtained at num num num num and num of the required force final forces or pressures and elongations obtained on completion of tensioning residual elongations after release of jacks measurement of hog at completion of stressing operation the nature of any unexpected occurrences and the corrective measures taken .
completed records shall be submitted to the superintendent on completion of stressing .
num grouting tendons shall be grouted as soon as practicable but not more than two weeks after their installation .
if tendons can not be grouted within this period of time the duct shall be sealed to protect the tendons from corrosion .
prestressing anchorages shall be sealed before grouting to prevent loss of grout .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num grout a materials grout for filling prestressing duct shall comprise cement water and an admixture to reduce shrinkage and bleeding .
cement shall conform to the requirements of as num for general purpose cement and shall not contain calcium chloride .
permitted admixtures shall not contain chlorides nitrates metals or similar electrolytic conducting materials and shall only be used where they will increase workability or reduce shrinkage and bleeding .
the water cement ratio shall be as low as possible consistent with adequate workability and shall be not less than num or more than num by mass .
all batching shall be by mass with an approved measuring device and to an accuracy of num .
the maximum proportion of chlorine shall not exceed num with not more than num in the cement and not more than num in the water .
the maximum proportion of sulphur in the form of sulphites and sulphides shall not exceed num .
details of the materials and the proportions of the grout mixture shall be submitted to the superintendent for review .
the contractor shall give the superintendent not less than seven days notice of any grouting operation .
hp all grouting operations shall take place in the presence of the superintendent .
b properties the minimum compressive strength of test cubes made cured and tested in accordance with as num shall be num mpa at num days .
at least one pair of cubes shall be taken from each num cubic metres or part thereof of grout .
bleeding of the grout shall not exceed num of the volume three hours after mixing and shall not exceed num of the volume at any time .
all separated water shall be absorbed within num hours .
bleeding shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of as num .
num grout mixing and pumping equipment proposal for mixing and pumping equipment shall be submitted to the superintendent for review .
grout shall be mixed in a high speed mechanical mixer for at least two minutes until a uniform colloidal consistency is achieved .
mixing by hand or by tumbling action is not accepted .
water shall be added to the mixer before any other mix ingredients .
cement shall then be added gradually and the grout shall be stirred continuously for a minimum period of two minutes prior to the commencement of grouting .
admixtures shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
grout may be used for a period of num hours following addition of cement to the mix .
on the expiry of num hours following the introduction of cement to the mix unused grout shall be discarded and a fresh mix shall be prepared .
pumps shall be capable of continuous operation with minimal pressure variation and shall have a system for recirculating the grout when grouting is not in progress .
pumps shall be fitted with a pressure gauge and shall be capable of delivery at pressures up to num mpa .
the use of compressed air will not be permitted .
the hoppers to the pumps shall be fitted with num mm sieve strainers .
piping to the grout pump shall have a minimum internal diameter of num mm and a minimum of bends valves and changes in diameter .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num grouting equipment especially piping shall be thoroughly washed with clean water after each grouting operation .
num grouting operations grouting shall not commence when the temperature is below numc or when the temperature exceeds numc .
immediately prior to grouting the duct shall be flushed with clean water until all loose particles are removed and clean water is discharged .
the duct shall then be waterpressure tested and shall be capable of sustaining a pressure of at least num mpa .
all vent and drain hole leaks shall be plugged and surplus water shall be removed by airflush using oilfree compressed air .
grout shall then be injected into the duct with sufficient volume to achieve a speed of between num m and num m per second .
a continuous steady flow of grout shall be maintained until all entrapped air and water has been expelled and the duct is completely filled and pure grout issues from all vents and from the remote end of the duct .
in order to ensure complete filling of the duct the vents shall be closed progressively commencing at the inlet end as soon as a steady flow of grout free of bleedwater and airbubbles is achieved at the vent .
a grout pressure of num mpa shall then be maintained at the inlet for ten minutes .
during this period the crest vents shall be opened after five minutes to allow removal of bleed water or air that may have accumulated in the vent .
this process shall be repeated after ten minutes after which the inlet shall be closed to maintain the pressure in the duct .
all vents and the ends of the duct shall remain closed until the grout has set .
if the pressure in the duct can not be maintained at num mpa grouting shall be suspended the duct flushed clean with water and the leakage sealed before grouting is resumed .
if a blockage occurs pumping may be transferred to the far end of the duct provided that thus is done in sufficient time for the grout to remain workable and there are enough vents to ensure that the duct will be filled with grout .
alternatively duct may be flushed with clean water to clear the blockage and the grouting repeated .
if a second blockage occurs the grout mix will be rejected and the contractor will be required to revise the grout mix design .
all duct openings shall be inspected at between two and three days after grouting and topped up if required .
on completion of grouting and after the grout has hardened sufficiently vents or grouting tubes that extend to the surface of the concrete shall be cut off num mm below the concrete surface and the recess filled with a proprietary concrete repair mortar .
an alternative method for grouting of tendon ducts in precast posttensioned beams to ensure that the tendon duct is completely filled with grout and that there are no voids containing air or bleedwater in the grout the above procedure may not be sufficient .
although this method is of greatest benefit for beams with tendons having a curving profile it may also offer significant benefits for beams with straight tendons .
the beam shall be raised at one end to a point where the gradient of the curving duct is always positive .
the end of the beam shall be lifted by the embedded lifting attachments with the use of a crane .
the beam shall be lifted and supported in such a way that no damage occurs to the concrete and that none of its components are overstressed .
after lifting the beam it shall be supported on a rigid and stable support designed to prevent collapse or toppling .
department of state growth vicroads august num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num grouting of the duct shall then be conducted as described above working from the low end of the beam .
when the grout has achieved sufficient strength the beam shall be returned to its normal storage position taking the same precautions as described for lifting and with the same equipment .
nondestructive testing shall be used to prove the absence of voids at the request of the superintendent .
num concreting of anchorage recesses filling of recesses at anchorages shall be as shown on the drawings .
when the grouting has been completed and the grout has set the protruding ends of tendons shall be cut back sufficiently to ensure a minimum of num mm cover to the ends of the tendons when concreting of the recesses has been completed .
flame cutting of the protruding ends of strands or tendons is not permitted .
the interior surfaces of anchorage recesses shall be scabbled .
steel reinforcement shall be placed in the recesses as shown on the drawings .
the surface of the recess shall be coated with a bonding agent after which concrete conforming to the requirements of section num shall be cast in the recesses to the shape required by the drawings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num falsework this section crossreferences sections num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for the design and erection of falsework required to facilitate construction of the permanent works and the subsequent dismantling and removal of falsework .
num standards a australian standards australian standards are referenced in an abbreviated form e.g .
as num .
as num parts num and num loading code as num scaffolding as num timber structures as num formwork for concrete as num steel structures as num bridge design set .
b additional documents work health and safety act num work health and safety regulations num .
num definitions falsework the temporary structural system required to support the formwork the permanent structural components material plant equipment and personnel required in the construction of the works .
the temporary structural system comprises foundations and all structural members supporting the formwork or supporting permanent structural components .
num falsework design falsework shall conform to the requirements of as num and this specification .
hp the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for review detailed drawings and specifications of the proposed falsework design and foundations not less than num weeks prior to the commencement of erection of falsework .
the falsework design shall be certified by a design engineer who is a member of engineers australia and with a minimum of num years experience in the design and construction of falsework of similar complexity .
the falsework design shall be verified in accordance with the contract to confirm that the design satisfies the assumptions and the performance requirements of the falsework .
the design engineer shall provide a statement that its obligations under section num of the work health and safety act num have been satisfied .
the falsework design shall also be proof engineered by a proof engineer who is independent of the design consultants firm and is prequalified at level pe under the vicroads prequalification scheme or approved by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num proof engineering shall be based on the construction drawings and specification and without reference to the design engineers computations .
hp the proof engineering certificate of compliance shall be forwarded to the superintendent not less than five working days prior to the commencement of fabrication of the falsework and at least two days prior to the construction of any falsework foundations .
the proof engineering certificate of compliance shall be in accordance with the form included as attachment a to this section .
evidence of the proof engineers detailed check and acceptance shall be indicated on every drawing and the specification issued for construction .
the design certification by the proof engineer shall state that the design of falsework and all falsework documentation conforms to the performance requirements of the contract and this section including the australian standards and additional documents listed in clause num .
any amendment to the design after the issue of the proof engineering certificate of compliance shall be referred to the proof engineer for review and written confirmation that the certificate of compliance remains valid .
falsework shall be erected and dismantled in strict conformance with the design drawings specification erection and dismantling procedures and instructions .
a copy of all drawings specification procedures and instructions duly certified by the design engineer shall be kept on site .
erection and dismantling of falsework shall be performed by personnel experienced in the erection and dismantling of falsework to ensure that it is performed in a safe manner and without risk to personnel and property .
all proprietary falsework shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and shall comply with the requirements of the work health and safety act num .
all falsework shall comply with the requirements of all relevant codes of practice approved under the work health and safety act num .
num design requirements falsework shall be designed to withstand all forces resulting from the loads as specified in this clause or from the loads specified in as num and as num parts num and num whichever produces the greater effect and any additional loads that may be imposed on the falsework during construction .
the design shall take into account the magnitude direction and duration of these forces individually and collectively to ensure that on completion of the permanent structural components the line levels and dimensions of the constructed component comply with the requirements of the contract .
the design loads other than those specified in as num and as num shall be a dead load this shall include the mass of forms falsework wet concrete reinforcement and any other embedded material .
the density of wet concrete including reinforcement shall be taken as num kgmnum .
b superimposed load this shall include the mass of workmen plant equipment and runways stacked material and an impact allowance equal to num of the all up weight of any mechanically operated plant .
in no case shall the superimposed load be less than num kpa plus the mass of stacked material on the plan area of the finished concrete or a single isolated load of num kn applied at any point of the structure .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c wind load this shall be num kpa minimum acting on the exposed area of falsework formwork and any object supported by the falsework or formwork .
d other loads these shall include any special conditions likely to occur during construction including the redistribution of load due to the effects of prestressing or early application of prestress construction stages and staged removal of falsework .
the falsework design shall also allow where required the effects of stream flow traffic impact flooding and any other applicable conditions .
e horizontal loading this shall include wind loading horizontal surge loading equal to num of the all up mass of any mechanically operated plant and loading occurring during construction .
in no case shall the design value of the horizontal load acting in any direction be less than num kn per metre applied at the edge of deck or num of the total dead load whichever is the greater .
the design of all falsework members and connections shall comply with as num as num and as num .
guardrailing and access requirements shall comply with as num .
falsework members shall be designed and constructed to limit deflections to prevent cracking or settlement of previously cast sections due to subsequent casts .
deflections of beams and dimensional changes in other members and connections shall be limited to ensure that the finished concrete is within the specified tolerances for line and level .
all permanent structural components which are adjacent to or surrounded by falsework shall be protected to prevent any damage during the execution of the works .
falsework shall not be supported or braced from completed permanent structural components unless it can be demonstrated that such temporary loading will not affect the structural integrity of the relevant component or the stability and integrity of the overall falsework system .
the contractor shall carry out a site specific geotechnical investigation in addition to the geotechnical investigation required for the design of the permanent structure to establish the appropriateness of the existing ground conditions for the design and construction of the falsework system .
where the falsework settles under load such that the allowable dimensional tolerances on the permanent structural components are exceeded a nonconformance shall be raised and the falsework shall be modified such that the finished permanent structural components comply with the requirements of the contract with regard to dimension position and tolerances .
where required the falsework design shall include hydrologic and hydraulic design parameters to assess the potential for scour and bank erosion and allow for suitable protective measures .
num falsework drawings the drawings submitted to the superintendent shall state all design assumptions and shall include a statement of the loads and any dimensional changes due to loading in all members of the falsework .
the drawings shall be fully detailed including all member sizes and materials dimensions levels erection procedures and other relevant details including bracing connections and foundations to ensure that erection and inspection of the falsework can be undertaken without reference to any other documentation .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num provision for adjustment to level the falsework shall have provision for making adjustment to level .
num provision for longitudinal and lateral movements the structural members of the falsework shall be designed for loads which may result from longitudinal or lateral movements caused by temperature effects or shrinkage of concrete .
alternatively provision shall be incorporated in the falsework to permit these movements .
num bracing adequate bracing shall be provided longitudinally and transversely to ensure that the falsework is stable and that significant horizontal movements resulting from the applied loads are limited .
num foundations the foundations of the falsework shall be designed to prevent excessive settlement and rotation of supports and to ensure that the tolerances for the finished structure are satisfied .
individual footings and groups of footings shall be designed also to satisfy stability criteria .
where the foundation material may become saturated with water allowance shall be made for possible reduction in bearing capacity consequent changes in stability and increased settlement or heave of the foundation .
bearing surfaces of footings shall be horizontal .
footings shall not be founded directly on filled ground .
num falsework at abutment batters footings for falsework shall not be founded directly on abutment fills .
footings on cut batters will only be permitted if the stability of the individual footings or groups of footings on the cut slope and the stability of the cut slope as a whole are adequate and incorporate the normal safety factors against possible failure .
num certification of asconstructed falsework the contractor shall arrange for the design engineer who certified the falsework drawings and the contractors engineer to carry out an onsite inspection and any other activities necessary to certify that the falsework has been erected in accordance with the certified falsework drawings and specification .
the contractor shall submit to the superintendent a certificate of compliance falsework inspection for the constructed falsework signed by the contractors engineer and the design engineer who certified the falsework drawings and shall be in the form shown in attachment b to this section .
the certificate of compliance falsework inspection for the constructed falsework shall be submitted to the superintendent not less than two clear business days prior to the application of any dead load .
hp the application of any permanent load shall not proceed until the signed certificate of compliance falsework inspection of the constructed falsework has been reviewed and accepted by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num loading of erected falsework the contractor shall ensure that the erected falsework is not subjected to any loading that exceeds the loading permitted by the design and as marked on the falsework drawings .
num drainage the contractor shall provide adequate drainage for stormwater to prevent scour of falsework foundations .
foundations on batters shall be protected against scour by directing drainage away from the falsework .
all drainage trenches pipes and diversion channels shall at all times be adequately maintained by the contractor .
num access through falsework the contractor shall provide access at all times through the falsework in accordance with section num or as specified .
num falsework release hp the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for review details of the proposed method of release of the falsework not less than two weeks prior to commencing this operation .
provision shall be made to permit an even and gradual release of the falsework .
where shown on the drawings the contractor shall provide for the release of defined sections of the falsework .
num reinstatement after falsework removal after falsework has been dismantled temporary piles shall be cut back to a depth of num mm below ground level .
temporary piles under proposed road pavement shall be cut back to at least num mm below subgrade level .
all temporary footings shall be removed and all excavations associated with the falsework shall be backfilled in accordance with the specification .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num attachment a to section num proof engineering certificate of compliance form to be used by the proof engineer at intermediate stages and final completion of design and construction i certify that i have num undertaken an independent engineering review in relation to the design represented by the drawings and specifications provided by the contractor as listed in the attached schedule num carried out a detailed check of individual structural elements and the structure as a whole including the specified material properties strikethrough num num andor num below if these aspects are not included in the specified scope of proof engineering num reviewed the site conditions information report in accordance with asnum bridge design the appropriate foundation investigation the recommended design values material properties and possible failure mechanisms num reviewed the hydrologic and hydraulic design parameters including design flood discharges and levels stream velocities and afflux as well as evaluation of potential for and protection against scour and bank erosion num reviewed the proposed construction procedure and the aspects of temporary works critical for structural integrity and safety .
in performing the function of proof engineer i have used due skill care and diligence and from my review and in my opinion as a professional engineer i consider that a. all relevant design actions and design criteria are covered by the design and that these actions and criteria and overall concept meet the requirements of the principals project requirements b. the strength stability and serviceability and other limit state requirements as defined in the principals project requirements are met and c. the construction drawings and specifications accurately describe the following matters critical to the structural integrity strikethrough c below if these aspects are not included in the specified scope of proof engineering a the detailing and dimensions b the required material properties and c the construction procedure and temporary works .
signed name please print on behalf of company date department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num attachment b to section num certificate of compliance falsework inspection contractors engineer i the undersigned please print persons name am responsible for supervising the construction of falsework detailed on the following listed final drawings and specifications certified by the proof engineer .
using due skill care and diligence i have reviewed the relevant geometric surveys and test reports and made inspections during the construction of the falsework and certify that the completed falsework complies with the certified drawings and specifications .
signed on behalf of company date design engineer i the undersigned please print persons name am responsible for the design of falsework detailed on the following listed drawings and specifications certified by the proof engineer .
using due skill care and diligence i have made an inspection of the completed falsework and certify that it complies with the certified drawings and specifications .
signed on behalf of company date contractor to schedule all drawings and specifications of falsework certified by the proof engineer applicable to this joint certificate of compliance .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num formwork this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for the design and construction of formwork required to produce the finished concrete to the shape lines and dimensions shown on the drawings and in accordance with the finishes and tolerances specified in section num .
num standards a australian standards australian standards are referenced in an abbreviated form e.g .
as num .
as num rigid cellular plastics sheets for thermal insulation rigid cellular polystyrene moulded rcps m asnzs num hotrolled steel flat products as num plywood and blockboard for exterior use as num formwork for concrete as num bridge design set .
b additional documents work health and safety act num work health and safety regulations num .
num definitions formwork a temporary structural system comprising the form that contacts the concrete and includes the supporting members bracing and other fixtures used to give the required shape lines and dimensions and to support the freshly placed concrete while it is setting and gaining sufficient strength to be self supporting .
void former prefabricated or solid light weight material including associated anchorages and fixtures for the purpose of forming circular or irregular shaped voids in concrete components .
num formwork design formwork shall conform to the requirements of as num and the additional requirements of this section .
formwork shall be rigid watertight braced and tied together to confine freshly placed concrete and maintain position and shape during construction and shall be constructed in such a way that it can be removed without damage to the concrete .
where formwork is to be reused the formwork design shall allow for the deterioration of materials through use and handling .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the submission of formwork documentation and certification for the various concrete members shall be in accordance with the requirements of table num and attachments a b and c to this section .
table num concrete members formwork documentation certification of formwork design proof engineering of formwork design certification of erected formwork a abutments pilecaps footings solid piers pier columns and walls with heights less than or equal to num metres na na na contractors engineer attachment c as per clause num b abutments pilecaps footings solid piers pier columns and walls with heights greater than num metres c all other concrete members d any member for which self compacting concrete is proposed design drawings and specifications design engineer proof engineer attachment a as per this clause contractors engineer and design engineer attachment b as per clause num where formwork requires design and the production of design drawings and specifications as stated in table num the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for review its detailed drawings and specifications of the proposed formwork not less than two weeks prior to the commencement of formwork construction .
the formwork design shall be certified as stated in table num by a design engineer who is a member of engineers australia and with a minimum of num years experience in the design and construction of formwork of similar complexity .
the formwork design shall be verified in accordance with the contract to confirm that design satisfies the performance requirements of the formwork .
the formwork design shall also be proof engineered as stated in table num by a proof engineer who is independent of the design consultants firm and is prequalified at level pe under the vicroads prequalification scheme or approved by the superintendent .
hp the proof engineering certificate of compliance shall be forwarded to the superintendent at least two days prior to the construction of any formwork .
the proof engineering certificate of compliance shall be in accordance with the form included as attachment a to this section .
any amendment to the design after the issue of the proof engineering certificate of compliance shall be referred to the proof engineer for review and written confirmation that the certificate of compliance remains valid .
the formwork drawings shall include all details of formwork formwork joints sealing procedures ties size and spacing of framing and details of any proprietary fittings or systems proposed to be used .
where vibration is to be applied externally the design of formwork shall include details of external vibrators to ensure efficient compaction and to avoid surface blemishes .
the requirements of the work health and safety regulations num shall be satisfied with respect to all formwork .
num formwork materials the formwork surface material for exposed concrete surfaces shall be steel plate conforming to asnzs num or plywood conforming to asnzs num unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the type and condition of formwork sheeting and lining and the ability of the formwork and its supports to withstand distortion caused by the placement lateral pressure and compaction of the fresh concrete and the standard of workmanship used in the formwork construction shall be such that a uniform concrete surface texture is produced and the finished surfaces of the concrete will conform to the requirements of the specifications and drawings .
all formwork panels shall be placed in a neat symmetrical pattern such that the exposed panel joints do not detract from the geometry or from the final appearance of the structure .
the proposed soffit and side formwork panel arrangements shall be detailed on the formwork drawings .
formwork panels shall be supplied in the maximum practicable width and length to minimise the number of joints .
plywood panels shall be placed with the grain of the outer plies in the direction of the span .
num formwork construction formwork shall be constructed and shall be of sufficient stiffness to tolerate the rate of concrete placement and high frequency vibration and shall be of uniform stiffness to avoid causing varying vibration amplitudes over the formwork surfaces during compaction of the concrete .
the constructed formwork shall be solidly braced and tight and maintain correct position and shape and achieve the specified dimensions levels cover to steel reinforcement and geometry of the finished structural component in accordance with the tolerance requirements of section num .
the use of wires or bolts extended to the surface of the concrete will not be permitted .
any embedded ties shall remain embedded and shall terminate not less than the minimum clear cover specified on the drawings .
all recesses shall be filled with a shrinkage compensating cementitious mortar in accordance with section num .
errors in line or level of the formwork or positioning andor quantity of steel reinforcement shall be corrected prior to placing concrete .
the contractor will be responsible for any defects to the formwork reinforcement embedded components or the formed concrete surface which may become apparent during or after casting the concrete .
formwork shall not be placed in locations where steel reinforcement and other fixtures can not be inspected until evidence that the reinforcement and other fixtures conform to the requirements of the specifications and the drawings has been obtained and recorded by the contractor .
all corners of castinplace or precast concrete shall have num mm x num mm chamfers or fillets .
chamfers and fillets shall be formed and cast integrally with the concrete member .
cutting or grinding of chamfers shall not be allowed .
the interior surface of formwork shall be thoroughly cleaned out and treated with form oil or lubricant to prevent adhesion of the exposed concrete surface in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
the form oil or lubricant shall be of the nonstaining type and shall not discolour the surface of the concrete .
the oil or lubricant shall be applied uniformly in a thin film and any surplus removed prior the concrete placement .
reinforcement and other embedments shall not be soiled by the form oil or lubricant .
prior to commencement of the concreting operations all tie wire ends wood chips and other debris shall be removed from the forms .
formwork shall be sufficiently tight at joints to prevent loss of slurry or mortar while the concrete is in its freshly placed state consistent with the method of placement and compaction .
formwork shall also be mortar tight where holes are needed to facilitate projecting reinforcement or fixing devices .
all relevant requirements of the work health and safety act num and work health and safety regulations num shall be satisfied with respect to all formwork .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num void formers a general formers used for the purpose of forming voids in concrete components shall be as follows i prefabricated formers including associated end caps and anchorages for circular voids ii solid formers made of lightweight material including associated anchorages for voids with irregular shapes .
b void former details the contractor shall submit the void former details for review by the superintendent not less than num weeks prior to the placement of concrete .
concrete shall not be placed until the void former details have been reviewed by the superintendent .
the void former details shall include the following i a full technical description of the proposed void former including documented evidence of previous use and performance ii the material type iii the method of construction and installation iv the type and spacing of anchors and supports to hold down the void former v the maximum pressure head and maximum height differential between the two sides of the void former which shall be consistent with the most adverse conditions that may exist during the concreting operations .
c certificates of compliance of materials and components the contractor shall submit for review by the superintendent not less than num weeks prior to the proposed use of materials and components a signed statement including relevant test reports demonstrating the compliance of the materials and components with the requirements of clause numd .
the contractor shall also submit for review by the superintendent not less than num weeks prior to the proposed use of materials and components computations carried out and certified by a design engineer confirming the ability of anchors and supports to securely restrain the void former in position during and after the concreting operations and confirm compliance with this section .
the design engineer shall be experienced and qualified in structural design with a minimum of five years experience in the design and construction of formwork and shall be verified in accordance with the requirements of section num. d materials the void formers shall be made watertight to prevent ingress of concrete slurry and sufficiently strong and tough to withstand handling transport storage and installation and the placing and compaction of the concrete without suffering damage or deformation .
void formers and associated fixtures shall remain dimensionally stable and retain their physical properties under normal conditions of use shall be resistant to fire shall not cause staining or discolouration and shall not alter physically or chemically by contact with concrete slurry or moisture .
as a minimum solid formers shall be rigid cellular expanded polystyrene complying with class s as stated in as num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num e fabrication void formers shall be fabricated such that after the concreting operations they maintain correct position and shape and achieve the specified dimensions levels and geometry of the finished structural component in accordance with the specified tolerance requirements .
any stiffening ribs of prefabricated void formers shall project inwards to ensure a smooth outer surface profile and seams shall be watertight recessed to present a smooth outer surface and mechanically overlocked when fabricated from spirallywound strip material .
joints to any fixtures shall be sealed and watertight .
void formers and associated fixtures shall not be dented cracked spalled or porous exhibiting signs of corrosion or are otherwise damaged in any way prior to installation to prevent local instability of the void former under pressure from the wet concrete .
void formers shall be fabricated to the following tolerances i outside dimensiondiameter to within num mm for cylindrical formers diameters measured at right angles ii overall length with required fixtures in place to within num to num mm iii diagonal dimensions for solid void formers to within num mm iv for horizontal bow the deviation of the void former from the required profile shall not exceed num of the length of the void former or a maximum of num mm .
f installation the void former shall be securely restrained in position during and after the concreting operations .
large uplift forces acting as a result of the buoyancy effect and any lateral pressure due to concrete placement shall be resisted by external means and not by securing the void former to the steel reinforcement .
joints between void former segments shall be watertight .
the tolerance on final position of the void former at any location shall be within num mm .
num certification of formwork further to the requirements of clause num and parts b c and d of table num the contractor shall arrange for the design engineer who certified the formwork drawings to carry out an on site inspection and any other activities necessary to certify that the erection of the formwork has been completed in accordance with the certified design drawings .
the contractor shall submit to the superintendent a certificate of compliance formwork inspection for the constructed formwork signed by the contractor and the design engineer responsible for the certification of the formwork drawings and shall be in the form shown in attachment b to this section .
further to the requirements of clause num and part a of table num the contractors engineer responsible for designing supervising and certifying the erection of the formwork shall be a member of engineers australia who is experienced in the design and construction of formwork of similar complexity .
as part of the certification the contractors engineer shall carry out an onsite inspection and any other activities necessary to certify in accordance with the form included as attachment c to this section that the erection of the formwork has been completed in accordance with the specified requirements .
the relevant certificate of compliance formwork inspection for the constructed formwork shall be submitted to the superintendent not less than two days prior to the application of any load .
hp the application of any load shall not proceed until the signed certificate of compliance formwork inspection of the constructed formwork has been reviewed and accepted by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num removal of formwork the period of time before formwork and formwork supports can be removed shall be in accordance with the minimum formwork removal times and requirements as specified in section num .
formwork shall be so constructed as to allow for its undisturbed dismantling and removal from the cast concrete without shock or damage .
shock or damage to the cast concrete shall also be prevented when removing formwork in the vicinity of projecting reinforcement or fixing devices .
all formwork shall be removed on completion .
all relevant requirements of the work health and safety act num and work health and safety regulations num shall be satisfied with respect to removal of all formwork .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num attachment a to section num proof engineering certificate of compliance form to be used by the proof engineer at intermediate stages and final completion of design and construction for concrete members as stated in parts b c and d of table num i certify that i have num undertaken an independent engineering review in relation to the design represented by the drawings and specifications provided by the contractor as listed in the attached schedule num carried out a detailed check of individual structural elements and the structure as a whole including the specified material properties strikethrough num num andor num below if these aspects are not included in the specified scope of proof engineering num reviewed the site conditions information report in accordance with asnum bridge design the appropriate foundation investigation the recommended design values material properties and possible failure mechanisms num reviewed the hydrologic and hydraulic design parameters including design flood discharges and levels stream velocities and afflux as well as evaluation of potential for and protection against scour and bank erosion num reviewed the proposed construction procedure and the aspects of temporary works critical for structural integrity and safety .
in performing the function of proof engineer i have used due skill care and diligence and from my review and in my opinion as a professional engineer i consider that a. all relevant design actions and design criteria are covered by the design and that these actions and criteria and overall concept meet the requirements of the principals project requirements b. the strength stability and serviceability and other limit state requirements as defined in the principals project requirements are met and c. the construction drawings and specifications accurately describe the following matters critical to the structural integrity strikethrough c below if these aspects are not included in the specified scope of proof engineering a the detailing and dimensions b the required material properties and c the construction procedure and temporary works .
signed name please print on behalf of company date department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num attachment b to section num certificate of compliance formwork inspection for concrete members as stated in parts b c and d of table num contractors engineer i the undersigned please print persons name am responsible for supervising the construction of formwork detailed on the following listed final drawings and specifications certified by the proof engineer .
using due skill care and diligence i have reviewed the relevant geometric surveys and test reports and made inspections during the construction of the formwork and certify that the completed formwork complies with the certified drawings and specifications .
signed on behalf of company date design engineer i the undersigned please print persons name am responsible for the design of formwork detailed on the following listed drawings and specifications certified by the proof engineer .
using due skill care and diligence i have made an inspection of the completed formwork and certify that it complies with the certified drawings and specifications .
signed on behalf of company date contractor to schedule all drawings and specifications of formwork certified by the proof engineer applicable to this joint certificate of compliance .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num attachment c to section num certificate of compliance formwork inspection for concrete members as stated in part a of table num contractors engineer i the undersigned please print persons name am responsible for designing and supervising the construction of formwork detailed on the following listed final drawings and specifications .
using due skill care and diligence i have reviewed the relevant geometric surveys and test reports and made inspections during the construction of the formwork and certify that the completed formwork complies with the specified requirements .
signed on behalf of company date contractor to schedule all drawings and specifications of formwork applicable to this certificate of compliance .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num manufacture testing and delivery of precast reinforced concrete box culverts this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general the supply of materials manufacture testing handling and delivery of precast reinforced concrete box culverts up to num mm in width shall be in accordance with the requirements of as num and this section .
num standards australian standards are referenced in an abbreviated form e.g .
as num .
as num methods of testing concrete as num methods of sampling and testing aggregates as num specification and supply of concrete as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout as num precast reinforced concrete box culverts small culverts as num calibration and classification of forcemeasuring systems as num aggregates and rock for engineering purposes concrete aggregates as num supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement concrete as num part num fly ash as num part num slag ground granulated iron blast furnace as num part num amorphous silica as num formwork for concrete as num liquid membraneforming curing compounds for concrete as num general purpose and blended cements as num bridge design num definitions definitions of concrete related terms shall be as described in section num .
num types of box culverts the types of culvert covered by this specification are as designated in as num clause num a u shape consisting of invert and lid .
b inverted u shape consisting of crown and base .
note where the word unit appears in this specification it is deemed to mean a complete box culvert as described above .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num page num of num num standard dimensions and lengths unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings box culvert dimensions shall comply with the requirements of table num of as num and the standard nominal length of box culverts shall be as follows a where imperial moulds remain in use num m and num m b where metric moulds are in use num m and num m. all references to num m and num m units shall equally apply to num m and num m units and vice versa .
num dimensional tolerances a internal and external dimensions the actual internal dimensions of a unit shall not differ from the manufacturers designated dimensions by more than num mm .
b thickness the actual thickness of a unit shall not differ from the specified thickness by more than num to num mm .
c length the actual length of a unit shall not differ from the manufacturers designated length by more than num mm .
d straightness when the inner surface of a unit is tested by means of a num m long straight edge the deviation from straightness at any point shall not exceed num mm .
e ends i squareness the end faces shall not depart from planes at right angles to the sides and base by more than num mm or num of the height or width whichever is the greater .
ii straightness the end faces shall not depart at any point from a straight edge held against them by more than num mm .
f section i squareness the external crosssection anywhere in the length of the unit shall at no point depart from a true rectangle by more than num mm or num of the height or width whichever is the greater .
ii straightness when the surfaces of a unit are tested by means of a straight edge the deviation from straightness at any point shall not exceed num mm for a num m unit or num mm for a num m unit .
the contractor shall undertake a check for compliance with dimensional tolerances as stated in this clause at the frequency of one unit for every ten units manufactured of each size class of box culvert units .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num page num of num num durability requirements box culverts shall be designed for a minimum exposure classification of bnum in accordance with as num and as num .
box culverts used in saltwater applications shall be designed for exposure classification c in accordance with as num and as num .
the minimum concrete strength grade and concrete cover to the steel reinforcement shall be as shown in table num .
table num exposure classification minimum cover to steel reinforcement mm for characteristic strength fc at num days num mpa num mpa bnum num num bnum num num c not applicable num num materials a concrete general concrete used for the manufacture of precast reinforced concrete box culverts shall comply with the requirements of as num .
the concrete shall consist of a mixture of cementitious material fine aggregate coarse aggregate and water .
the concrete may also contain chemical admixtures details of which shall be submitted for review by the superintendent .
in its finished state concrete shall be sound and dense and durable and free from honeycombing and shall have the strength and other properties specified .
b cementitious material i cement cement shall comply with the requirements of as num .
cement per batch of concrete shall be from one manufacturer and of one brand type and grind .
cement more than three months old shall not be used in the works unless it is retested to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of as num. ii fly ash ggbf slag and amorphous silica fly ash ggbf slag and amorphous silica shall comply with the requirements of as num as num and as num respectively and shall be from one manufacturer and of one brand type and fineness .
iii minimum portland cement content the minimum mass of portland cement in concrete mixes containing ggbf slag fly ash or amorphous silica shall be num num or num respectively of the total mass of cementitious material in the concrete mix .
the inclusion of ggbf slag fly ash or amorphous silica in concrete mixes shall only be in single or double combination with portland cement .
in a triple blend concrete mix the portland cement content shall be a minimum of num and the individual contribution of ggbf slag fly ash or amorphous silica shall be a maximum of num num or num respectively of the total mass of the cementitious material in the concrete mix .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num iv cementitious type and content for saltwater applications and exposure classification c box culverts used in saltwater applications or exposure classification c shall be manufactured with concrete containing at least num fly ash and num to num silica fume as a replacement of portland cement or at least num fly ash as a replacement of portland cement .
c chemical admixtures chemical admixtures when used shall comply with the requirements of as num .
they shall be used in accordance with the requirements of clause num of as num and the manufacturers recommended method of use and shall not reduce the strength of concrete below that specified .
chemical admixtures shall be accurately measured by means of dispensers which are subject to regular maintenance and are calibrated as a minimum at three monthly intervals .
chemical admixtures shall not contain calcium chloride calcium formate chlorine sulphur sulphides or sulphites .
d aggregates source rock shall comply with the requirements of section num source rock for the production of crushed rock and aggregates .
fine and coarse aggregate for concrete shall comply with the requirements of as num unless otherwise specified in table num .
table num property relevant standard and clauses test limits for product acceptance general requirements num .
particle density as num num greater than num kgmnum num .
bulk density as num num greater than num kgmnum num .
water absorption as num num less than num for coarse less than num for fine dimensions num .
grading as num num table num singlesized aggregate coarse and fine num .
material finer than num microns as num num coarse num max .
fine num max .
num .
particle shape as num num num max .
at num ratio for misshapen flat and elongated durability num .
los angeles value as num num maximum num .
unsound stone content as num unsound stone content num max .
total of unsound stone and marginal stone num max .
impurities num .
organic impurities as num num not darker than the standard reference colour no .
num num .
sugar as num num less than num part in num num .
alkaliaggregate reactivity numc limits as per numc num .
soluble salts to cementitious material mass numk num max .
sulphate salts concrete cured at ambient temperature num max .
sulphate salts steamcured concrete num max .
chloride salts department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num e water the quality of mixing water to be used in the concrete mix shall comply with the requirements of clause num of as num .
however the amounts of chloride and chlorine in the water shall be not greater than num. f steel reinforcement steel reinforcement used in the manufacture of precast reinforced concrete box culverts shall comply with section num .
num placing and compacting concrete concrete shall be deposited in horizontal layers in a manner to avoid segregation and displacement of the steel reinforcement or other embedded items or formwork .
the compaction of concrete shall be carried out by using external vibrators to achieve the desired level of compaction .
immersion vibrators of adequate size number and frequency shall only be used as backup when external vibrators fail .
care shall be taken to ensure that no steel reinforcement or embedded items are displaced by vibration .
num curing stripping and removal from formwork concrete shall be cured using one or a combination of methods described in this clause .
the concrete shall be protected from moisture loss until commencement of curing which shall continue until the concrete reaches the age or the maturity whichever is the lesser and the compressive strength is as shown in table num .
the concrete compressive strength for checking the adequacy of curing shall be determined by test cylinders cured with and in the same manner as the concrete unit .
the unit shall not be completely stripped from all forms or handled off the base forms until the compressive strength reaches num mpa .
curing shall be carried out to meet the requirements of table num and where curing is interrupted by more than num minutes the unit shall be protected from moisture loss .
table num exposure classification minimum characteristic concrete compressive strength fc at num days mpa required concrete compressive strength at completion of accelerated curing mpa required minimum concrete age days and minimum maturity c hrs at completion of curing moist membrane accelerated age days maturity c hrs age days maturity c hrs age days maturity c hrs bnum num num num num num num num num num num bnum num num num num num num num num num num c num num num num not permitted num num notes num .
for concrete exposure classification u curing should be as specified on the drawings and in this specification .
num .
the required concrete compressive strengths at completion of curing are based on table num of as num i.e .
compressive strength at completion of curing num fc .
num .
maturity c hrs for moist and membrane curing is calculated by adopting the minimum days x num x numc .
minimum days are based on table num of as num .
num .
maturity c hrs for accelerated curing is calculated by adopting the minimum days x num x numc .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num where moist curing is used concrete shall be kept continuously moist and the concrete maintained at a temperature above numc and all surfaces of the culvert must remain fully saturated .
membrane curing in the form of curing compounds may be used in accordance with table num for exposure classifications bnum and bnum in lieu of moist curing .
curing compounds shall be applied to all exposed concrete surfaces to manufacturers specifications .
the concrete shall be maintained at a temperature above numc .
curing compounds shall comply with the requirements of as num .
accelerated curing shall be carried out by low pressure steam curing in accordance with appendix c of as num .
num sampling and testing for compressive strength a sample consisting of a minimum of four concrete compression cylinders shall be taken at not greater than ten hours of continuous manufacture of culvert units and tested for strength .
the concrete compression cylinders shall be made in accordance with as num and as num and subsequently tested in accordance with as num .
the minimum compressive strength requirements for each strength grade shall be in accordance with clause num and as shown in table num .
curing of concrete compression cylinders shall be carried out in accordance with as num .
concrete compression cylinders shall be cured initially with the product .
as soon as practicable after a period of num hours from moulding the test cylinders shall be placed under standard moist curing conditions .
the time between moulding and entry into standard moist curing conditions shall not exceed num hours .
num concrete cover to steel reinforcement the tolerance on concrete cover shall be num to num mm .
for normal service conditions spacers or bar chairs used to maintain cover to the steel reinforcement shall be made of plastic or steel provided the box culvert is manufactured using rigid formwork and intense vibration .
where box culverts are to be placed in saltwater applications stainless steel spacers or plastic bar chairs shall be used .
the concrete cover to the steel reinforcement shall be measured with a calibrated cover meter to ensure compliance with the requirements of clause num .
the contractor shall select one unit for concrete cover measurements from each num units of a batch or a maximum period of num months production .
the cover meter device shall be capable of detecting the presence of reinforcement and indicating the depth from the concrete surface to the nearest point on the surface of the reinforcement with an accuracy of num mm at a depth of num mm .
num provision for lifting and handling of units units shall be handled in a manner which will avoid damage to them and shall be lifted using the lifting points provided .
where units are lifted in the legsup position a lifting beam shall be used in order to avoid inducing excessive bending moments .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num precast units shall not be handled before the concrete has reached compressive strength of num mpa and stored in a manner such that their a serviceability is not impaired b shape is not distorted to affect installation alignment and c surface and edge finishes are not unduly damaged .
provision shall be made for lifting and handling the precast units .
where lifting inserts are provided they shall be installed in accordance with the lifting inserts suppliers recommendations .
all provisions for lifting shall comply with the requirements of the appropriate regulatory authority .
num workmanship and finish all units shall be free from fractures cracks and from any other defects .
a surface condition the interior and exterior surfaces of the units shall be smooth and dense and free from voids chipped edges fins protrusions surface roughness and other defects .
blowhole defects num mm diameter and num mm deep will be accepted provided that there are no more than num defects in an area num mm square or an equivalent area of larger or smaller diameter holes providing they are not more than num mm deep .
units with defects greater than this allowance shall be rejected .
units shall not be coated with cement wash or any other preparation .
b dents bulges and defects dents not exceeding num mm deep and bulges not exceeding num mm high shall be accepted provided they do not extend over the surface for a distance greater than twice the wall thickness of the unit and provided that the minimum cover is maintained .
dents shall be repaired by the contractor if necessary to maintain the minimum cover .
units shall be free from fractures and cracks wider than num mm and residual test cracks wider than num mm in accordance with the requirements of clause num and appendix e of as num .
num identification of units all units shall be clearly stencilled by the contractor with indelible ink on the interior surface of each unit prior to inspection .
lids shall be stencilled on the underside and base slabs on the top side .
information required on each unit shall be as follows a nominal dimensions b date of manufacture and identification number c name of the manufacturer andor its registered trade mark d locality of the supplying factory e maximum mass of the unit f number of the relevant australian standard i.e .
as num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num testing at the manufacturers works a batch is defined as a maximum of num number units of the same size and manufactured and cured at the same works within two calendar months .
units supplied from more than one source or manufactured outside of a two month period then those units shall be deemed to be more than one batch and the requirements of the specification shall apply to each separate batch .
num proof load test from each num units of a batch the contractor shall select one unit as defined in clause num for proofload testing in accordance with as num .
the two test units shall represent the first sample for the batch .
for batches of less than num units a sample of one unit shall be selected by the contractor for proofload testing .
every selected unit not more than num metres long shall sustain a vertical force of num kn without developing a test crack as defined in note num and on removal of the load no crack caused by the load shall be greater than that defined in note num below as a residual test crack .
for batches greater than num units if a in the first sample two nonconforming units are found then reject the batch or b one unit in the first sample is nonconforming select a second random sample of two units one unit from each num units of the same batch and subject them to the same crack load test in accordance with as num .
if any unit in the second sample fails then reject the batch .
if no units in the second sample fail accept the batch .
for batches of less than num units should the sample test unit fail to comply then select a random second sample of one additional unit from the same batch and subject it to the same crack load test in accordance with as num .
if the unit in the second sample fails reject the batch .
if no nonconforming unit is found in the second sample accept the batch .
note num a test crack is defined as one into which the point of a test crack measuring gauge conforming to the details given in figure enum of as num may be inserted to a depth of num mm over a length of at least num mm at intervals not exceeding num mm .
note num a residual test crack is defined as one into which the point of a residual test crack measuring gauge conforming to the details given in figure enum of as num may be inserted to a depth of num mm over a length of at least num mm at intervals not exceeding num mm .
num ultimate load test from each num units of a batch the contractor shall select one unit as defined in clause num for ultimateload testing in accordance with as num .
the two test units shall represent the first sample for the batch .
for batches of less than num units a sample of one unit shall be selected by the contractor for ultimateload testing .
every selected unit not more than num metres long shall sustain a vertical force of num kn .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num for batches greater than num units if a in the first sample two nonconforming units are found then reject the batch or b one unit in the first sample fails to comply select a second random sample of two units one unit from each num units of the same batch and subject them to the same ultimate load test in accordance with as num .
if any unit in the second sample fails then reject the batch .
if no units in the second sample fail accept the batch .
for batches of less than num units should the sample test unit fail to comply with the requirements of this clause then select a random second sample of one additional unit from the same batch and subject it to the same ultimate load test in accordance with as num .
if the unit in the second sample fails reject the batch .
if no nonconforming unit is found in the second sample accept the batch .
num load testing of num metre units for unit sections of num m the loads specified for proof and ultimate test shall be applied over each num m end of the culvert either separately or at both ends simultaneously .
when the unit is loaded at both ends simultaneously the specified load for proof and ultimate shall be doubled .
num calibration of testing machine the testing machine used for load testing shall meet the requirements of as num class b and shall be calibrated in accordance with the terms of laboratory accreditation for the specific testing machine type .
a jack and pressure gauge system may be used provided that calibration is carried out at not more than six monthly intervals .
num transport and storage a transporting units shall not be transported from the precast yard within seven days after casting and the curing has been completed in accordance with clause num .
units shall be supported on timber bearers which are fitted with rubber strips on top .
rubber strips shall also be placed between units both laterally and longitudinally .
all tie down straps and chains shall have rubber protection strips over box culvert edges .
the legs of all box culverts shall be adequately braced to prevent whipping and bending .
the precast invert base slabs and lids to be transported shall be loaded in the laid position .
b stacking i inverts or crowns shall be stored in separate stacks of identical units up to a maximum height of num metres or two units high separated by timber packers .
ii lids or base slabs shall be stored in separate stacks of identical units up to a maximum height of six units separated by timber packers .
c final visual inspection of units upon delivery to site the contractor shall undertake a final visual inspection of units upon transport and delivery to site and the findings of such inspection shall form part of the acceptance requirements of clause num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num acceptance box culverts shall be accepted on the basis of full compliance with the requirements of this section and as num .
documentation supporting the following quality requirements shall be submitted for review by the superintendent upon transport and delivery of units to site a visual inspection b dimensional measurements c measurements of clear cover to steel reinforcement d concrete compressive strength test results e proof load test results f ultimate load test results .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num precast concrete units this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the manufacture storage handling and delivery of precast concrete units .
concrete for these units shall be in accordance with section num structural concrete and reinforcement shall be in accordance with section num steel reinforcement .
num forms forms shall be manufactured from steel except where otherwise approved by the superintendent .
the formwork shall be constructed so as to produce the finished concrete to the shape lines and dimensions shown on the drawings and in accordance with the surface finish and tolerances specified in section num structural concrete .
void formers shall be securely restrained in position vertically against the action of placing concrete and subsequent flotation under vibration .
the void former shall likewise be laterally restrained against forces arising from differential pressures during placing of concrete .
void formers shall comply with the requirements of section num .
the use of wires or bolts extended to the surface of the concrete will not be permitted except where shown on the drawings .
any embedded ties shall remain embedded and shall terminate not less than the specified concrete cover .
all recesses shall be filled in accordance with the surface finish provisions of section num .
num removal of units from forms individual precast units with mass of five tonnes or less shall have a minimum concrete compressive strength of num mpa for removal of units from forms .
for individual precast units of mass greater that five tonnes the minimum concrete compressive strength shall be num mpa for removal of units from forms .
lifting of precast units at a minimum concrete compressive strength other than that specified in this clause shall be supported with structural calculations and maturity testing for estimating the in situ strength of concrete in accordance with the requirements of clause numl .
the structural calculations shall be certified by an engineer who has qualifications admitting to corporate membership of the institution of engineers australia with a minimum of five years experience in structural design .
num projecting reinforcement where shown on the drawings steel reinforcement shall be left projecting for the purpose of bonding on subsequent work .
care shall be taken to avoid disturbing the bars during the specified period for curing of the concrete .
projecting reinforcement which has been damaged or dislodged or which is loose in the concrete will be cause for rejecting of the units .
continuity bars shall be positioned within num mm of the positions shown on the drawings .
the relative deviation of any two bars cross sections taken at right angles to the longitudinal centreline of the unit over the projecting length of bar shall be within num mm .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num sole plates and bearing retainers material for sole plates and bearing retainers shall be of structural grade steel complying with the requirements of as num .
all surfaces and edges of sole plates shall be finished smooth and bearing surfaces shall have a maximum out of flatness of num mm unless otherwise specified on the drawings .
prior to galvanizing the surface finish on edges shall be equivalent to a class num flame cut surface as specified by the australian welding research association .
welding shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num part num .
unless otherwise specified steel sole plates shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num .
the minimum mass of zinc coating shall be num kgmnum of surface .
sole plates shall be set to the required grades shown on the drawings or as specified by the superintendent .
they shall be arranged so that the bearing surfaces are at right angles to the vertical axis of the unit .
num marking the identification number date of casting the manufacturers name or registered mark and the maximum mass shall be marked on every precast unit .
temporary identification shall be made on the top surface of the unit near an end except for parapet units .
final marking shall be made by indelible marking material using letters approximately num mm high .
for parapet units temporary identification shall be made on the broomed surface of the parapet as shown on the drawings .
final markings shall be made on one end of each unit .
piles shall be marked and numbered at num mm increments starting from the toe with an indelible marking material .
num handling and storage units shall not be stored in areas subject to flooding .
units shall not be stored within num m of existing or proposed overhead power or telephone lines or over service conduits drainage pipes or uncompacted fill .
the units shall be supported on bearers clear of the ground .
bearers shall support the units over their full width and be placed perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the unit .
unless specified otherwise bearers shall be placed beneath the specified or approved lifting points clear of any sole plates .
the ground or space between the bearers supporting the units shall be carefully cleared and levelled so as to prevent the unit from being supported other than on the bearers .
the bearers shall rest on a firm foundation and adequate precautions shall be taken to prevent subsidence from occurring and to prevent the units bearing other than at the specified support positions .
any units damaged or distorted in excess of the specified tolerances prior or during installation shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
where the method of handling and supporting is not specified the contractor shall submit for review by the superintendent details of his proposals num days prior to lifting and supporting the units .
unless otherwise specified precast units shall be lifted using the lifting points provided and supported with the top surface uppermost at all times .
the angle subtended by the slings and the longitudinal axis of the unit shall be not less than num .
beams shall be stored and handled with webs vertical at all times .
all beams shall be laterally supported .
the lateral bracing shall be designed for num of the dead load of the beam at the mid height of the beam .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num beams and parapet units shall not be stored in stacks .
slabs planks and piles may be stored in separate stacks of identical units up to a maximum height of num m or two units high whichever is greater .
crown units may be stored in separate stacks of identical units up to a maximum height of num m. the upper layers shall be separated from the lower layers by suitable timber bearers in line vertically at the specified supporting points .
timber supports for upper layers shall be placed directly above the supports of the layer below .
num transporting units shall not be transported from the precast yard until specified num day concrete compressive strength has been achieved and not before num days after casting .
units shall be securely fixed to the transporter and provision shall be made to protect the units from damage caused by lashings .
during transport of beam units the contractor shall provide end bracing and if necessary top flange bracing .
bearings and supports shall allow for longitudinal rotation of the unit in transport and have adequate width and bearing capacity .
no beam shall be transported and erected if it has a bow in excess of num in num of the length or num mm whichever is the lesser .
should the bow at any time exceed the maximum allowable limit steps shall be taken to ensure the safety of the unit throughout the journey .
num traceability of precast concrete units all manufactured precast concrete units shall be traced from the completion of manufacture to their final location by a unique identification number .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num pretensioning of concrete units this section crossreferences sections num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for the supply placing and stressing of pretensioning systems .
castinplace concrete for pretensioned construction shall comply with the requirements of section num structural concrete .
precast concrete units for pretensioned construction shall comply with the requirements of section num precast concrete units .
num supply of tendons a materials hightensile steel wires and strands for use in pretensioning and the testing of these materials shall comply with asnzs num steel prestressing materials .
strand and wire for use in pretensioning shall be relaxation class num and shall be tested for compliance with the requirements for class num relaxation with an initial load of num of the specified minimum breaking force .
strand shall be obtained from an australian certification authority for reinforcing steel acrs accredited supplier .
the contractor shall submit the following for the material in each coil of wire or strand test certificates for tensile testing loadextension graphs together with the manufacturers certificate of compliance of the tendon material with the australian standard a stressrelaxation test certificate for material taken from the same production facility and of the same type of material as that proposed for use in the works stress relaxationtest certificates for similar tendons produced within the calendar year prior to the proposed use will be accepted to the superintendent at least seven days prior to the delivery of the coil or lot to its place of use .
tests shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate australian standard in a laboratory accredited by the national association of testing authorities nata or approved equivalent for those test methods by personnel experienced in the testmethods described in the contract .
additional relaxation testing of samples may be required by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num all test reports shall be endorsed in accordance with the nata terms of accreditation for that laboratory .
hightensile steel wires or strands shall be supplied in coils of sufficiently large diameter to ensure that the wires or strands are straight when unwound from the coil .
b sampling and testing if required under clause num sampling where required under clause numc the contractor shall arrange for the tendon material to be tested .
samples of wire or strand shall be taken by the contractor at the site of the works or at the suppliers fabrication shop provided that the tendons fabricated from one coil or lot are bundles together and clearly identified with the coil or lot number .
the contractor shall arrange testing of test samples representative of each coil .
these samples shall be taken not less than num metre from the end of any coil .
for split coils comprising two or more production runs of wire or strand each production run shall be sampled and tested separately .
testing samples shall be tested in a nataaccredited laboratory for compliance with the australian standard for steel prestressing materials .
all test reports shall be endorsed in accordance with the nata terms of accreditation for that laboratory .
c assembly of tendons splicing of strands or wires to form a tendon is not permitted .
welding is not permitted on or near tendons nor shall any heat be applied to tendons .
tendons which have been affected by welding weld splatter andor heat shall be rejected .
flamecutting of wire or strand within num mm of an anchorage or jack is not permitted .
d storage and surface condition coils of wire and strand and assembled tendons shall be stored above ground level and shall be protected from mechanical damage contamination with harmful substances or other damage until their incorporation into the works .
wires and strands that show any evidence of damage kinks or bends shall not be used .
wires and strands which are heavily corroded or visibly pitted will not be accepted .
slight surface rusting shall not be a reason for rejection provided that no pitting is visible .
wire and strand shall be kept free from loose rust oil grease tar paint soil or any other harmful substances .
if the wire or strand become contaminated with any substance it shall be cleaned with suitable equipment and appropriate detergents andor clean water until all of the contaminant and any detergent has been removed to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
loose rust shall be removed by mechanical or manual methods that do not cause damage to the wire or strand or which impair the bond between the wire or strand and the concrete .
wire or strand that remains contaminated or that has suffered damage or impairment during cleaning will not be accepted .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num traceability of materials wire strand shall be labelled in accordance with asnzs num .
individual lengths of wire and strand shall be traceable from the point of manufacture of coils to their final location by a unique identification number .
pretensioned concrete units shall be traceable in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num placing tendons tendons shall be placed in continuous lengths in the positions shown on the drawings and shall be held in the required position by endblocks of sufficient strength and stiffness to safely maintain the required force in the tendons .
tendons shall be debonded in the positions shown on the drawings by the use of closefitting plastic tubing which shall be sealed to prevent grout leakage into the tube .
grease or other coatings shall not be used for debonding .
tendons shall not be allowed to come into contact with the oiled surface of the formwork .
if a tendon is contaminated with oil or other harmful substance it shall be cleaned using an appropriate method in order to ensure that the bond between the tendon and the concrete is unimpaired .
tendons that can not be cleaned shall be replaced .
tendons shall not be welded or exposed to heat from welding or other sources .
where deflected tendons are shown on the drawings tendons shall be restrained with devices of sufficient strength to hold the tendons in their proper positions without displacement during the placing and compaction of concrete .
num stressing precautions stressing of tendons measurement of elongation and associated operations shall be conducted in a safe manner .
the precast concrete manufacturer shall comply with the requirement of the work health and safety act num to provide a safe workplace .
the stressing jack shall be adequately supported and restrained in order to ensure that it can not cause injury to personnel operating the jacking equipment should the jack lose its grip on the tendons or should the tendon fail .
noone shall stand behind the jack or in a position where a broken tendon could cause injury when stressing is in progress .
should a tendon break during stressing adequate restraint shall be provided to prevent lateral or vertical movement of the broken tendon .
robust barriers shall be provided in order to prevent a broken or loose tendon from recoiling into the working area .
warning signs that conform to as num safety signs for the occupational environment shall be displayed at both ends of the member being tensioned during stressing operations .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num tensioning a equipment the contractor shall maintain current calibration certificates conforming to the requirements of as num grade b for the jack and pressure gauges or other force measuring devices .
jacks and pressure gauges and other devices shall be calibrated and used as a single unit .
calibration to as num shall be carried out by a laboratory that is nataaccredited for that method and at the appropriate force range .
the power unit shall be adjusted so that the rate of extension of the tendon is within the specified limits .
the measuring equipment shall permit measurement of the tendon force prior to lockoff to the degree of accuracy required by as num grade b .
the measuring equipment used shall permit elongation to be determined to an accuracy of num .
the equipment shall prevent unwinding of the strand during tensioning .
the sag takeup force in the tendons shall be measured with equipment which complies with the repeatability and accuracy requirements of as num grade b at a scale mark at which the equipment has been calibrated .
the readability requirements of as num grade b shall be ignored for the purpose of establishing sag takeup .
sag takeup force shall not exceed num of the required tendon force and shall be not less than num of the required tendon force or num of gauge capacity whichever is the greater .
b anchorages anchorages shall be of a type that prevents the occurrence of slip during casting and curing operations .
c tendon force before tensioning commences the contractor shall calculate the extension corresponding to the required tendon force shown on the drawings .
the calculation shall be based on the measured length of the tendon between the tendon anchorages at the end blocks and the modulus of elasticity determined from the sample tested in accordance with clause num .
the calculations shall include allowances for all losses including slip at anchorages elastic shortening of the stressing bed pullin on transfer of prestress friction losses and temperature changes .
the calculations shall be reviewed by the designer of the pretensioned concrete units who shall certify that the calculations meet the requirements of the specification and the drawings .
the contractor shall provide a copy of the designers certification to the superintendent .
after all tendons have been anchored to the endblocks lockedoff the force remaining in the tendons at midspan of the unit shall be the required tendon force stated on the drawings .
the allowable variation of the tendon force shall be num .
under no circumstances shall the maximum tensioning force exceed the lesser of the rated capacity of the jacking equipment or num of the tensile strength of the tendon .
the tensioning force required to achieve the design tendon force shall be determined from the calibration certificate and the actual elongation of the tendon corresponding to the tensioning force shall be recorded .
alternatively the superintendent may approve determination of the tensioning force by measurement of the elongation provided that the limits of variation of the modulus of elasticity of the tendons are satisfactory .
in this case the jacking force shall be recorded .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num should the modulus of elasticity of batches of tendons differ by more than num the required elongation shall be adjusted accordingly .
where the difference between the force determined from the calibration certificate and the tensioning force calculated from the elongation exceeds num the contractor shall nominate some or all of the following remedial steps subject to review by the superintendent .
the contractor shall suspend stressing until the completion of the superintendents review recalibration of tensioning equipment testing of tendon material to check the modulus of elasticity that tendons be released and restressed with the adoption of a modulus of elasticity applicable to the second stressing other steps as agreed by the superintendent .
d tensioning procedure the contractor shall give the superintendent seven days notice of stressing operations .
hp all stressing operations shall take place in the presence of the contractors precast concrete surveillance officer .
tensioning operations shall be performed by suitably trained and experienced personnel .
where the sag takeup force is not measured the slack shall be taken up by means of a pulling device preset to the sag takeup force .
an allowance based on elongation measurements shall be made for sag takeup force in calculating the tensioning force .
tendons shall be marked for measurement of elongation after this sag takeup force has been applied .
in order that slip may be observed each tendon shall be marked at both the jacking end and the dead end of the stressing bed prior to the commencement of tensioning .
should slip occur in any one of a group of tendons being tensioned together provided that not more than two tendons have slipped tensioning of the group including the slipped tendons may be completed .
if more than two tendons have slipped the whole of the group shall be relaxed the tendons shall be reset and the whole group tensioned again .
the prestressing force shall be transferred from the tensioning jack to the stressingbed end block immediately after the required tendon force prior to lockoff or the required elongation has been reached in the tendons .
the hydraulic pressure in the jack shall then be relaxed before any other operation is commenced .
e action if concreting is delayed if placing of concrete does not commence within num hours of completion of tensioning of the tendons the contractor shall reestablish the jacking equipment and check the force in each of the tendons .
if the measured force in any of the tendons is less than the required tendon force the tendon stressing procedure shall be repeated .
placing of concrete may commence on completion of checking of tendon forces and retensioning if required .
num failure of tendons should a tendon fail after the concrete has been placed the unit shall be rejected .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num transfer of prestress the contractor shall submit details of the proposed method of transfer of prestress to the superintendent for review not less than num days prior to the commencement of tensioning .
a procedure transfer of prestress shall not take place until the concrete has reached the transfer strength stated on the drawings or in the specification and before the steam covers have been removed .
prior to transfer of the prestressing force to the units all tendons shall be tested for tightness and marked at each end of the unit to enable pullin of the tendons to be measured .
tendon pullin shall be recorded and the record shall be supplied to the superintendent on completion of the unit .
transfer shall be gradual continuous and simultaneous from each end of the unit and shall be performed in the shortest practicable time .
transfer by cutting of tendons that are still under tension is not permitted .
if it is proposed to transfer prestress by applying heat the contractor shall submit details of the method of transfer of prestress to the superintendent including i the lengths of free tendons between units and at both ends of the bed ii the locations where the heat will be applied iii the order of severance of tendons and of release of devices for deflecting tendons iv the method of applying heat and the proposed equipment .
heat shall be applied over a portion of the exposed tendon and for a period of time sufficient to ensure that the tendon is entirely relaxed before it is severed .
care shall be taken to prevent heatdamage to the concrete .
heat shall not be applied directly to any part of any tendon within num mm of the concrete surface of the units .
unless otherwise specified on completion of the transfer of prestress the projecting lengths of tendons shall be cutoff flush with the end of the unit using a mechanical cutter .
care shall be taken to avoid damage to the concrete surface .
should damage to the concrete surfaces around the tendon anchorages occur during cutting the contractor shall submit proposals for its repair to the superintendent .
b pullin of tendons the maximum pullin of any tendon shall not exceed num mm .
if pullin exceeds num mm the degree of variation shall be recorded and the cause shall be investigated by the contractor and the results shall be submitted to the superintendent for review .
if the unit does not meet strength and serviceability requirements of the design it shall be rejected .
c hog hog shall be measured at midspan of the unit immediately after transfer of prestress has been completed .
the actual hog shall be compared to the anticipated hog and to the hogs of other units intended for the same structure .
if the hog varies by more than num from the anticipated hog the effects of this variation shall be investigated by the contractor and the results shall be submitted to the superintendent for review .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num if the unit does not meet strength and serviceability requirements of the design or if the geometrical variation between adjacent units is unacceptable it shall be rejected .
unacceptable geometrical variation is defined as a difference in the levels of groups of units or between adjacent units that requires a change in gradeline to accommodate the variation allowing for the required thickness of asphalt surfacing .
num data to be recorded the following data shall be recorded identification number of the unit identification number of each dynamometer gauge and jack calibration certificates for each dynamometer gauge and jack identification details for each tendon sag takeup force or pressure when tendons are marked for measurement of elongation elongation obtained at intervals during tensioning together with corresponding force or pressure gauge reading tendon force or pressure and elongation obtained on completion of tensioning prior to lockoff elongation after release of jack pullin compressive strength of concrete at time of transfer of prestress steam curing charts measurement of hog following transfer of prestress .
completed records shall be forwarded to the superintendent prior to delivery of the prestressed units to the site .
num protection of exposed ends of tendons if the end face of the unit and the tendons are to be cast into a diaphragm the concrete surface surrounding the ends of the tendons and the tendons themselves shall be prepared as required on the drawings .
if the ends of tendons are to remain exposed they shall be wirebrushed to remove rust loose mortar grease dirt and all other harmful material and shall then be coated with a minimum num mm thickness of epoxy compound .
num protection of surfacemounted steel embedments on completion of the unit tapped holes for steel embedments such as tendon holddowns shall be patched with a lowshrinkage mortar or epoxy mortar .
patching shall be finished flush with the surface of the unit .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num installation of precast concrete crown unit culverts this section crossreferences sections num num num num num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies requirements for the installation of reinforced precast concrete crown unit culverts and the associated castinplace concrete including excavation bedding preparation placing of units backfilling and compaction .
num construction procedure hp culvert construction shall not commence until the contractors construction quality procedure and inspection and test plans addressing all requirements of this section have been reviewed by the superintendent .
num tolerances for placement of units the culvert shall be constructed in the location to the alignment cross sectional shape dimensions and levels shown on the drawings with the following tolerances grade num mm in num m num in num overall plan position num mm gap between adjacent units num mm maximum step at joint between adjacent units num mm maximum horizontal or vertical .
num diversion and disposal of water before obstructing or diverting any waterway stream or channel for construction purposes the contractor shall obtain and provide to the superintendent the written approval of the relevant authority to construct the obstruction or diversion .
the contractor shall observe all requirements imposed by the relevant authority and included in the written approval .
the contractor shall a divert or dispose of water where necessary to enable construction of the culvert .
the diversion shall be in the form of temporary channels or temporary pipes .
pumping options shall not be used .
culvert construction shall not commence until water flow has been diverted to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
b devise and install measures to prevent the escape of sediment andor construction materials into the watercourse .
c implement appropriate measures to prevent damage to other parts of the works or surrounding properties that might result from the temporary modification of flows .
the contractor shall rectify any damage that may occur to the works or to adjacent properties to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
the contractor shall produce a written declaration from the relevant authority that the waterway has been left in a satisfactory condition prior to practical completion .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num where a cofferdam is constructed to facilitate construction of the culvert the cofferdam shall be extended below the foundation to prevent loosening of the foundation materials by water rising through the bottom of the excavation and it shall be watertight to prevent seepage of water from the sides and damage to the concrete .
cofferdams shall be adequately braced and the cofferdam details including supporting calculations shall be proof engineered in accordance with section num and section num .
removal of the cofferdam shall be such that the in situ structure is not damaged or weakened .
num excavation excavation shall be as shown on the drawings and shall comply with section num .
the required ground bearing pressure shall be as stated on the drawings .
excavation for the culvert shall include all excavation necessary to provide the specified depth of bedding to place the units and associated walls working space and space required for filling including the removal and replacement of unsuitable material below the level of the underside of the bedding .
the foundation material at the level of the underside of the bedding shall be test rolled in accordance with section num .
foundation material that is soft excessively wet unstable does not comply with the requirements for test rolling or does not achieve the required ground bearing pressure stated on the drawings shall be treated as unsuitable material .
such unsuitable material shall be excavated and replaced with num mm class num crushed rock spread in layers not exceeding num mm compacted thickness and compacted to achieve the required ground bearing pressure stated on the drawings .
when the foundation is in rock all loose rock and pockets of unsound material mud or water shall be removed to expose the sound rock and the surface shall be brought to level as necessary with blinding concrete .
the excavation shall be supported in accordance with section num .
num bedding bedding material shall comply with section num .
bedding for the castinplace concrete base slab shall consist of a compacted layer of num mm class num crushed rock of not less than num mm compacted thickness .
where shown on the drawings this material shall be placed on num mm class num crushed rock spread in layers not exceeding num mm compacted thickness and compacted to achieve the required bearing pressure specified on the drawings .
hp no bedding material shall be placed until the foundation or foundation materials have been inspected and approved by the superintendent .
num castinplace concrete all castinplace concrete for culvert construction shall comply with the drawings and section num .
steel reinforcement shall comply with the drawings and section num .
hp construction of the concrete base slab shall not commence until the bedding has been approved by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num placing crown units the castinplace concrete base slab shall be cured in accordance with section num .
precast concrete units shall not be placed on the concrete base slab prior to num days after casting and shall also ensure that the minimum curing periods of clause num table num are satisfied .
placement of precast concrete units earlier than num days shall comply with clause numl or clause numm for early application of loading .
crown units shall not be moved sideways along the ground during handling or installation .
crown units shall be lifted clear off the ground when moved to prevent inducement of any lateral stresses in the legs .
immediately prior to placing crown units including link slab units the surfaces of the bearing areas which support the crown units or link slab units shall be cleaned wetted and then covered with a sufficiently stiff cementitious mortar to give a continuous finished thickness not less than num mm and not more than num mm after the crown units or link slab units have been placed .
the cementitious mortar shall comply with clause num and shall be mixed with only sufficient water to a moist drypack consistency that can be displaced to provide an even bearing .
the crown units or link slab units shall be placed in position before the mortar has stiffened to ensure that a uniform bearing is achieved .
all surplus mortar shall be removed from the installation before the mortar hardens .
after placing the crown units any gap between the inside bottom of the crown unit leg and the side of the base recess or upstand shall be filled with cementitious mortar .
all mortar joints shall be protected and cured in accordance with section num .
castin lift anchors shall be cut off flush with the concrete substrate and recesses filled to the surface with shrinkage compensating proprietary polymer modified cementitious mortar in accordance with section num .
num covering of external surfaces of joints between adjacent units with fabric cover external surfaces of joints top and sides between adjacent units shall be covered full length with one layer strips of num mm wide synthetic nonwoven fabric factory impregnated with a rubberised bitumen or a neutral petrolatum based compound to seal the joints and prevent loss of fines .
the nonwoven fabric shall have the following properties a breaking tensile strength not less than num n num mm wide strip b thickness not less than num mm and c mass not less than num kgmnum .
the fabric covers shall not be wrinkled and shall be applied on surfaces free of foreign matter in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to ensure effective adhesion onto the outer surfaces of the adjacent units .
in the case of multicell culverts fabric covers are not required where the gap between adjacent cells is filled with cementitious mortar or grout which complies with clause num .
hp the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for review all test certificates related to the supply of fabric cover material at least num days prior to commencement of installation .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num structural filling structural filling shall comply with the drawings and section num .
num construction loading on culverts if construction vehicles or plant are required to cross the culvert at any time before completion of the road construction the contractor shall construct a temporary riding surface over the culvert .
construction vehicles or plant with axle loadeffects including the load due to the actual depth of construction or temporary riding surface that exceed the design loadeffect shall not be permitted to pass over the culvert at any time without the approval of the superintendent .
the contractor shall submit its proposals including supporting calculations to move such vehicles to the superintendent for review not later than two weeks prior .
supporting calculations shall be proof engineered in accordance with section num .
the temporary riding surface shall have a smooth profile to produce a surface free from ruts and bumps .
the depth of the temporary riding surface shall be determined by the contractor but shall be not less than num mm .
construction vehicles or plant shall not pass over the culvert or base slab until at least num days has elapsed following casting of the base slab and provided that the cylinder compressive strength of the base slab concrete has achieved num mpa .
the minimum curing periods of clause num table num shall also be satisfied .
if vibrating rollers are required to work on or move over the temporary riding surface the axle load for determining the required depth of cover shall be the combined static and dynamic load .
the contractor shall maintain the temporary riding surface for the period during which construction traffic is required to pass over the culvert and shall remove it prior to construction of the final embankment and pavement .
the temporary materials may be left in place at the discretion of the superintendent subject to the suitability of the material its density and condition .
num repair of concrete repair of damaged or defective cast in situ or precast concrete shall be undertaken in accordance with section num section num and section num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num fabrication of steelwork this section crossreferences sections num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies requirements for the fabrication of steelwork including materials fabrication welding handling and transport to site of girders columns and other structural members .
the steelwork materials may include either steel plates hotrolled open steel sections welded steel sections and structural steel hollow sections .
the section is limited to the use of steel parent material with a specified minimum yield strength not exceeding num mpa and applies to all work on the steel after manufacture to final size at the originating steel mill .
num referenced documents australian standards as australiannew zealand standards asnzs international standards iso and other documents referred to in this section are listed in section num .
num qualification testing and accreditation the contractor shall nominate in the quality plan the responsibilities names and qualifications of all personnel associated in the planning production and inspection of all welds in the work including welding supervisors welding inspectors and nondestructive testing technicians .
the contractor shall conduct surveillance of the fabrication and welding of structural steelwork in accordance with vicroads technical bulletin tb num .
this surveillance shall be carried out by a person the surveillance officer accredited for surveillance of structural steelwork to vicroads technical bulletin tb num by an organisation certified to asnzs isoiec num .
all welding procedures shall be authorised by and welding supervised by a qualified welding supervisor who is qualified in accordance with clause numa of asnzs num part num .
all welding shall be inspected by a qualified welding inspector who is qualified in accordance with clause num of asnzs num part num .
all nondestructive inspections shall be performed by certified technicians who are qualified in accordance with clause num of asnzs num part num .
testing shall conform to the requirements of the relevant australian standards .
num safety precautions welding shall be carried out in accordance with the safety requirements of asnzs num part num .
precautions shall be taken to protect all persons working or present near welding operations including visitors and the public .
precautions include the control of exposure to arc radiation hot metal and welding fumes as well as the prevention of electric shock and fire .
suitable opaque welding screens shall also be provided to protect workers and other people in the vicinity of welding against stray radiation .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num where nondestructive tests employing industrial xray plant or radioactive isotopes are used special precautions shall be observed to ensure that people in the vicinity are not subjected to direct or scattered radiation .
the relevant regulations governing the use of radioactive sources and xray plant and equipment shall be complied with .
num drawings the contractor shall be responsible for the preparation and verification of shop drawings .
welding symbols used on drawings shall comply with as num .
further to the requirements of section num the contractor shall submit to the superintendent two copies of asconstructed drawings for steelwork .
num dimensional tolerances the dimension of structural members shall be within the tolerances specified on the drawings .
where tolerances are not specified tolerances shall be in accordance with the requirements of as num clause num or as num appendix gnum .
num material compliance and traceability all materials shall comply with the standards and specifications shown on the drawings .
all structural steel associated components and welding consumables shall be manufactured by companies that hold quality systems certification to asnzs iso num .
the contractor shall submit to the superintendent the steel manufacturers certificate of product compliance and related test certificates .
the test certificates shall be related to the steel by trade marks and heat number .
all steel incorporated into the steelwork shall be identified in accordance with the marking requirements as specified in as num asnzs num asnzs num or asnzs num .
the steel shall be traced from the point of manufacture to its final location in the structure .
steelwork shall be deemed to be nonconforming where defects or imperfections due to the manufacture of the steel become evident at any stage of fabrication .
any defects or imperfections in the steel shall be assessed against the freedom from defects clause in as num asnzs num asnzs num or asnzs num .
the contractor shall submit details of any proposal to use weld repaired steel including the proposed location in the structure and postweld inspection requirements at least five working days prior .
weld repaired steel shall include lengths of plates or sections containing welds to make up member lengths with welds not otherwise shown on the drawings .
these welds shall be inspected in accordance with table num .
all grinding of surface imperfections and weld repairs shall produce a surface roughness similar to and blend in with the surface finish of surrounding areas .
grinding marks shall be parallel to the direction of principal stress and shall be produced using a grinding disc of grain size number num or finer .
hp the use of any weld repaired steel including welding to make up member length shall not commence until approval to proceed is given by the superintendent .
unidentified steel shall not be used .
num storage of materials all steel whether fabricated or not shall be stored above the ground and adequately protected against corrosion and damage .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num handling transport and erection the method of handling transporting and erection of the steelwork shall be such that the members are not stressed or deformed beyond the design limit and that there is no damage to the protective coating during these operations .
num cutting cutting of steel shall be carried out by methods that will not be detrimental to the finished product .
cutting shall be by sawing shearing plasma cutting or flame cutting using machines which are mechanically guided and move at uniform speed unless otherwise specified below .
the contractor shall perform cutting of members in accordance with work instructions for cutting .
handheld or handguided cutting shall not be permitted .
shearing or cropping shall not be used for main plates reinforcing plates main gussets splice plates rolled sections and shapes or any steel thicker than num mm .
distortions caused by shearing shall be removed .
plasma or flame cutting procedures for tension members shall not produce heat affected zone hardness exceeding num hv vickers hardness number along the cut edges as evidenced by the vickers hardness testing of a cutting procedure test specimen .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings all plates shall be finished square straight and in plane without burrs or imperfections .
any cut surface not incorporated in a weld shall have a surface roughness not greater than the appropriate value given in table num .
a cut surface to be incorporated in a weld shall comply with asnzs num part num .
table num maximum cut surface roughness application maximum roughness cla m normal applications i.e .
where the face and edges remain ascut or with minor dressing num roughness class num specified in wtia technical note num fatigue application detail categories as specified in as num as num detail category num mpa num roughness class num specified in wtia technical note num as num detail category num mpa num roughness class num specified in wtia technical note num notes num guidance on flame cutting of steels can be obtained in wtia technical note num .
num roughness values may be estimated by comparison with surface replicas such as the wtia flame cut surface replicas .
num cla centre line average method num flame cut surfaces may require some surface grinding to make the surfaces suitable for the application of protective coating treatments .
cut surfaces with roughness exceeding the values in table num shall be repaired by grinding to give a value less than the specified roughness .
grinding marks shall be parallel to the direction of the cut .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num any cut steel surface having notches gouges or other imperfections with a depth of num mm or greater shall be repaired by welding in accordance with asnzs num part num .
notches gouges or other imperfections with a depth of less than num mm shall be removed by machining or grinding and the depression shall be tapered out smoothly for a distance of at least num mm on both sides of the defect .
notches gouges or other imperfections with a depth of less than nummm on an otherwise satisfactory surface are acceptable provided that they are not closer than num times the thickness of the component .
the finished product shall be within the specified tolerances .
where steelwork is to be given protective coating all edges shall be ground or machined to a smooth even surface finish with a minimum radius of num mm .
rolled edges need not be ground provided that the corners are rounded and that the edges are square and straight .
all reentrant corners shall have a radius of not less than num mm and shall be shaped to be smooth and without notches .
num cambering straightening or forming cambering of members and measurement of camber and straightening or forming shall be performed in accordance with a work instruction prepared and issued by the contractor in accordance with the quality system .
hp the work instruction for cambering straightening or forming as appropriate shall be submitted to the superintendent for review at least seven working days prior to commencement of these activities .
in the measurement of camber where the member spans between supports allowance shall be made for the deflection due to self weight .
this allowance shall be calculated by an experienced structural engineer who is eligible for corporate membership of engineers australia .
the methods used to camber or straighten materials shall not reduce the properties of those materials below the minimum property values as specified in the relevant australian standards .
cold forming of materials i.e .
forming at temperatures below numc shall be carried out within the deformation range recommended by the steel manufacturer .
distortion resulting from welding and fabrication may be corrected by either or a combination of mechanical or thermal means provided that the process used does not damage the components or restrict the intended use .
the temperature of the steel shall not exceed numc .
forced cooling by water or other fluids shall not be used until the temperature of the steel is below numc .
num holing round holes may be either a drilled full size or b reamed to full size after subdrilling or subpunching at least num mm undersize or c machine flame or plasma cut to full size and shall be pierced within the removed material .
slotted holes may be either a machine flame or plasma cut or b formed by drilling two adjacent holes and completed by machine flame or plasma cutting .
hand flame cutting of holes shall not be permitted .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num punching of holes to full size will not be permitted for any grade of steel .
subpunching will only be permitted in grade num steel and only in material less than num mm in thickness .
subpunching will not be permitted for grade num lnum or for any higher grade of steel .
all holes shall be cylindrical and perpendicular to the face of the member .
the nominal diameter of a completed hole other than a hole in a base plate shall be num mm larger than the nominal bolt diameter for a bolt not exceeding num mm in diameter and not more than num mm larger for a bolt of greater diameter .
all holes shall be located so that after the holes have been reamed or drilled num of the holes in any group shall show no offset greater than num mm between adjacent thicknesses of metal .
connecting parts shall be assembled and held securely while being drilled or reamed and shall be matchmarked before separating the parts .
all burrs shall be removed including if necessary taking apart assembled parts for the removal of burrs caused by drilling and reaming .
drifting to enlarge holes shall not be permitted .
an oversize or slotted hole shall be permitted provided that the requirements of and limitations on use given in as num appendix gnum are satisfied .
num welding all welding shall be in accordance with asnzs num part num .
all welding of studs shall comply with asnzs num part num .
weld category sp of asnzs num part num shall apply when part num is applicable unless otherwise specified on the drawings or within this specification .
num welding operator qualification welders shall be suitably qualified to carry out the welding procedures on which they will be employed .
qualified welders shall either a have welded the test plate manufactured as part of the weld procedure qualification process or b satisfy the requirements of clause num of asnzs num part num and can produce documented evidence of having successfully and consistently produced welds in compliance with category sp requirements during the previous twelve months or c demonstrate compliance with category sp requirements by means of a weld macro test or ultrasonic or radiographic test for the welding procedures similar to and representative of those procedures to be used in the contract steelwork and including any special or restrictive influences .
num welding procedure qualification for the purpose of qualification welding procedures include procedures for the welds detailed on the drawings welds joining sublengths of material field or site welding stud shear connector welding and tack welding .
all welding procedures shall be qualified as follows a all category sp welds including but not limited to flange butt welds tbutt welds partial penetration welds corner welds field splice welds web to flange welds and all tack welds for these joints method d of clause num of as num part num b all stud welding asnzs num part num section num c other welds category gp clause num of asnzs num part num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the welding of all test pieces shall be done under the direct supervision of the welding supervisor and witnessed by the surveillance officer .
welding procedure qualification tests shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements for weld category sp and not prequalified consumables in table num of asnzs num part num .
these tests shall be performed on test pieces cut from a weld test plate of the full section under consideration and with a minimum welded length of num mm except for a builtup girder web to flange connection in which case the test piece shall be cut from a welded test plate of a minimum welded length of num mm .
when fillet welds are the subject of welding procedure qualification a fillet break sample shall be prepared from the test plate and tested as described in as num .
if the fillet break test is not witnessed by the surveillance officer the test piece shall be submitted with the macro sample for assessment and report .
welding procedures previously qualified and used on other work shall be deemed qualified for use upon certification of the relevant documentary evidence by the surveillance officer provided that a the procedure is being used within the limits of changes in essential variables permitted by asnzs num part num and within the limits of the welding procedure specification and b all qualification documents as required by asnzs num part num are available to support the procedure qualification record and c nondestructive examination records are available to demonstrate successful use of that procedure .
hp documentary evidence of the results of testing and an approved welding procedure specification for each of the weld procedures to be used in the welding of the steelwork shall be submitted to the superintendent for review at least five working days prior to commencement of welding .
hp a photograph of the etched surface of all weld macrotests to as num at a magnification of xnum or greater shall be submitted to the superintendent with the test results .
num specific welding requirements all welding consumables shall be stored handled and used in accordance with asnzs num part num .
electrodes shall be used in accordance with the recommendation of the manufacturer .
preparation assembly preheating and welding shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant sections of asnzs num part num as specified and the following requirements a hydrogen controlled welding processes shall be used for all butt welds for flange and web splices in main girders and columns for extending members for splices in bridge barrier railing and for tbutt welds .
b low hydrogen electrodes shall be used for all manual metal arc butt welds .
c minimum length of tack weld shall be num mm for a num mm fillet weld or num mm for a num mm fillet weld .
d suitable runon and runoff tabs shall be used for all butt welds and web to flange fillet welds .
each weld pass shall be terminated on the runonrunoff tabs at least num mm beyond the edge of the parts to be joined .
e root runs of double sided butt welds shall be backgouged sufficient to ensure full penetration .
a num sample of backgouged preparations shall be examined and reported by the welding inspector .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num f the maximum size of electrode for down hand position welding excepting root runs of multiple pass welds shall be num mm unless the work is in the naturalvee position where num mm electrodes may be used .
for welds made in all other positions and the root runs of multiple pass welds the maximum size of electrode shall be num mm .
g the maximum size of fillet weld which may be made in one pass shall be num mm except that num mm fillet welds may be made in the naturalvee position .
h a single layer of weld metal whether deposited in one pass or made up of several parallel beads shall not exceed num mm in thickness except that the bead at the root may be num mm in thickness if the position of welding and viscosity of the weld metal is such that it does not overflow onto unfused parent metal .
i when welding in the vertical position the direction of welding for all passes shall be upward .
for all vertical up welding the width of the deposited weld metal shall not exceed three times the diameter of the electrode .
j exposed faces of welds shall be made reasonably smooth and regular .
weld size shall conform as closely as practicable to specified dimensions and shall not at any place be less than the specified dimensions .
k butt weld runon and runoff tabs shall be removed after the joint has cooled and the ends of the weld shall be finished smooth and flush with the faces of the abutting parts .
l butt welds shall be finished smooth and flush with abutting surfaces where required for assembly or specified on the drawings or where the welds are to be nondestructively inspected and are on the exterior faces of exterior girders .
m all weld spatter shall be removed from the surfaces of the weld and the parent metal .
n preheat temperatures shall be confirmed by contact thermometers or temperature indicating crayons .
preheat temperatures shall be confirmed if welding is suspended for more than num minutes and if necessary further preheating shall be applied .
o stud welding and stud shear connectors shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num part num. p ground or earth clamps shall be connected directly to the work piece being welded .
num visual inspection of welds the extent of visual scanning and visual inspection of welding shall be in accordance with table num .
the acceptable limits for imperfections shall be in accordance with table num of asnzs num part num .
lengths of weld containing the imperfections exceeding the limits in table num of asnzs num part num shall be repaired .
the repair procedure shall be submitted to the superintendent for review at least five working days prior to commencement of repair work .
table num extent of visual scanning and visual inspection of welding method location of weld percentage of total length or number visual scanning of all welds all welds num visual inspection of category sp welds butt welds tbutt welds including column to base plate web to flange splices butt or tbutt splices between rhs shs or chs sections or hotrolled open sections num field butt welds num column or post to base plate fillet welds num other welds as specified in the special clauses or as required to demonstrate compliance with the limits for imperfections department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num nondestructive inspection of welds the extent of nondestructive inspection using methods of radiography ultrasonics magnetic particle or liquid penetrant shall be in accordance with table num .
all welds shall comply with the acceptance limits for imperfections in welds given in table num or table num of asnzs num part num .
lengths of weld containing imperfections exceeding the limits in table num of asnzs num part num shall be repaired .
the repair procedure shall be submitted to the superintendent for review for at least three working days prior to commencement of repair work .
the full lengths of repaired weld shall be reinspected .
table num extent of nondestructive inspection method location of weld percentage of total length radiography asnzs num part num clause num or ultrasonics asnzs num part num clause num fabricated bridge girders the reinforcement of builtup bridge girder flange butt welds that are to be examined by ultrasonic methods shall be ground smooth and flush .
flange splices num full length web splices num num mm on tension side of each web butt all field butt splices num web to flange splices fillet welded num of the total weld length for welds incorporating steel grade num or a higher steel grade in flange plates num mm or thicker web to flange splices tbutt welded num of the total weld length other components e.g .
sign gantries cantilevers light towers and poles barrier railing etc .
column to base plate joint of cantilever signs sign gantries and lighting towers or masts num butt or tbutt splices between rhs shs or chs sections or hot rolled open sections with flange thickness of less than num mm num where backing material is not used num where backing material is used welds attaching lifting brackets or loops num barrier rail posts to base plate tbutt weld post numbers posts where backing material is used posts where backing material is not used num num num of number num of number num num num of number num of number above num num of number num of number where more than one post from each batch inspected requires repair the inspection rate shall revert to that for posts num barrier railing butt welded splices num where backing material is not used num where backing material is used other butt and tbutt welds including welds to repair or make up member lengths num of total weld length other welds as required to demonstrate compliance with the limits for imperfections noting that the minimum extent of inspection shall be not less than num of weld length magnetic particle asnzs num part num clause num or dye penetrant asnzs num part num clause num field butt welds of main girders num web to flange splices first num girders num of each girder length made up of equal sublengths at each end of the girder over piers and at points of maximum moment subsequent girders one girder in every three num of girder length as above barrier rail post to base plate fillet welded only post numbers inspect for each for full circumference num num num of number num num num of number above num num of number where more than two posts from each batch inspected requires repair the inspection rate shall revert to that for posts num other welds as specified in the special clauses or as required to demonstrate compliance with the limits for imperfections note the percentage of total length is applied to the number of items with each item fully inspected .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num where the total of defective portions exceeds num of the weld length inspected the total weld length for that weld detail shall be inspected .
the contractor shall submit test certificates for all nondestructive inspections to the superintendent for review .
num stud shear connectors stud shear connectors and the welding of these shall conform to the requirements of asnzs num part num .
after welding testing shall be carried out as detailed in table num .
table num welding test requirements method location of weld percentage of total length or number daily preproduction test stud welded shear connectors all members with stud welds daily preproduction test as num part num section num including hammer bend test to num of first two stud welded shear connectors or as necessary .
visual scanning of all stud welds all welds num stud weld ring test made using a steel num kg hammer swung freely to strike the stud in two opposite directions all stud welds num each stud shall give a clear ring .
all studs which do not give a clear sound in the ring test shall be subjected to the num bend test .
stud welded shear connector num bend test all members with stud welds num of studs on each member num in each num including studs with missing weld flash .
studs with less than num of weld flash shall be bent num in a direction opposite to the missing portion of the flash .
if any stud fails all studs on the member or element shall be visually inspected and any stud with less than num of weld flash shall be tested .
num bolting a general all bolts and associated nuts and washers shall comply with the appropriate bolt material standard specified on the drawings .
bolts nuts and washers for property class nums bolting shall be supplied in accordance with as num and as num .
bolts nuts and washers for property class num bolting shall be supplied in accordance with asnzs num .
all material within the grip of the bolt shall be steel and no compressible material shall be permitted within the grip .
each bolt and nut shall be assembled with at least one washer .
one washer shall be provided under the rotated part .
locknuts when specified shall be placed between the main nut and the components being gripped .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the length of a bolt shall extend entirely through the nuts and be such that at least one clear thread shows beyond the nut but not more than num mm beyond the nut .
the shank shall be threaded to such a length that not less than one thread shall be within the grip of the bolt after tightening .
all bolts and nuts shall have a protective coating unless otherwise specified .
the coating on hotdip galvanized bolts and nuts shall comply with as num .
the coating on hotdip galvanized washers shall comply with asnzs num .
where bearing faces of bolted parts are not parallel and exceed a taper of num a suitably tapered washer shall be provided against the tapered surface and placed under the nonrotating component where possible .
b preparation of surfaces in contact all oil dirt loose scale loose rust burrs fins and any other defects on the surfaces of contact that will prevent solid seating of the parts in the snugtight condition shall be removed .
for a frictiontype connection the contact surfaces shall be clean asrolled surfaces or equivalent and in addition to satisfying the provisions above shall be free from paint lacquer galvanizing or other applied finish unless the applied finish has been tested to establish the friction coefficient or slip factor .
values of slip factor for clean steel surfaces and abrasive blasted surfaces coated with zinc silicate coating are given in as num part num .
slip factor for other surfaces shall be evaluated in accordance with the standard test in as num part num. c assembly and alignment of connections to snug tight condition each part of the structure shall be aligned as soon as practicable after erection .
permanent connections shall not be made until sufficient of the structure has been aligned levelled plumbed and temporarily connected to ensure that members will not be displaced during subsequent erection or alignment of the remainder of the structure .
hardened or plate washers shall be used under both the bolt head and nut for any slotted and oversize holes .
during assembly drifting shall not enlarge the holes or distort the metal .
holes which do not match shall be reamed or drilled and if necessary bolts of a larger diameter shall be used .
bolting categories nums and nums shall be installed to the snugtight condition to ensure that the loadtransmitting plates are brought into effective contact .
snugtight is the tightness attained by a few impacts of an impact wrench or by the full effort of a person using a standard podger spanner .
all workshopassembled joints should be match marked before the structure is dismantled .
d assembly of a connection involving tensioned bolts this subclause applies to bolting categories numtb and numtf .
bolts nuts and washers shall be supplied in accordance with asnzs num .
they shall be placed so that the marks identifying a high strength fastener are visible after tightening .
nuts for high strength bolts shall be of the double faced or washer faced hexagon type .
bolts and nuts shall always be tightened in accordance with a prescribed sequence .
where the sequence is not shown on the drawings a staggered pattern shall be adopted with tightening proceeding from the centre of the joint out towards the free edges .
bolt heads and nuts shall be tightened and the nuts shall be effectively locked where specified .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num high strength structural bolts that are to be tensioned may be used temporarily during erection to facilitate the assembly .
however if so used they shall not be finally and fully tensioned until all bolts in the connection have been snugtightened in the correct sequence .
the slackening off and retensioning of fullytightened bolts is not permitted .
bolts shall not be reused .
adjusting tension of previously tensioned bolts that may have been loosened by the tensioning of adjacent bolts is not considered as retensioning e method of tensioning all bolts shall be tightened either by the partturn method or by the use of a directtension indicator device to produce on completion of the joint to not less than the minimum bolt tension appropriate to the particular bolt diameter as specified in table num .
table num minimum bolt tension nominal bolt thread diameter minimum bolt tension kn mnum num mnum num mnum num mnum num mnum num i partturn method of tensioning on assembly all bolts in the connection shall be first tightened to the snugtight condition to ensure that the loadtransmitting plates are brought into effective contact .
the relative position of the bolt and nut shall be established by permanent mark .
bolts shall be finally tensioned by rotating the nut by the amount given in table num .
table num nut rotation for full tensioning from the snugtight condition bolt length underside of head to end of bolt disposition of outer face of bolted parts both faces normal to bolt axis one face normal to bolt axis and other sloped both faces sloped up to and including num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters num turn num turn num turn exceeding num diameters determine by test notes num tolerance on rotation for  turns or less onetwelfth of a turn num over and under tolerance for num turns or more oneeighth of a turn num over and nil under tolerance .
num the bolt tension achieved with the amount of nut rotation specified in table num is deemed to be at least equal to the minimum bolt tension specified in table num .
num nut rotation is the rotation relative to the bolt regardless of the component turned .
num the nut rotations specified are only applicable to connections in which all materials within the grip of the bolt are steel .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num ii directtension indicator device hp approval to use directtension indicator devices shall be obtained from the superintendent at least num days prior to the use of such devices on bolting on the steelwork .
when their use is approved directtension indicator devices shall be used in accordance with the device manufacturers instructions .
a minimum of two calibration tests using a calibrated bolt tension gauge shall be carried out on each day that directtension indicator devices are used .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num protective treatment of steelwork this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general a scope this section covers the requirements for surface preparation coating systems including hot dip galvanizing and paint application for the protective treatment of structural steelwork and metalwork .
the section requires that protective coating works shall be carried out using an agreed coating system that includes the specified level of surface preparation certification of all coatings by the australian paint approval scheme apas and inspection of the surface preparation and coating application by an accredited coatings inspector .
unless otherwise specified all work required to achieve the specified protective treatment of steelwork in the completed structure shall be carried out in accordance with the recommended procedures and guidelines set out in asnzs num. b exclusions this section does not cover the requirements for antigraffiti protection of steelwork which are included in section num antigraffiti protection and graffiti removal .
this section does not cover the removal or partial removal of either existing leadbased coating systems containing more than num by weight of lead or other hazardous materials .
works involving the maintenance or removal of coatings that contain lead compounds or other hazardous substances is specified separately to this section .
all such works shall only be undertaken by coatings contractors who hold accreditation from the painting contractor certification program pccp for class num removal of hazardous coatings .
num standards australian standards as australiannew zealand standards asnzs australian paint approval scheme specifications apas and international standards iso referred to in this section are listed in standard section num .
num definitions definitions of painting terms contained in asnzs num shall apply where these terms are used in the specification .
coating film thickness is specified in microns in accordance with industry practice where one micron is equal to one micrometre .
num accreditation and inspection protective coating works carried out in situ on existing structures shall be preformed by coatings contractors who hold accreditation from the pccp for class num field application atmospheric exposure service .
accreditation is not required for protective coating works including hotdip galvanizing carried out as a controlled workshop application in either an open yard or an enclosed building or facility .
all phases of the surface preparation and coating application shall be monitored and inspected .
coating inspectors shall hold accreditation from an inspector training organisation recognised by the pccp or another certifying body acceptable to the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num information to be supplied hp at least num days prior to commencing the protective treatment of steelwork the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for review the following information on all proposed coating systems a coating system including hotdip galvanizing if specified on the drawings .
if hotdip galvanizing is the only coating required no further information is required to be submitted b type of coatings c name of paint manufacturer d product names of paints e technical data sheets and material safety data sheets msds for all paints f documentary evidence from the manufacturer certifying compliance of paints with relevant specifications g details of work to be carried out by shop treatment and those to be carried out by field treatment h for field works details of work methods containment processes and environment controls i details of solvent cleaning solution and soluble salt removal procedures j abrasive to be used for abrasive blast cleaning k analysis certificate for nonmetallic abrasives and l paint application conditions including but not limited to i the maximum and minimum ambient temperature ii the maximum and minimum temperature of surfaces to be painted iii maximum and minimum if applicable relative humidity iv minimum difference between temperature of surface to be painted and the dew point and v minimum andor maximum time between application of successive coats .
num hotdip galvanized zinc coating for steel components that are detailed on the drawings to be hotdip galvanized this shall be carried out in accordance with as num .
all requirements for hotdip galvanizing for surface preparation application of coating film thickness and acceptance are included in as num .
galvanized components that are subsequently required to be coated with paint shall be coated in accordance with this section .
num coating systems paint coating systems for steelwork shall comply with the requirements nominated on the drawings or as specified elsewhere .
the paint coating system shall comply with the requirements detailed in table num ai for the selected coating system .
these coating systems are designed to achieve num to num years durability to first maintenance under exposure to the low category of atmospheric corrosivity or num to num years durability to first maintenance under exposure to the medium category of atmospheric corrosivity as defined in asnzs num .
all surfaces of the steelwork and metalwork components shall be coated with the specified system or systems and achieve the specified minimum dry film thickness as nominated on the drawings or in the specification .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num for coating works in which the specified or nominated coating system is a single coat of solvent borne inorganic zinc silicate supplied to asnzs num type num this coating shall be applied in accordance with as num except that the minimum dft shall be num microns minimum .
zincbased primers shall not be used in coating systems at locations where the coating will be subjected to water ponding or immersion or to a consistent long timeofwetness irrespective of whether topcoats are to be applied .
where colours are specified colours shall be in accordance with as num .
num coating materials all materials including thinners for the coating system shall be supplied by the same paint manufacturer .
conditions of application and curing shall comply with the requirements of this specification and the paint manufacturers written recommendations .
unless otherwise specified coating materials shall have approval to the apas specification listed in the applicable coating system specification .
the zinc primer used on the works shall have a minimum zinc dust pigment content of num by mass .
all coating materials shall be compatible with each other and the substrate surface on which they are to be applied .
where more than one coat of paint is to be applied the colour of successive coats shall be different to aid application and inspection .
the superintendent shall nominate the colours to be used for topcoats .
all paint of a particular type for a topcoat of a particular structure shall be from the same batch .
all paint shall be stored handled and used in accordance with the paint manufacturers recommendations including for storage conditions shelf life and pot life restrictions and mixing and straining requirements .
the contractor shall record details of all paints used including manufacturers name product name and batch number of all products and results of all testing carried out by the contractor to assess conformity of the product .
num plant and equipment a general all equipment used for the works shall be maintained in good working order and of suitable quality to carry out the specified work .
b blasting and painting equipment oil and water traps shall be fitted to all air lines used for abrasive blast cleaning blowing down after blasting and spraying of paint .
the traps shall be maintained to ensure that clean dry air is supplied for all operations .
num surface preparation a general abrasive blasting shall be carried out in accordance with thework health and safety regulation num .
the surface preparation process shall be managed to ensure that debris emissions comply with environment protection authority and local municipal authoritys requirements .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num steel components shall be free of surface defects including deep pitting weld defects weld spatter slag burrs and fins .
sharp edges shall be ground to a minimum radius of num mm to meet the requirements of preparation grade pnum as defined in iso num .
the steelwork to be coated shall be inspected for compliance with vicroads standard specification section num before protective coating works commences .
surfaces being prepared and coated shall be protected from the weather .
all surfaces to be coated shall be free of all oil and grease .
where appropriate contaminated surfaces shall be cleaned by solvent washing in accordance with as num prior to commencement of surface preparation by abrasive blast cleaning .
all solvents or degreasing agents shall be approved by the coating manufacturer .
anionic detergents shall not be used .
b abrasive blast cleaning all surfaces to be coated shall be cleaned by dry abrasive blasting in accordance with this specification as num parts num and num to achieve the specified class of surface cleanliness and profile .
surface preparation shall be an abrasive blast cleaning process using crushed sharp angular grit .
ilmenite garnet staurolite or steel grit abrasive may be used .
spherical shot or cut wire abrasives are not to be used .
abrasives shall not contain more than one num percent of free crystalline silica nor more than num percent of lead .
materials containing radioactive substances and recycled materials that have not been treated to minimize respirable dust shall not be used as blasting media .
nonmetallic abrasives shall be analysed for the presence of watersoluble materials including salts .
the maximum permitted level of watersoluble salts in samples of the abrasive shall be num parts per million by weight or an upper limit of conductivity of num msm when assessed in accordance with iso num. c requirements for surface preparation class and surface profile the steel surfaces shall be cleaned by abrasive blasting to achieve a minimum of a class num surface finish in accordance with as num part num and part num .
all cleaned surfaces shall be assessed for compliance .
as num part num makes further reference to iso num for guidance of pictorial representation of the class of surface preparation .
all welds edges and other areas with surface imperfections shall be prepared to comply with preparation grade pnum very thorough preparation of iso num .
the surface profile height shall be in the range of num to num microns num to num mm when sampled and measured in accordance with as num .
one evaluation should be performed for each num square metres of cleaned surface with at least three evaluations made for each days production .
the achievement of the surface preparation and the measured surface profile height shall be recorded on the daily inspection report by the contractors representative .
d cleaning after blasting before applying the protective coating all surfaces shall be cleaned free of any traces of blast product and debris by brushing with clean brushes and blowing down with clean dry compressed air or by vacuuming .
air used to blow down surfaces shall be free of oil and moisture .
the effectiveness of the dust removal process shall be verified in accordance with method c of as num .
a result equal or better than rating num shall be achieved on all surfaces .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num e surface cleanliness all surfaces to be painted shall have less than num micrograms per square centimeter gcmnum of chloride contaminants and less than num gcmnum of ferrous ion levels as verified by field analysis using reliable reproducible test equipment .
the procedures for extracting and analysing soluble salts shall be selected from method a of as num .
no oil or grease shall remain on the blasted surface .
testing for the absence of these contaminants shall be as per method b of as num .
testing for the level of surface contaminants shall be carried out at a rate of one test per num square metres of cleaned steel or part thereof .
the results of testing for surface contaminants shall be made available to the superintendent .
if the level of contaminants exceeds the limits specified above the affected area shall be cleaned degreased and reblasted as appropriate in accordance with this specification .
num paint application a workmanship painting shall be performed by competent and experienced personnel .
coatings shall not be applied until the specified standard of surface preparation has been achieved and weather conditions are suitable for coating application and curing .
the manufacturers coating application instructions and the specified film thickness requirements shall be strictly followed .
the applied coating shall be uniform in thickness and appearance and shall be free of defects such as runs blisters pinholes holidays overspray inclusions etc .
all overspray shall be removed by sanding from the surface of primer or intermediate coats before overcoating commences .
the contractor shall record all details of surface preparation paint application ambient weather conditions and film thickness measurements on daily inspection reports .
as a guide suitable forms are available in as num to num .
airborne dust and other foreign matter that settles onto and is protruding from the wet primer or intermediate coat surface shall be removed by sanding without reducing film thickness once the coating has sufficiently hardened .
b time requirements for coating application the application of the first coat of paint or primer paint to a blastcleaned surface shall be completed before discolouration or deterioration of the blastcleaned surface occurs and the application of the primer shall be completed on the same day as surface preparation .
if the required surface preparation standard does not exist at the time that the primer is to be applied the abrasive blasting shall be repeated .
surfaces not primed in accordance with these requirements shall be reblasted at the contractors expense .
applying a part or mist coat of primer to hold the blast is not permitted .
the manufacturers recommended recoating times shall be strictly observed taking into account the existing climatic dryingcuring conditions .
steelwork shall not be handled until the applied coating has dried sufficiently to resist damage .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c application conditions and method of application paint shall be stored mixed and applied under conditions of temperature and humidity recommended by the paint manufacturer for each product .
substrate temperatures shall not be less than numc above the dew point .
when moisturecured urethane singlepack coatings are applied there is no restriction on the dew point temperature differential if the surface is visibly dry and free from condensation .
paint shall be prepared for application in accordance with the paint manufacturers instructions and technical data sheets including requirements for mixing and accurate proportioning for multiple pack paints .
paint shall be applied in accordance with the paint manufacturers instructions and technical data sheets .
unless clearly stated in the technical data sheets submitted as part of the information required by a previous clause the contractor shall submit written documentation prepared by the paint manufacturer setting out the conditions recommended by the manufacturer for the application of each coating material .
d brushing the brush type shall be appropriate to the paint type and the shape and size of component to be painted .
brushes shall be used for working the paint into all corners crevices lapped joints rivets bolt heads nuts washers etc .
these requirements shall apply for each application of primer and topcoat paint .
for all brush applications the primer shall be applied as supplied by the manufacturer without the addition of thinners .
e spraying spraying of paint shall be carried out using conventional airless or airassisted airless spray equipment generally using equipment that meets or equals the recommendations contained in the manufacturers technical data sheets .
for spray application of primer thinning shall be permitted only with the type and amount of thinner specifically recommended by the manufacturer .
f stripe coats stripe coats of all paints shall be applied to all edges welds bolt heads nuts rivets and pitted areas before the application of each full coat except for primers where the stripe coat is to be applied after the full coat is sprayed .
inorganic zinc silicate primers are generally not to be brushapplied as stripe coats .
stripe coats shall be applied by brush or spray .
g support points the complete coating system shall be applied to all locations on the structure that are used for support or bracing points or for scaffolding support points .
the same level of corrosion protection and aesthetics shall be achieved as on adjacent surfaces .
num requirements for film thickness a wet film thickness wet film thicknesses shall be monitored by the contractor to ensure that the nominal dft shall be achieved and that the maximum wet film thickness recommended by the coating manufacturer is not exceeded .
wet film thickness gauges with worn feet shall be discarded .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b dry film thickness dft i calibration of dft gauges a calibrated dft gauge shall be on site at all times .
magnetic electromagnetic magnetic induction and eddy current dft gauges shall be calibrated and used in accordance with the relevant sections of as num .
in all cases calibration and verification of calibration shall be over a smooth polished test plate using non conductive and nonmagnetic test shims or a reference standard as recommended by the gauge manufacturer .
ii correction factors the dft values specified in this specification are based on the use of a magnetic electromagnetic or magnetic induction dft gauge using the appropriate magnetic base reading correction factor as described in as num for the depth of profile for all coating systems or parts of systems with specified minimum dft of up to three times the profile height .
when measuring dft values allowance shall be made for the thickness of the previous coating layer .
iii measurement the contractor shall measure and record the dft of the area coated each day .
the inspection plan for measurement of dft for the area coated on each day shall be in accordance with as num section num for large surface areas .
one point reading shall consist of the average of three individual readings taken at equal spacings along a line num millimeter in length .
iv dry film thickness requirements the primer coat of the coating system shall be applied to achieve at all point locations tested in accordance with as num method a or b the minimum dry film thickness dft as nominated in the applicable coating system specification .
for atmospheric exposure the primer film thickness shall comply with the following requirements num the average of five point readings for each num square metre area of coating surface should not be outside the specified coating dft range and num no single point reading in any num square metre area shall be less than num of the specified minimum coating thickness .
the average dft of intermediate and top coats and the average total coating thickness shall be not less than the specified minimum when tested in accordance with as num except that up to one single point reading in any num square metre area may be less than num of the specified minimum coating thickness and the average of the point readings for each num square metre area of coating inspected shall be within the range specified for the coating layer .
num special areas a frictiongrip joints regardless of the coating system used elsewhere on the structure the faying surfaces of frictiongrip bolted joints shall be treated as follows i dry abrasive blast clean to as num class num with surface profile in the range num to num microns and ii application of one num micron coat of solventborne inorganic zinc silicate primer complying with as num type num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b hollow members the inner surfaces of fully sealed hollow sections shall be dry and free of all loose material .
protective coatings are not required for the internal surfaces of fully sealed hollow sections .
c steelwork in contact with concrete for steelwork in contact with concrete the surface preparation and shopapplied coatings shall extend beyond the edge of the exposed surface in the completed structure for a minimum distance of num mm beneath the concreted portion .
areas further than num mm from the exposed surface shall receive the same surface preparation and primer as the exposed steelwork but the subsequent coatings if any may be reduced to give a total minimum dft of num microns unless specified otherwise .
areas of steelwork in contact with concrete in the completed structure and adjacent to surfaces subject to immersion in water shall receive the full protective treatment as that used on the adjacent exposed steel areas for a minimum distance of num mm from the exposed surface .
d stud shear connectors stud shear connectors shall have a mist coat of the zinc primer applied .
mist coat a thin coat of paint applied by spraying not intended to form a protective film but to enhance the performance of subsequent coatings asnzs num .
num prevention of damage to protective coatings care shall be taken at all times during all phases of construction to avoid damage to the protective treatment of steelwork .
measures shall be taken to ensure that debris from other construction activities such as welding cutting grinding drilling concreting asphalting etc .
shall be prevented from contaminating or damaging the protective coating .
coated steelwork in storage transport or in laydown prior to erection shall be supported positioned and covered so that ponding of water or contact with damp or wet soil or packing materials does not occur .
num repair of protective coatings areas of defective protective coating including field weld areas shall be correctly and fully repaired .
the repair coating shall overlap and blend with the original or intact coating .
the completed work shall be uniform in appearance and colour .
all edges of intact coatings adjacent to damaged areas or uncoated areas shall be tapered from full thickness to zero thickness over a width of num mm by for example brush blasting or sanding with num grit paper creating a feathering of the edge .
if the completed paintwork on the outer face and soffit of the exterior girders and other surfaces in general public view is not uniform in appearance and colour a further light application of the final coat of finishing paint shall be applied at no extra cost for the full length of the member or to the boundary of each affected continuous area if considered necessary by the superintendent .
areas of rust staining staining from hardwood formwork or other staining on painted surfaces shall be removed by solvent or detergent washing .
following the completion of construction works all painted surfaces shall be washed clean using low pressure water washing at a nozzle pressure greater than num mpa num psi and less than num mpa num psi to remove construction debris .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num paint identification the contractor shall provide to the superintendent written confirmation of full details of the paint systems applied to surfaces of steelwork including manufacturers product names nominal dft values and date of application .
for bridge girders the contractor shall neatly and legibly stencil on the inside web of one exterior abutment girder at the abutment end the type of paint and number of coats applied the nominal dft values and the dates of application of coatings .
the superintendent will indicate the exact information to be stenciled .
paint used for stenciling shall be compatible with the topcoat .
section num protective treatment of steelwork table num a inorganic zinc silicate single coat system izsnum to asnzs num table num requirements for coating system activity description class and profile features surface preparation dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with as num to remove all mill scale rust any existing paint coating and foreign matter .
surface preparation grade as num class num .
surface profile height num to num microns .
coating australian standard number and paint type apas specification product typical colour and gloss minimum dry film thickness dft microns application primer coat asnzs num inorganic zinc silicate paint solventborne type num apas num colour grey or pastel green dft num microns minimum application spray application to all surfaces followed by stripe coat as appropriate .
special requirements inorganic zinc silicate paint solventborne type num to asnzs num shall be applied in accordance with as num except that the minimum dry film thickness shall be num microns minimum .
total dft num microns minimum repair treatment small areas if applicable remove affected coating prepare surface and area edges and apply asnzs num organic zincrich primer large areas reprepare by abrasive blasting and recoat with asnzs num inorganic zinc silicate paint solventborne type num as for full system above .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num protective treatment of steelwork table num b inorganic zinc silicate mio epoxy mio polyurethane three coats system purnum to asnzs num table num requirements for coating system activity description class and profile features surface preparation dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with as num to remove all mill scale rust any existing paint coating and foreign matter .
surface preparation grade as num class num .
surface profile height num to num microns .
coating australian standard number and paint type apas specification product typical colour and gloss minimum dry film thickness dft microns application primer coat asnzs num inorganic zinc silicate paint solventborne type num apas num colour grey or pastel green dft num microns minimum application spray application to all surfaces followed by stripe coat as appropriate intermediate coat asnzs num highbuild epoxy twopack apas num colour metallic grey or bridge grey dft num microns minimum application stripe coat followed by spray application to all surfaces third coat top coat finish coat asnzs num high build mio polyurethane twopack apas num colour as specified semigloss dft num microns minimum application stripe coat followed by spray application to all surfaces total dft num microns minimum special requirements micaceous iron oxide mio shall be included in the paint formulation for both the intermediate and top coats repair treatment small areas if applicable remove affected coating prepare surface and area edges and apply asnzs num organic zincrich primer followed by top coats large areas as for full system above department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num protective treatment of steelwork table num c organic zinc mio epoxy mio polyurethane three coats system purnum to asnzs num table num requirements for coating system activity description class and profile features surface preparation dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with as num to remove all mill scale rust any existing paint coating and foreign matter .
surface preparation grade as num class num .
surface profile height num to num microns .
coating australian standard number and paint type apas specification product typical colour and gloss minimum dry film thickness dft microns application primer coat asnzs num organic zincrich primer apas num colour grey or pastel green dft num microns minimum application stripe coat as appropriate followed by spray application to all surfaces .
intermediate coat asnzs num highbuild epoxy twopack apas num colour metallic grey or bridge grey dft num microns minimum application stripe coat followed by spray application to all surfaces finish coat asnzs num high build mio polyurethane twopack apas num colour as specified semigloss dft num microns minimum application stripe coat followed by spray application to all surfaces total dft num microns minimum special requirements the zinc primer used on the works shall have a minimum zinc dust pigment content of num by mass in accordance with iso num .
micaceous iron oxide mio shall be included in the paint formulation for both the intermediate and top coats .
some colours of the polyurethane topcoat may require additional coats to achieve full opacity .
repair treatment as for full system above .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num protective treatment of steelwork table num d moisturecure urethane zinc mcu mio intermediate mcu mio polyurethane topcoat three coats system mcunum to asnzs num table num requirements for coating system activity description class and profile features surface preparation dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with as num to remove all mill scale rust any existing paint coating and foreign matter .
surface preparation grade as num class num .
surface profile height num to num microns .
coating australian standard number and paint type apas specification product typical colour and gloss minimum dry film thickness dft microns application primer coat as num moisture cure urethane single pack systems zinc primer with not less than num zinc in the dry film apas num colour grey dft num microns application stripe coat as appropriate followed by spray application to all surfaces .
intermediate coat as num moisture cure urethane single pack systems aromatic micaceous iron oxide pigmented intermediate coat apas num colour as specified dft num microns application stripe coat followed by spray application to all surfaces .
finish coat as num moisture cure urethane single pack systems aliphatic micaceous iron oxide pigmented polyurethane topcoat apas num colour as specified dft num microns application stripe coat followed by spray application to all surfaces .
total dft num microns minimum special requirements micaceous iron oxide mio shall be included in the paint formulation for both the intermediate and top coats repair treatment as for full system above department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num protective treatment of steelwork table num e zinc metal system zinc only system to asnzs num requirements for coating system activity description class and profile features surface preparation dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with as num to remove all mill scale rust any existing paint coating and foreign matter .
surface preparation grade as num class num .
surface profile height num to num microns .
coating australian standard number and paint type apas specification product typical colour and gloss minimum dry film thickness dft microns application primer coat australian standard number not applicable zinc metal system paint single component apas num e.g .
zinga liquid galvanizing colour grey dft num microns minimum application stripe coat as appropriate followed by spray application to all surfaces .
finish coat australian standard number not applicable zinc metal system paint single component apas num e.g .
zinga liquid galvanizing colour grey dft num microns minimum application spray application to all surfaces special requirements total dft num microns minimum repair treatment small areas if applicable remove affected coating prepare surface and area edges and apply zinc metal system paint .
large areas reprepare by abrasive blasting and recoat with zinc metal system paint as for full system above .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num protective treatment of steelwork table num f zinc metal system with topcoat system to asnzs num requirements for coating system activity description class and profile features surface preparation dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with as num to remove all mill scale rust any existing paint coating and foreign matter .
surface preparation grade as num class num .
surface profile height num to num microns .
coating australian standard number and paint type apas specification product typical colour and gloss minimum dry film thickness dft microns application primer coat australian standard number not applicable zinc metal system paint single component apas num e.g .
zinga liquid galvanizing colour grey dft num microns minimum application stripe coat as appropriate followed by spray application to all surfaces .
intermediate coat australian standard number not applicable uv resistant solvent borne acrylic finishing coat single component e.g .
zingametall acryltop colour as specified dft num microns minimum application stripe coat as appropriate followed by spray application to all surfaces .
finish coat australian standard number not applicable uv resistant solvent borne acrylic finishing coat single component e.g .
zingametall acryltop colour as specified dft num microns minimum application spray application to all surfaces special requirements total dft num microns minimum repair treatment small areas if applicable remove affected coating prepare surface and area edges and apply zinc metal system paint .
large areas reprepare by abrasive blasting and recoat with zinc metal system paint as for full system above .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num protective treatment of steelwork table num g coating of hotdip galvanized steel to be coated with epoxy primer and polyurethane system hdgnumpnum to asnzs num table num requirements for coating system activity description class and profile features initial treatment steelwork hotdip galvanized to as num surface preparation one of a light abrasive blast cleaning sweep blasting in accordance with as num appendix d or asnzs num appendix i .
surface preparation grade clean and texture the hotdip galvanized surface to as num class num and ensure that no more than num microns of zinc is removed .
surface profile height num to num microns .
b treatment as specified by the paint manufacturer .
coating australian standard number and paint type apas specification product typical colour and gloss minimum dry film thickness dft microns application primer coat asnzs num epoxy zinc phosphate primers twopack apas num colour as specified dft num microns minimum application stripe coat as appropriate followed by spray application to all surfaces .
finish coat asnzs num full gloss polyurethane twopack apas num colour as specified dft num microns minimum application stripe coat followed by spray application to all surfaces .
total dft num microns minimum special requirements surfaces where the coating will be subjected to a consistent long timeof wetness or a marine environment shall have the total film build increased to a minimum of num microns using a high build epoxy twopack to asnzs num as the finish coat system hdgnumpnum of asnzs num .
repair treatment repair of galvanized coating if applicable remove affected coating prepare surface and area edges and apply asnzs num organic zincrich primer followed by top coats .
repair of paint coating only as for full system above .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num protective treatment of steelwork table num h coating of hotdip galvanized steel to be coated with mcu primer and mcu topcoat system hdgnumpnum to asnzs num table num requirements for coating system activity description class and profile features initial treatment steelwork hotdip galvanized to as num surface preparation light abrasive blast cleaning sweep blasting in accordance with as num to clean and texture hotdip galvanized surface .
surface preparation grade visually meeting as num class num .
surface profile height num to num microns .
coating australian standard number and paint type apas specification product typical colour and gloss minimum dry film thickness dft microns application primer coat asnzs num moisture cure urethane single pack systems aromatic micaceous iron oxide pigmented primer apas num colour as specified dft num microns minimum application stripe coat followed by spray application to all surfaces finish coat asnzs num moisture cure urethane single pack systems aliphatic micaceous iron oxide pigmented polyurethane topcoat apas num colour as specified dft num microns minimum application stripe coat followed by spray application to all surfaces total dft num microns minimum special requirements surfaces where the coating will be subjected to a consistent long timeof wetness or a marine environment shall have the total film build increased to a minimum of num microns .
micaceous iron oxide mio shall be included in the paint formulation for both the intermediate and top coats .
repair treatment repair of galvanized coating if applicable remove affected coating prepare surface and area edges and apply asnzs num mcu zincrich primer followed by top coats .
repair of paint coating only as for full system above .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num protective treatment of steelwork table num i requirements for coating system organic zinc acrylic or epoxy polysiloxane two coats system pslnum to asnzs num table num activity description class and profile features surface preparation dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with as num to remove all mill scale rust any existing paint coating and foreign matter .
surface preparation grade as num class num .
surface profile height num to num microns .
coating australian standard number and paint type apas specification product typical colour and gloss minimum dry film thickness dft microns application primer coat asnzs num organic zincrich primer apas num colour grey or pastel green dft num microns minimum application stripe coat as appropriate followed by spray application to all surfaces .
finish coat australian standard number not applicable apas num atmospheric durability organic modified acrylic polysilxane or epoxy polysiloxane twopack colour as specified gloss dft num microns minimum application stripe coat followed by spray application to all surfaces .
total dft num microns minimum special requirements the zinc primer used on the works shall have a minimum zinc dust pigment content of num by mass in accordance with iso num .
repair treatment as for full system above .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num buried corrugated metal steel structures this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the supply of buried corrugated metal structures bcms of the following types bolted steel plates or sheets in accordance with asnzs num longspan corrugated steel structures in accordance with asnzs num .
except as otherwise stated in bridge technical note btnnum buried corrugated metal structures all bcms shall be designed and constructed in accordance with as num the australian standard for buried corrugated metal structures .
all bcms shall be provided with a reinforced concrete invert lining in accordance with bridge technical note btnnum buried corrugated metal structures .
bcms made from continuous helicallywound galvanised steel strips with lockseams or other proprietary helicallywound profiles are not permitted .
bcms are not permitted if the culvert will be permanently inundated and water will be in constant contact with the galvanised steel structure .
bcms shall have a design life of num years .
at the end of the design life the structure shall have a residual thickness of steel with sufficient capacity to safely support the design dead and live loads current at the time of design in accordance with the relevant australian standard .
bcms of less than num mm diameter are not permitted .
where the required design life can not be achieved using steel consideration must be given to the use of alternative materials for example aluminium or precast concrete pipes and box culverts .
num standards the definitions and requirements in asnzs num buried corrugated metal structures shall apply where appropriate .
num material compliance materials shall comply with the requirements of the relevant australian standard .
steel plates shall be hotdip galvanised in accordance with asnzs num .
materials shall be tested for conformity with the specified requirements .
testing of materials shall be conducted by a nataaccredited laboratory or an equivalent testing establishment that meets with the approval of the superintendent .
the contractor shall submit the following to the superintendent for each lot of steel plate material used in the fabrication of the culvert test certificates for the required material properties in accordance with the relevant australian standard the manufacturers certificate of compliance of the material with the relevant australian standard .
test certificates for other materials shall be supplied to the superintendent on request .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num all materials shall be traceable from the point of manufacture to the point of use and appropriate supporting documentation shall be supplied to the superintendent on request .
num cutting and forming plates the edges of plates shall be cut straight and finished square .
distortions caused by cutting or shearing shall be removed .
any sharp edges shall be ground or machined to a smooth even surface finish with a minimum radius of num mm .
rolled edges need not be ground provided that the corners are rounded and that the edges are square and straight .
plates shall be mechanically curved to the required radius in order to ensure that the specified crosssectional dimensions of the finished culvert are achieved in a manner that does not damage the material or its coating .
num end treatment ends of culverts shall be plain .
if required skewed stepped bevelled and stepbevelled ends shall be fabricated to the shapes and dimensions shown on the drawings .
num minimum thickness bcms shall be designed in accordance with asnzs num and shall be made from galvanised steel with a minimum wall thickness of num mm which shall be shown on the drawings .
otherwise for structures designed by the contractor bcms shall be designed in accordance with asnzs num and shall be made from galvanised steel with a minimum wall thickness of num mm .
hp not less than four weeks before delivery of the bcms to site the contractor shall submit details of the proposed thickness of culvert wall to the superintendent for review .
the submission shall include calculations for the thickness required to support dead and live loads calculations for both the earthside and waterside surfaces that demonstrate how the design life requirement will be achieved the assumed annual rates of loss of galvanising for both soilside and waterside surfaces together with the assumed annual rates of loss of steel for both soilside and waterside surfaces when the galvanising has been expended details of the soil and water chemistry ph and soil resistivity obtained from site investigations and how these have been used in the determination of thickness considerations of present and future use of the bcms and upstream land landuse that may effect soil and water chemistry and that can reasonably be determined at the time of design drawings showing the bcms the structural concrete lining complete with details of inlet and outlet structures cutoff and endwalls evidence that the design has been proofchecked by a proofengineer who is prequalified in accordance with the vicroads prequalification scheme or approved by the superintendent .
design calculations shall ignore the effect of the concrete lining required by clause num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num bolts temporary bolts may be used to draw plates together during assembly but shall be replaced by the permanent bolts in the final assembly .
bolts and nuts shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num .
num handling storage and assembly components shall be handled stored and assembled with care to avoid distortion and damage to the galvanised surfaces or other coatings .
culverts shall be assembled in accordance with asnzs num .
if prefabricated culverts are transported in completed lengths temporary bracing shall be used as necessary to prevent permanent distortion .
prefabricated culverts and bevelled ends shall be internally braced during transport and lifting as necessary to prevent permanent distortion of the culvert .
should damage or permanent deformation occur to a completed structure it shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
failing that the distorted length of culvert or plates shall be replaced .
damage to galvanised surfaces shall be repaired in accordance with asnzs num .
other coatings shall be repaired in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
galvanised components shall be transported and stored in conditions that minimise the risk of zinc oxide formation otherwise known as white rust or wetstorage stain .
the contractor shall inspect all galvanised components for the presence of white rust .
the contractors inspection report together with its proposals for the removal of zinc oxide shall be submitted to the superintendent for review .
superficial deposits of zinc oxide shall be removed prior to the incorporation of the galvanised components into the structure .
if the galvanised coating thickness has been reduced below the appropriate minimum requirement of asnzs num remedial action shall be taken to restore the thickness of the galvanised coating to the minimum requirement .
the contractor shall submit its proposals for restoration of the required galvanised coating thickness to the superintendent for review .
num invert lining the inverts of all culverts shall be lined with reinforced concrete in accordance with the drawings and bridge technical note btn num buried corrugated metal structures .
the extent of the concrete invert lining shall be determined in accordance with bridge technical note btn num buried corrugated metal structures .
lining concrete shall comply with section num .
reinforcement for use with concrete linings shall comply with section num and shall be galvanised in accordance with asnzs num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num concrete lining shall not be cast until num days has elapsed following the completion of backfilling and road construction .
the lining together with its attachments to the culvert walls shall be of sufficient strength to enable the culvert to support the design loads in the event that the steel loses its loadcarrying capacity .
attachment of reinforcement to the culvert walls shall be by welding .
the temperature of the steel components during welding must not exceed numc .
galvanised surfaces which have been damaged by heat must be repaired by the application of two coats of a proprietary zincrich coating which complies with clause num of asnzs num .
welding must be in accordance with as num using a qualified welder together with appropriate welding materials and welding procedures .
threaded fasteners may be used for attachment to the culvert walls provided that a continuous structural connection between the concrete lining and the culvert wall can be achieved .
fasteners for attachment shall be hotdip galvanized .
holes for fasteners shall be drilled deburred and treated with two coats of zincrich paint .
if required secondary coatings shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
culverts with secondary coatings shall be handled stored and assembled in accordance with clause num .
num foundations aprons headwalls wingwalls and cutoff walls headwalls wingwalls foundations for arches aprons beaching and cutoff walls shall be constructed in accordance with the drawings .
num bedding fill materials and filling fill material shall be class a to section num graded in accordance with table numb of asnzs num with a ph in the range of num to num and a minimum resistivity of num ohm.cm .
the levels of chloride and sulphate ions in the fill material shall not exceed num ppm and num ppm by weight respectively in accordance with asnzs num .
filling and installation shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num .
fill shall be laid progressively to both sides of the culvert and shall be compacted by mechanical means with the appropriate level of energy to achieve the required density without permanent distortion or damage to the culvert .
to avoid permanent distortion or damage to the culvert fill over the structure shall be compacted with lowenergy devices until the depth of fill is to the lesser of half the culvert diameter or num mm .
internal bracing shall be provided during filling as necessary to prevent distortion or damage to the culvert .
department of state growth vicroads august num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num num construction traffic if construction vehicles or plant are required to cross the culvert at any time before completion of the road construction the contractor shall construct a temporary riding surface over the culvert .
construction vehicles or plant with axle loadeffects including the load due to the actual depth of construction or temporary riding surface that exceed the design loadeffect shall not be permitted to pass over the culvert at any time .
the contractor shall submit proposals including supporting calculations to the superintendent for the movement of permitted vehicles for review not later than two weeks prior to the proposed movement .
supporting calculations shall be proofchecked in accordance with the requirements for proofchecking stated in clause num .
the temporary riding surface shall have a smooth profile with a surface free from ruts and bumps .
the depth of the temporary riding surface shall be determined by the contractor but shall be not less than num mm .
if vibrating rollers are required to work on or move over the temporary riding surface the axle load for the purposes of this clause shall be the combined static and dynamic load of the roller .
the contractor shall maintain the temporary riding surface for the period during which construction traffic is required to pass over the culvert and shall remove it prior to construction of the final embankment and pavement .
the temporary materials may be left in place at the discretion of the superintendent subject to the suitability of the material its density and condition .
on completion of the concrete invert lining in accordance with clause num construction vehicles or plant shall not pass over the culvert until at least num days has elapsed following casting of the concrete invert lining or alternatively seven days has elapsed following casting provided that the cylinder strength of the concrete has achieved num mpa .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num sheet piles this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the requirements for the supply and installation of steel sheet piles for permanent works .
this section also covers specific requirements for sheet pile retaining structures .
the supply and installation of sheet piles for temporary works is covered by section num and section num .
num definitions sheet piles interlocking steel sections driven to form a continuous line .
sheet piles may be used for landscaping erosion control containment barriers for contaminated materials noise attenuation walls and retaining structures .
sheet pile retaining structure a cantilever or anchored retaining structure constructed from sheet piles num m or greater in height and steeper than numhnumv or which would result in a traffic or pedestrian hazard or damage to neighbouring property upon failure .
num sheet piles sheet piles shall be manufactured in accordance with asnzs num .
steel used for the manufacture of sheet piles shall be minimum grade num .
sheet piles that have previously been used for temporary works shall not be used for permanent works .
the dimensions and properties of sheet piles shall comply with the relevant requirements of table num .
table num dimensions and properties of sheet piles length m width mm thickness mm section modulus cmnumm mass kgm interlock to be sealed number sheet piles may be cut to length on site as required by saw cutting or flame cutting .
the ends of all sheet piles shall be square straight and in plane without burrs or imperfections .
interlock seals shall be applied to the sheet piles before installation where specified .
sheet piles shall not be coated for any other purpose prior to installation .
hp prior to the commencement of work the contractor shall supply a certificate of compliance from the manufacturer confirming that the sheet piles comply with this specification for approval by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num sheet pile installation a transport and handling care must be taken to ensure that sheet piles are not damaged during transport and handling .
handling holes shall not be cut in sheet piles .
sheet piles that are damaged shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
sheet piles that the superintendent considers can not be repaired shall be replaced .
b marking sheet piles shall be clearly marked at num mm intervals starting from the sheet pile toe .
c driving guide and sheet pile threader a driving guide shall be used to ensure that sheet piles achieve the specified tolerance of position and verticality .
the driving guide shall be constructed from steel and shall be fixed in place to prevent movement during driving of sheet piles .
a sheet pile threader shall be used to ensure that sheet piles are interlocked prior to the commencement of sheet pile driving .
the details of the driving guide and sheet pile threader shall be submitted to the superintendent for review not less than num days prior to commencement .
d driving system sheet piles shall be driven to the level shown on the drawings without causing damage to the sheet piles and without inducing ground vibrations with a peak particle velocity greater than num mms .
sheet piles may be driven with a vibratory pile driver or with a drop hammer .
if a drop hammer is used the drop hammer shall be guided by a helmet fixed to the head of the sheet pile the sheet pile head shall be protected by a cushioning material and the drop height shall not exceed num m to avoid damage to the sheet pile .
the contractor shall provide details of the driving system including the frequency and centrifugal force of vibratory pile drivers and the make model and rated energy of drop hammers and the dimensions and materials of the helmet and cushion .
these details including calculations which demonstrate that the proposed driving system is capable of driving the sheet piles to the level shown on the drawings shall be submitted to the superintendent for review not less than num days prior to commencement .
e driving sequence all sheet piles shall initially be driven halfway to the level shown on the drawings .
hp on completion of driving the sheet piles halfway to the level shown on the drawings the contractor shall obtain the approval of the superintendent to drive the sheet piles to the level shown on the drawings .
the sheet piles shall then be driven to the level shown on the drawings .
sheet piles drawn down below the level shown on the drawings by the driving of adjacent sheet piles shall be extended .
sheet piles that can not be driven to the level shown on the drawings shall be cut off subject to approval of the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num f extension of sheet piles sheet piles shall be extended in situ by means of full strength butt welds .
welding of joints shall be undertaken in accordance with asnzs num .
the contractor shall provide details of the welding procedure for review by the superintendent not less than num days prior .
hp welding shall not commence until the welding procedure has been qualified as specified in section num. g acceptance of sheet piles the following tolerances shall apply to sheet piles after driving i deviation from the plan position shall not exceed num mm at the sheet pile head ii deviation from the vertical shall not exceed num mm per metre length of sheet pile .
where a sheet pile is not interlocked is damaged during driving exceeds the specified tolerances of position and verticality or is otherwise defective the sheet pile shall be repaired or replaced subject to the approval of the superintendent .
num coating of sheet piles protective coatings applied to exposed sections of sheet piles after installation shall comply with section num .
antigraffiti coatings applied to exposed sections of sheet piles after installation shall comply with section num .
num sheet pile retaining structures sheet pile retaining structures shall be designed in accordance with as num and the following requirements a the design life shall be num years b the worst case depth of scour anticipated over the design life shall be used to determine the retained height or alternatively scour protection shall be installed and the retained height fixed at the underside of the scour protection c the minimum thickness required for structural strength shall be increased to allow for uniform corrosion and resulting loss of section over the design life .
the corrosion allowance shall be determined in accordance with as num .
alternative corrosion protection systems including higher grade steel protective coatings applied before or after installation and cathodic protection systems shall not be used instead of the corrosion allowance and shall not be considered when determining the corrosion allowance d weep holes consisting of num mm diameter holes drilled through the centre of exposed sections of sheet piles after installation shall be provided on a minimum num m by num m centre grid .
strikethrough the remainder of this clause if not requiredin addition for sheet pile retaining structures with a retained height of num m or more the design shall be proofengineered by a proof engineer who shall be prequalified at level pe in accordance with the vicroads prequalification scheme or approved by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num supply of elastomeric bearings num general this section covers the manufacture and supply of laminated elastomeric bearings .
the manufacture and supply of elastomeric bearings shall be in accordance with as num bridge design bearings and deck joints .
num materials materials and components for use in bearings shall comply with as num bridge design bearings and deck joints .
the completed bearings shall satisfy the structural performance and dimensional requirements of the design .
num tolerances dimensional tolerances for bearings shall be in accordance with as num bridge design bearings and deck joints appendix c. num bearing tests bearings shall comply with the testing requirements of as num bridge design bearings and deck joints and shall be tested in accordance with appendix d. all bearings shall be tested in compression and examined for splits uneven bulging delamination and other irregularity of shape .
bearings that are split or which exhibit uneven bulging delamination or other irregularity of shape shall be rejected .
representative samples of bearings shall be subjected to shear stiffness testing .
elastomeric bearings that do not meet shear stiffness testing criteria shall be rejected .
hp copies of all test certificates shall be provided to the superintendent for review .
num traceability bearings shall be marked with a unique identification number and with the as part number as listed in as num bridge design bearings and deck joints appendix a .
it shall be possible to identify bearings with the batch number of the elastomer and the associated test certificate number via the unique identification number .
bearings shall be traceable from the point of manufacture to their final location via the unique identification number .
copies of all traceability documents shall be provided to the superintendent for review .
num handling packing and storage elastomeric bearings shall be transported stored and handled in a manner that prevents damage to the bearings .
bearings that are damaged shall be rejected .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num pot type confined elastomeric bearings num general this section covers the requirements for the design manufacture testing protective treatment supply and installation of confined elastomeric pot type bearings .
pot type bearing shall consist of a discshaped elastomeric pad confined within a steel pot and piston .
horizontal movement if required shall be provided by means of a polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe pad sliding against a smooth truly plane stainless steel mating surface .
bearings shall be designed to support the loads and to accommodate the movements and rotations shown on the drawings .
this section also applies to the manufacture protective treatment and supply of any bearing attachment plate assemblies required to anchor the pot type bearing to a substructure or superstructure component .
num standards standards are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num .
as num accelerated ageing as numf resistance of lining and cover to ozone as num ptfe skived tape as num ptfe cast sheet as num hotdip galvanized coatings on threaded fasteners as num flat metal washers for general engineering purposes as num high strength steel bolts with associated nuts and washers as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces abrasive blast cleaning of steel as num methods of test for elastomers as num tension testing of vulcanised rubber as num tear resistance of vulcanised rubber as num compression set of vulcanised rubber under constant deflection as num indentation hardness of rubber and plastics by means of a durometer as num structural steel hotrolled plates floorplates and slabs as num paints for steel structures part num inorganic zinc silicate paint as num bridge design astm anumanumm specification for general requirements for flatrolled stainless and heatresisting steel plate sheet and strip unless otherwise stated the applicable issue of a standard shall be the issue current at the date one week before the closing date for tenders .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num information to be supplied the contractor shall submit the following information for each bearing type a name of manufacturer b rated load and movement capacities c overall height of bearing d diameter and thickness of elastomeric disc e dimensions and thickness of ptfe sliding pad for sliding bearings f previous performance history .
hp at least num working days before the proposed commencement of manufacture the contractor shall forward to the superintendent a certificate together with necessary calculations from a practising structural engineer experienced in the design of pot bearings who is eligible for corporate membership of the institution of engineers australia which details the information required above and which verifies their suitability and likely satisfactory performance and their compliance with this part of the specification .
num design requirements a pot and elastomer each bearing shall be proportioned so that at the maximum serviceability limit state vertical load shown on the drawings the average pressure on the elastomeric disc does not exceed num mpa .
the dimensions of the elastomeric disc shall be such that the ratio of the diameter to thickness is less than num and at the design rotation the vertical strain at the edge of the disc does not exceed num .
the requirements of as num shall be complied with viz .
shift in the centre of pressure due to rotation measures to prevent extrusion of the elastomer and anchorage of the bearing .
b sliding bearings for sliding bearings the ptfe pad shall have a minimum thickness of num mm and a maximum thickness of num mm and shall be restrained by recessing it into the backing material to a depth of half the thickness of the ptfe .
the mating surface shall consist of stainless steel sheet with a minimum thickness of num mm .
the backing material to the ptfe and mating surface shall be sufficiently rigid to ensure that the ptfe layer is uniformly loaded .
the average pressure on the ptfe layer shall not exceed num mpa under the minimum vertical load and num mpa under the maximum vertical load .
the peak pressure under combined vertical and side loads and concurrent rotation shall not exceed num mpa under minimum vertical load and num mpa under maximum vertical load .
all pressures are related to serviceability limit state loads .
guides where provided on sliding bearings shall be recessed into the top bearing plate to withstand the design forces shown on the drawings .
the guide shall be faced with a stainless steel sliding surface fixed along the length of the guide and the opposing surface on the bearing faced with filled ptfe or similar material which shall be fixed to the face of the bearing .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num properties of materials a elastomer the elastomer shall be tested in accordance with the australian standards shown in table num and the properties of the compounded and cured elastomeric material shall comply with the requirements of table num .
three samples shall be tested from every num kg batch or part thereof of mixed elastomer material and each sample shall meet the requirements specified .
table num properties of elastomer property requirements method of test hardness num num as num ultimate tensile strain num min as num tensile strength num mpa min as num tear resistance num knm min as num die.b compression set num max as num num hours numc ozone resistance no cracking visible by eye after num hours .
as numf num strain at numc numc and num ppm accelerated ageing maximum permissible change in properties hardness num tensile strength num ultimate tensile strain num as num num hrs at numc evidence of recent testing of identical materials may be accepted by the superintendent .
b ptfe polytetrafluoroethylene the ptfe sliding pad shall consist of unfilled ptfe sheet .
the resin used in the manufacture of ptfe sliding pads shall be num virgin material with a relative density between num and num and durometer hardness of num to num .
the requirements of as num grade a or as num grade a shall be complied with .
the ptfe pad shall be permanently lubricated in accordance with clause numa to e of as num part num. c steel other than stainless steel the steel other than stainless steel used in the manufacture of the bearing shall conform to as num .
all high strength bolts shall comply with as num and washers with as num. d stainless steel the stainless steel used in the manufacture of the sliding surface shall conform to as num numb or ba finish having a surface finish not rougher than num micron cla and a brinell hardness not less than num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num design and fabrication design and fabrication where applicable shall be in accordance with as num .
num testing of bearings a general a minimum of one representative bearing in ten num of each size and type to be used in the works shall be tested .
b equipment for testing testing shall be carried out at a laboratory accredited by nata for those test methods .
the equipment for testing bearings shall be capable of determining compressive and shear loads to an accuracy of num and deflections to within num. c test loads bearings shall be loaded in compression to num times the maximum vertical serviceability limit state load shown on the drawings and the load shall be maintained for a minimum of three minutes .
bearings which are required to resist lateral forces shall be further tested to num times the lateral serviceability limit state load stated on the drawings while loaded in compression to the minimum vertical serviceability limit state load shown on the drawings .
the load shall be maintained for three minutes .
d test for coefficient of friction in addition to testing to the requirements of clause numc for vertical and lateral forces the coefficient of friction of sliding surfaces of sliding bearings shall be determined .
the value of the coefficient of friction shall be taken as the average result of five tests and shall be determined for both maximum and minimum vertical serviceability limit state loads shown on the drawings .
the sliding surfaces shall be tested as manufactured with the lubrication reservoirs filled with the long life silicone grease used to permanently lubricate the bearings .
the friction coefficient of the sliding surfaces shall not exceed the values given in table num for the relevant stresses on the ptfe surface .
values shall be interpolated for intermediate bearing pressures .
table num friction coefficient of sliding surfaces bearing pressure num mpa num mpa num mpa num mpa or greater friction coefficient num num num num e test for rotation one bearing of each type shall be tested for rotation to the value shown on the drawings rounded upwards to the nearest num radians while being loaded in compression to the maximum vertical serviceability limit state load shown on the drawings .
bearings which are required to resist lateral forces shall also have the specified lateral serviceability limit state load stated on the drawings applied during this test .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num f failure to meet requirements after testing bearings shall be dismantled and examined for distress warping scoring or other effects which may affect the durability of the bearing .
a bearing will be rejected if it exhibits any signs of failure such as i extrusion of the elastomer from the pot ii tearing cracking or permanent deformation of the ptfe sliding surface iii cracking or permanent deformation of the sealing ring or other part of the bearing or iv abrasive marks indicating abnormal contact between the metal surfaces of the bearing plates or piston and the pot .
if a bearing is rejected two additional bearings from the batch it represents shall be tested .
if both bearings meet the requirements of this specification the remaining bearings in the batch will be accepted .
otherwise each remaining bearing in the batch shall be tested to determine its compliance with the specification .
num test certificates prior to the installation of the bearings the contractor shall submit to the superintendent copies of the test certificates showing details of the test results of each sample of elastomer and each bearing tested .
the test certificates shall show whether any tolerances have been exceeded or faults have been observed .
num protective coating bearings shall be coated with zincinsilicate in accordance with as num .
bearings shall be prepared by grit blasting to as num class num followed by the application of zincinsilicate undercoat num microns dft exposed edges shall have a further two coats of micaceous iron oxide epoxy mnumoe num micron each coat .
colour mnumoe mid grey .
all paint coats shall be factory applied prior to assembly of the bearings .
all bolts nuts and washers shall be hot dipped galvanized in accordance with as num .
stainless steel sliding surfaces of expansion bearings shall receive no protective treatment and care shall be taken to protect these surfaces from being damaged or coated during the application of the protective treatment .
num shop assembly the bearings including all parts as shown on the drawings shall be fully shop assembled at the manufacturers works to ensure proper fitting of all parts .
num movement indicator where shown on the drawings or specified elsewhere a movement indicator and suitably located scale shall be securely fixed to the bearings to enable shear movements to be monitored .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num marking and delivery all bearings shall be suitably marked to identify their location in the bridge .
when bearings are required to be preset for shear movement they shall be clearly marked to ensure they are installed with the correct orientation .
mating parts of bearings shall be suitably and permanently marked and shall be supplied in sets held together with metal transit clips andor bolts to prevent misalignment andor damage of the components during transport and erection .
the transit clips andor bolts shall not be removed until final installation in the bridge or when specified on the drawings .
num site storage bearings stored on site prior to installation shall be protected from exposure to chemicals fuel oil water mud or dust and shall not be stored in areas subject to flooding .
num installation a general the contractor shall ensure that the specified installation tolerances are allowed for during the manufacture of the bearings and attachment plates .
b tolerances bearings shall be installed to the correct position and orientation as shown on the drawings and where applicable in accordance with the bearing suppliers installation procedures .
bearings shall be installed level or where indicated on the drawings to a grade within a tolerance of num .
department of state growth section num installation of elastomeric bearings and pads this section crossreferences sections num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general elastomeric bearings shall comply with section num read in conjunction with as num bridge design part num bearings and deck joints .
to ensure that the bearings function as designed they shall be of the sizes and at the positions orientations and levels stated on the drawings .
num preparation concrete pedestals for bearings shall be of the sizes and at the positions orientations and levels stated on the drawings and shall extend a minimum of num mm beyond the edge of bearing .
pedestals shall have sufficient strength to transmit the forces movements and rotations required by the design to the bridge substructure .
construction joints at the interface between pedestals and the bearingshelf shall be recessed a minimum of num mm below the top surface of the cross head or bearing shelf .
if shown on the drawings dowels shall be provided at the construction joints to transmit horizontal design loads .
concrete for pedestals shall comply with the requirements of section num and shall have a minimum age of num days before load is transferred to the bearings from the beams .
if horizontal loads are to be transmitted by friction alone the concrete surface on which elastomeric bearings pads and strips are to be placed shall have sufficient surface roughness to develop the friction required by the bearing design .
a woodfloat finish will generally satisfy this requirement .
num installation if required on the drawings dowels shall be provided to transmit horizontal design loads in accordance with as num .
dowels shall have sufficient strength to satisfy the requirements of the design and shall be made from durable materials and be demountable to allow removal and replacement of the bearings .
all bearings shall be restrained from moving by the use of stainlesssteel brackets attached to the bearingshelf and the beam or diaphragm .
brackets shall not be directly connected to the bearing nor shall they prevent or interfere with its normal functioning .
brackets and their fasteners shall have sufficient strength to satisfy the requirements of the design and shall be made from durable materials be demountable to allow removal and replacement of the bearings .
care shall be taken during the installation of fasteners to prevent damage to the beams and other structural components and in particular to prestressing strands and reinforcement .
if bearings are installed level and the bottom flange of the beam above is sloping in transverse longitudinal or both directions machined plates or other spacing devices shall be manufactured and installed between the top surface of the bearing and the underside of the beam in accordance with the geometrical and strength requirements of the design .
num position and alignment bearings and pads shall be level and square to the longitudinal axis of the beam .
department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num tolerances plan position num mm in any direction level num mm num handling packing and storage elastomeric bearings shall be transported stored and handled in accordance with the requirements of section num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num bridge expansion joints num general this section covers the supply and installation of bridge expansion joints .
num material supply the contractor shall supply all expansion joint components including joints seals inserts anchorages cover plates waterproofing membrane drainage system bedding mortar nosing edging and all adhesives and sealants required for the installation of the joint system in conformity with the suppliers recommendations .
num joint systems bridge expansion joints shall comply with the drawings .
alternative designs if an alternative bridge expansion joint is proposed it shall be designed in accordance with bridge technical note num design of deck joints for road bridges in conjunction with the requirements of the as num the australian standard for bridge design .
the contractor shall submit proposals for joints and their installation including items b to f listed below to the superintendent for review within four weeks of acceptance of tender .
where an alternative system is proposed by the contractor the submission shall include the following a design basis for the joint in accordance with the australian standard for bridge design b details of provisions for inspection maintenance and replacement c anchorage system details d geometry for blockout if required e a drawing showing typical crosssections including cover plates where applicable f treatment at kerb pedestrian footpaths and barriers g alterations or modifications to deck reinforcement andor embedments h details of nosing material adhesive backing rod sealant and seal i evidence of satisfactory performance and durability of the product under equivalent conditions .
num joint installation the expansion joint shall be installed in accordance with the suppliers recommended procedure .
installation temperature expansion joint gaps shall be designed and dimensioned for installation at a mean temperature of numc .
hp in the event that the ambient temperature differs from numc by more than numc it may be necessary to vary the joint gap .
the contractor shall seek a direction from the superintendent and shall vary the jointgap if required .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num installation tolerances the following tolerances shall apply to joint installation a joint gap num mm b deviation from plan alignment num mm maximum over the total length of the joint c the top surface of the joint shall be level with the adjacent road surface with a tolerance of num to num mm when measured with a num m straight edge at num to the joint the upper surfaces of the joint shall be parallel with the longitudinal grade and crossfall of the completed road or footpath surface .
reinforcement for deck joints reinforcement for deck joints shall comply with the requirements of bridge technical note num reinforcement of deck joints .
reinforcement surrounding embedded anchorages shall be in accordance with the drawings and shall be fixed to ensure that the strength of the anchorage meets the requirements of the joint design .
hp prior to casting deck concrete the contractor shall ensure that there is no conflict between the joint anchors the deck reinforcement and any embedment .
where conflict does occur the contractor shall submit proposals for resolving the conflict to the superintendent .
in situ concrete if the joint detail includes a raised concrete plinth that sits above the level of the adjacent deck surface the concrete in the plinth shall be cast monolithically with the deck concrete .
for joints that are recessed into the end of the bridge deck and the adjacent fenderwall concrete immediately under and around the joint shall be placed and compacted in a manner that ensures that there is full contact with the underside of the expansion joint and its components and that the concrete is free of voids .
if the joint is to be fixed to the deck concrete after the concrete has been cast the seating surface shall be accurately formed to the required finished profile .
should depressions or high spots be present in the formed concrete surface these shall be filled cut or ground to the required finished profile prior to installation of the joint .
depressions shall be filled with a highstrength minimum num mpa nonshrink mortar that is compatible with the expansion joint .
the expansion joint shall not be fixed in place and holdingdown bolts shall not be tensioned until the mortar has achieved its nominal strength .
hp after concreting and prior to installation of the joint seal the vertical face of the concrete under the full length of the joint shall be inspected for the presence of voids and other imperfections .
if voids are discovered the contractor shall remove the affected section of the joint to enable a full inspection of the concrete and shall submit proposals for repair to the superintendent .
hp following completion of the joint assembly and tensioning of all anchor bolts the full length of the joint shall be tested by tapping with a hammer .
should any part of the joint exhibit a hollowring or movement the affected length shall be removed and rebedded and all bolts replaced and retensioned .
if the concrete under the joint is found to have voids or other imperfections or any of the anchor bolts are not properly restrained the contractor shall submit proposals for repair to the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num tensioning of anchor bolts hp not later than two weeks prior to installation of the bridge joint the contractor shall submit proposals for tightening of anchor bolts to the superintendent .
anchor bolts for bridge joints shall be tensioned to a maximum of num of the ultimate strength of the bolt in accordance with the requirements of the joint design and the suppliers recommendations either by the use of a calibrated torquewrench the partturn method or other approved method .
if a torquewrench is used to tension the anchor bolts appropriate allowances shall be made in the calculation of the required torque for friction losses in the anchor bolt assembly taking into account the condition of the threads on the bolts and ferrules and the use of lubricants .
torquewrenches and other similar devices shall be calibrated in accordance with as num or iso num and shall be capable of generating the required torque with an accuracy of num nm .
the contractor shall supply a copy of the torquewrench calibration certificate to the superintendent on request .
anchor bolt tensioning records shall be maintained by the contractor and supplied to the superintendent on completion of installation .
if the required tension can not be achieved the contractor shall submit proposals to the superintendent for rectification of the defect .
if it is necessary to detension partly or wholly or remove an anchor bolt of the singleuse type that has been tensioned the used anchor bolt shall be discarded and replaced with a new bolt .
anchor bolts for expansion joints on posttensioned bridges shall not be fixed in position until at least four weeks after posttensioning of the deck .
joint levels for posttensioned bridges shall be adjusted for variation from the design hog .
compression seals inserts and membranes compression seals inserts and membranes shall be installed in one continuous piece for the full length of the joint including footpaths and barriers .
if seals are bonded to the nosing the surface shall be prepared and primed and the adhesives placed in accordance with the suppliers recommendations .
completed joints shall be watertight .
nosing materials nosing materials shall be mixed poured and cured in accordance with the suppliers recommendations .
trafficking of joints during construction joints shall not be trafficked until all components of the joint have achieved adequate strength to support traffic loads without being damaged .
joints seals inserts and membranes shall be protected from damage due to construction activities and the passage of site vehicles .
if the joint or any of its component parts is damaged during construction the contractor shall repair the damage to the satisfaction of the superintendent or replace the joint .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num replacement joints the replacement joint system shall a be designed in accordance with as num b have a minimum design life of years c be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations by an experienced installer .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num steel bridge barriers this section crossreferences sections num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the fabrication and installation of steel barriers for road and pedestrian bridges .
section num details the relevant references to australian standards as in this section .
num materials and fabrication materials and fabrication of steel components shall be in accordance with section num .
materials and fabrication of cast steel posts and sleeves shall be in accordance with section num .
where the drawing requires the steel barrier posts to be cut before welding to the structure the contractor shall make an allowance not exceeding num mm for packing or cutting the posts to allow for variation of camber .
num installation of barriers the barrier shall be installed in accordance with section num and to the tolerances specified in clause num to a smooth alignment both vertically and horizontally independent of any irregularities that may exist in the alignment of the deck .
barrier posts panels balusters and openings shall be vertical .
bolts nuts washers base plates and welds shall be of the correct sizes and shall be correctly assembled .
retrofitted bonded anchors shall not be used in anchorbolts for steel barriers .
sleeves at expansion joints shall be connected to the rail on the lower side of the joint .
bolted joints at sleeves joints and rail splices shall be as shown on the drawings and as specified .
hole drilling shall be in accordance with section num and any cut surfaces holes shall have a protective coating treatment applied in accordance with section num .
after the barrier has been installed and all connections made the gap between the base plate and the top of concrete footing shall be completely filled with a flowable dual shrinkage compensating proprietary cementitious grout in accordance with clause num .
dry pack mortar shall not be used .
hp railing posts shall not be grouted until the contractor provides a survey certificate verifying compliance with the specified tolerances on lines and levels .
num barrier finish the type and extent of the primary protective coating and additional paint finish shall be as shown on the contract drawings and as specified .
the finished surface of barriers shall be smooth nonabrasive and nonsnagging .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num both internal and external surfaces of barrier railing and posts shall have a hotdip galvanized zinc coating applied in accordance with asnzs num .
where the barrier is completely sealed by welding against the ingress of water and other corrosive agents a zinc silicate primer may be applied for external protection in lieu of galvanising .
the primer shall be applied in accordance with section num .
where required additional paint finishes for secondary protective coatings or aesthetic and other reasons shall be applied in accordance with section num .
num tolerances barriers shall be installed within the following tolerances a departure from plan position num mm b departure from alignment num mm c irregularities in alignment num mm in num m d variation in joint gap width num mm e verticality of posts panels balusters and openings num mm .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num concrete and combined concrete and steel bridge barriers this section crossreferences sections num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the installation of precast concrete and combined precast concrete and steel traffic barriers on road and pedestrian bridges .
section num details the relevant references to australian standards as in this section .
num materials and fabrication materials and fabrication of steel post and rail components shall be in accordance with section num .
materials and fabrication of cast steel posts and sleeves shall be in accordance with section num .
num construction and installation of bridge barriers castinplace concrete barriers and precast concrete barrier units shall be constructed and installed as shown on the contract drawings .
castinplace concrete for barriers shall be constructed in accordance with section num and to the requirements of this section .
steel reinforcement for castinplace concrete shall comply with section num .
concrete deck surfaces in contact with castinplace portions of the concrete barriers shall be treated as a construction joint in accordance with clause num .
castinplace concrete or precast concrete bridge barrier units shall not be placed before the corresponding deck concrete achieves the numday compressive strength corresponding to the concrete grade in table num .
barriers on castinplace posttensioned concrete superstructures shall not be installed or cast until all prestressing operations have been completed .
all barrier surfaces including the precast units where required and the castinplace concrete shall have a class num surface finish as specified in section num .
installation of precast concrete barrier units shall comply with the tolerances specified in section num prior to construction of the castinplace sections of the barriers .
the sloping portion of the castinplace section of the precast concrete barriers shall be partially formed .
three millimetre diameter galvanized wires or synthetic cords shall be threaded through each service duct in the concrete barrier and shall be continuous for the full length of the bridge .
castinplace concrete barriers and stitch pours shall not be subjected to vibration from adjacent construction operations for a minimum period of num hours following completion of the associated concrete pour .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num installation of steel posts and rails all barrier posts shall be vertical .
panels of posts and rails shall have a smooth even alignment both vertically and horizontally which shall be free from any steps or imperfections that could cause a vehicle to snag on the barrier .
bolts nuts washers base plates and welds shall be of the correct sizes and shall be assembled in accordance with the drawings .
sleeves at expansion joints shall be connected to the rail on the lower side of the joint .
bolted joints at sleeves joints and rail splices shall be as shown on the drawings and as specified .
hole drilling shall be in accordance with section num and any cut surfaces holes shall have a protective coating treatment applied in accordance with section num .
after the barrier has been installed and all connections made the gap between the base plate and the top of concrete footing shall be completely filled with a flowable dual shrinkage compensating proprietary cementitious grout in accordance with clause num .
dry pack mortar shall not be used .
hp railing posts shall not be grouted until the contractor provides a survey certificate verifying compliance with the specified tolerances on lines and levels .
num steel post and rail finish requirements for protective coating finishes for steel components shall be as shown on the drawings .
the finished surface of posts and rails shall be smooth nonabrasive and nonsnagging .
both internal and external surfaces of barrier railing and posts shall have a hotdip galvanized zinc coating applied in accordance with asnzs num .
where the barrier is completely sealed by welding against the ingress of water and other corrosive agents a zinc silicate primer may be applied for external protection in lieu of galvanizing .
the primer shall be applied in accordance with section num .
where required additional paint finishes for secondary protective coatings or aesthetic and other reasons shall be applied in accordance with section num .
num tolerances posts and rails shall be installed within the following tolerances departure from plan position num mm departure from alignment num mm irregularities in alignment num mm in num m variation in joint gap width num mm department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num cast steel barrier railing posts num general this section covers the manufacture of cast steel barrier railing posts the properties of the cast steel and the testing procedures required .
cast steel for railing posts and sleeves shall conform to the requirements of as num .
num materials specification cast steel with minimum yield stress of num mpa shall conform to as num grade cnum .
cast steel with minimum yield stress of num mpa shall conform to as num grade lnuma .
technical requirements for steel castings shall comply with as num .
num heat treatment all castings shall be heat treated in accordance with clause num of as num .
num shape and tolerances the castings shall be made to the shape and dimensions shown on the drawings and within the tolerances specified thickness of members num mm num mm diameter of holes num mm num mm overall dimensions num mm num mm flatness of base num mm maximum on convex surface measured along all edges and diagonals of base plan area .
the web centreline shall not be out of square with the plane of the base by more than num mm per num mm height of the web .
the recess for the rail shall not be out of parallel with the plane of the base by more than num mm per num mm width of the base .
all edges shall be smooth true and rounded to num mm radius .
num identification marks each casting shall be legibly marked with a number or identification mark by which it can be traced to the cast and heat treatment batch from which it was made .
all test samples made in accordance with as num shall be similarly marked .
num acceptance of surface finish quality by visual inspection steel castings shall be visually inspected by the contractor in accordance with as num non destructive testing visual inspection of metal products and components .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the texture and surface finish of all castings shall not exceed the following maximum levels of acceptable defect surface feature maximum acceptable level num source of acceptance criteria num surface texture level i anum astm anumanumm num nonmetallic inclusions level i bnum astm anumanumm num gas porosity level i cnum astm anumanumm num metal removal marks thermal mechanical welds level i gnum level i hnum level i jnum astm anumanumm num hot tears and cracks none acceptable mss sp num shrinkage better than reference photograph a type ii mss sp num veining better than reference photograph a type v mss sp num rat tails better than reference photograph a type vi mss sp num wrinkles laps folds and coldshuts better than reference photograph a type vii mss sp num scabs better than reference photograph a type ix mss sp num chaplets better than reference photograph a type x mss sp num note num the maximum acceptable levels are consistent with surface discontinuity comparators for a reduced discontinuity size as described in as num appendix f. note num sources of acceptance criteria are as follows astm anumanumm num standard practice for steel castings surface acceptance standards visual inspection astm num mss sp num quality standard for steel castings for valves flanges and fittings and other piping components visual method for evaluation of surface irregularities manufacturers standardisation society num workmanship where the maximum levels of acceptable defects as given in clause num are exceeded the defects in the castings shall be rectified .
where appropriate castings may be welded in accordance with the requirements of as num welding of ferrous castings steel castings .
after welding all weldrepaired castings shall be given a stress relieving heat treatment .
num testing and test certificates testing for chemical composition and tensile properties shall be carried out for each cast or heat treatment batch .
charpy vnotch impact testing shall be carried out for the first batch cast and then for at least every third batch .
the charpy impact average value for testing of three specimens shall be not less than the value nominated in as num for the relevant grade .
test certificates which demonstrate compliance of the steel with chemical composition and mechanical property requirements of as num grade cnum or grade lnuma cast steel and the results of visual inspection shall be submitted to the superintendent .
num protective treatment all cast steel posts shall be coated in accordance with the drawings and specification .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num bonded anchors this section crossreferences sections num and num .
if either of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if either of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for supply of materials installation workmanship and testing of bonded anchors installed in concrete ..
the design of bonded anchors shall comply with the vicroads bridge technical note btnnum design guidelines for bonded anchors .
where bonded anchors are proposed the contractor shall demonstrate that the selected bonded anchor system satisfies the requirements of the design to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
num standards australian standards are referenced in an abbreviated form e.g .
as num. a australian standards as num calibration and classification of forcemeasuring systems as num metallic materials tensile testing at ambient temperature b additional test methods astm e num standard test methods for strength of anchors in concrete and masonry elements astm e num standard test methods for testing bond performance of adhesivebonded anchors c additional documents and referenced specifications sa ts num technical specification design of postinstalled and castin fastenings for use in concrete published by standards australia aticspec num metal anchors for use in concrete published by the australian technical infrastructure committee atic btnnum vicroads bridge technical note design guidelines for bonded anchors etag european technical assessment guideline num part num icces usa international code council approvals evaluation service for post installed anchors and other building products section num details the relevant references to these documents .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num definitions anchor a steel stud threaded rod steel bolt or reinforcing steel drilled and secured into the existing hardened concrete .
bonded anchor a system comprising an anchor and a chemical adhesive that transmits loads from the embedded anchor into the hardened concrete .
chemical adhesive a material or bonding agent used to bond together steel and concrete components to hardened concrete and provide the pathway for the required load transfer of the bonded anchor system .
discrete population a population of bonded anchors that has bonded anchors of the same type manufacturer and model installed in the same substrate e.g .
same type and strength same installation conditions such as wet or dry and temperature and have all been installed by the same work crew .
proof load test a test performed on a bonded anchor whose installation is complete and is intended to validate correct installation by allowing bond failure but precluding concrete failure via a confined test .
the proof load shall not exceed the lesser of the yield strength of the anchor rod or the design bond strength of the chemical adhesive .
ultimate load test a test performed on a bonded anchor whose installation is complete and is intended to aid in establishing the suitability of the bonded anchor in a particular hardened concrete where all the properties required for design are not known by allowing concrete failure andor bond failure via an unconfined test .
num design and limitations on use the design and limitations on use of bonded anchors shall be in accordance with the requirements of btnnum .
where sa ts num is referenced in the design of bonded anchors btnnum shall take precedence where they differ .
the design of the bonded anchor system shall make allowance for the following performance influencing factors a the substrate conditions at the time of installation b the inservice substrate conditions i.e .
dry or wet temperature concrete strength drilling method c the geometry of the host concrete member i.e .
edge distance spacing between bonded anchors member thickness d the nature of the applied loads i.e .
static dynamic cyclic sustained e the effect of the composition of the chemical adhesive on the load carrying capacity and performance .
the bonded anchor system design shall be certified by a design engineer who is a member of engineers australia and with a minimum of num years experience in the design and construction of bonded anchor systems of similar complexity .
the bonded anchor system design shall be verified in accordance with the contract to confirm that the design satisfies the performance requirements of the bonded anchors .
the bonded anchor system design shall be proof engineered by a proof engineer who is independent of the design consultants firm and is prequalified at level pe under the vicroads prequalification scheme .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num hp subject to the requirements of btnnum if it is proposed to use bonded anchors in tension as described in clause num ofbtnnum the contractor shall submit full details of the proposal including a proof engineeringcertificate of compliance for the approval of the superintendent not later than two weeks prior to the intended use .
any amendment to the design after the issue of the proof engineering certificate of compliance shall be referred to the proof engineer for review and written confirmation that the certificate of compliance remains valid .
num materials a general bonded anchor systems shall be certified in accordance with a third party materials accreditation scheme or a technical approval scheme approved by the superintendant .
for this purpose certification in accordance with one of the following is acceptable i sa tsnum appendix b ii atic sp num iii etag european technical approval num part num iv icc usa .
bonded anchor systems with current eta european technical assessmentapproval automatically conform to the requirements of sa tsnum appendix b .
components from different types of bonded anchor or from different bonded anchor suppliers shall not be mixed exchanged or substituted for the specified system.as a minimum the technical information to be specified on design drawings shall include the following i bonded anchor manufacturers name product name ii details of steel element strength grade depth of embedment iii drilled hole diameter depth method of drilling iv sequence of installation including cleaning steps v working time for the chemical adhesive vi curing time of the chemical adhesive to gain strength sufficient to allow the bonded anchor to be loaded vii tightening torque .
hp if the contractor proposes to use an alternative to the specified bonded anchor system including any deviation from the product substrate or installation specified the contractor shall submit full details of the proposed alternative system and its design for approval by the superintendent no later than two weeks prior to the proposed installation of the bonded anchors .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b chemical adhesives in addition to satisfying all requirements stipulated by the bonded anchor supplier the following restrictions apply i chemical adhesives containing styrenes are not permitted ii polyester type chemical adhesives susceptible to alkaline hydrolysis shall not be used if the bonded anchor will be exposed to moisture during the life of the structure iii the chemical adhesive shall be used in holes which have been drilled using the technique e.g .
carbidetipped rotary hammer or diamondtipped core drill prescribed by the manufacturer refer to manufacturers installation instructions iv the selected chemical adhesive shall perform in accordance with the design for expected ranges of temperature and moisture content over the design life of the structure iv the contractor shall comply with all requirements for the correct use of the chemical adhesive specified by the supplier in the manufacturers installation instructions including but not limited to temperature range curing time shelf life mixing requirements and moisture content v bonded anchors used under sustained tensile loading shall be prequalified for this loading type in accordance with clause numa .
c metallic components and coatings steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of section num and shall be prequalified for use with the chemical adhesive in accordance with clause numa .
coatings for metal components shall have sufficient durability to achieve the required design life of the structure .
galvanised steel components may only be used in permanently dry conditions where the design life is num years or less .
stainless steel grades num num num and num marking anum may not be used in conditions where the component is either permanently inundated in seawater or in the splash zone .
stainless steel grades num marking c may be used in conditions where the component is either permanently inundated in seawater or in the splash zone .
proprietary threaded anchor rods and metallic bolts shall be subject to certification by the third party materials accreditation scheme ortechnical approval scheme as required in clause numa .
num competency and training of personnel the bonded anchor installer shall be certified by the australian engineered fasteners and anchors council aefac or shall be able to provide evidence of competency acceptable to the superintendent .
all personnel who are required to install bonded anchors shall be aefac certified installers or be trained by the supplier of the bonded anchor system in the specific installation requirements of the project before bonded anchor installation commences .
individuals who have successfully completed training shall be issued with either a card which includes their name and photograph or a certificate of training .
the contractor shall hold evidence of this training on site and present it to the superintendent on request .
the bonded anchor system installation supervisor shall be trained and qualified in all aspects of the applied techniques and shall be present at each stage of the bonded anchors installation works including any trial installations and all testing .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num equipment bonded anchors shall be installed using the equipment specified or provided by the bonded anchor supplier in the manufacturers installation instructions .
num workmanship and installation a general bonded anchors shall be installed in the manner specified by the bondedanchor supplier by a competent person who has received appropriate training in accordance with clause num .
holes for bonded anchors shall be drilled with carbide or diamond drill bits in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions and shall be of the length and diameter specified by the supplier for the selected bonded anchor and as required by the design .
holes for bonded anchors must be positioned to avoid damage to reinforcement and prestressing tendons or to services .
prior to drilling of holes reinforcing bars and prestressing cables that lie within the depth of the drill hole must be accurately located by reference to asconstructed drawings .
the actual position of bars and tendons shall then be located by use of a recently calibrated concrete cover meter operated by a competent person .
if reinforcement is encountered during drilling drilling shall cease immediately and the contractor following consultation with the design engineer shall provide the superintendent with an acceptable course of action consistent with the design requirements holes for bonded anchors shall be drilled and cleaned in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions .
however as a minimum the procedure for drilling and cleaning of holes shall be as follows i drill to required depth ii air flush twice iii brush clean twice iv air flush twice v fingertip test the hole surface for dust and if dust is still present brush clean and air flush until all dust is removedincluding a potential dust plug at the end of the hole which reduces embedment depth .
at the end of the cleaning process the hole shall be clean and free of debris dust particles oil and other contaminants over its full depth .
if a mechanical compressor is used to provide the air flush the compressed air shall be free of oil .
if the hole is not immediately filled with chemical adhesive and is allowed to stand open for any period of time the cleaning process shall be repeated prior to installation of bonded anchors .
a discrete population of bonded anchors shall be installed by the same work crew b additional specific requirements the following requirements shall also be met i immediately prior to installation of the bonded anchor system holes for bonded anchors shall be completely free of water dry or be free of standing water damp in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions ii bonded anchors shallnot be used if the temperature of the concrete is less than numc above numc or outside the requirements specified in the manufacturers installation instructions .
iii check temperature of hole prior to injecting chemical adhesive note the working time which is the time allowed to place the anchor rod into the chemical adhesive and the curing time which is the time for the chemical to gain strength from the time of first mixing until the time when the bonded anchor can be loaded .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num iv the procedure for placing chemical adhesives and anchors shall be in accordance with the manufacturers installation requirements v chemical adhesive shall not be injected into the drilled hole until it is thoroughly mixed using the proprietary equipment to a uniform consistency colour and appearance in accordance with the manufacturers installation requirements .
vi the initial discharge of chemical adhesive from the mixing nozzle nozzle and for every new mixing nozzle used thereafter shall be discarded .
vii each hole shall be checked visually to ensure that the chemical adhesive is injected to the correct depth typically num of the hole depth prior to insertion of the metal anchor rod .
viii excessive chemical adhesive shall be removed from the concrete and anchor rod surfaces after inserting the anchor rod .
ix the anchor rod shall not be disturbed or moved during curing .
x if a popping or cracking sound is heard while inserting the anchor rod air voids are present in the chemical adhesive .
remove the anchor rod allow the chemical adhesive to fully harden redrill the hole and repeat the entire installation process .
xi following mixing the chemical adhesive shall be used within the time limit working time or gel time stated in the manufacturers installation requirements .
xii capsule chemical adhesives shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions .
chemical adhesives shall be allowed to gain strength for the minimum time specified by the manufacturers installation instructions before torque is applied to bolts and load is applied to the bonded anchor system .
num load testing of installed anchors la general the scope of the testing described in this clause is limited to demonstration of the suitability of the selected bonded anchor for use in a particular application and forvalidating the quality of installation .
certification and testing of the bonded anchor system and components required by clause num shall be conducted in accordance with the nominated independent thirdparty materials testing body .
the requirements for sitetesting of bonded anchors are limited to testing of tensile capacity .
separate requirements are given below for suitability testing and for testing of working anchors .
test bonded anchors shall be installed by suitably competent and experienced personnel as described in clause num in positions that are representative of the positions of the bonded anchors required by the design .
testing shall be conducted by a competent person who has experience in testing of bonded anchors and test reporting .
bonded anchors shall be tested using testing equipment that has been calibrated as a minimum on an annual basis at the required intervals in accordance with as num .
hp one week prior to testing the contractor shall submit to the superintendent calibration certificates conforming to the requirements of as num grade b for the jack and pressure gauges or other force measuring devices to be used .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the measuring equipment shall allow the applied force to be determined to the accuracynum .
if measurement of displacement is required the measuring equipment shall comply with as num and shall allow elongation to be determined with an accuracy of num mm with measurements made directly on the head of the anchor .
the test load shall be applied at predetermined increments and loading rates .
hp details of the test method including load increments and duration of sustained loading shall be submitted to the superintendent for review not later than one week prior to the testing .
test bonded anchors shall be identified with a unique reference number .
b ultimate load testing for the suitability of bonded anchors unless approved otherwise by the superintendent where the proposed bonded anchor system or where the characteristics of the substrate andor installation are outside the scope of the bonded anchor prequalification as specified in clause numa the contractor shall carry out ultimate load tests to validate the suitability of the bonded anchor system design and to demonstrate that the bonded anchor components chemical adhesives the substrate preparation and the proposed procedure will achieve the specified bonded anchor durability and load capacity .
ultimate load tests shall be conducted in advance of the installation of working bonded anchors after the manufacturers curing time has elapsed .
bonded anchors to be tested for ultimate load shall be installed in an identical manner and shall be situated in a substrate identical to that of the working anchors and shall be positioned such that the installation and performance of the working bonded anchors is not compromised in any way.a sample consisting of at least five of the proposed total number of bonded anchors required by the design shall be subject to an ultimate load test .
ultimate load testing shall be conducted for each of the combinations of anchors and chemical adhesives in each type of concrete or other substrate material in each orientation and in uncracked and if present cracked concrete .
the testing personnel shall ensure that the bonded anchors are installed in accordance with the specification and the manufacturers installation instructions .
testing personnel shall be suitably competent and possess the relevant experience at conducting testing of bonded anchors on site and reporting the findings including the different possible modes of failure .
the mode of failure and corresponding ultimate load for each test shall be recorded in the test report .
in the event that multiple failure modes are observed testing shall continue until the required minimum number of dominant mode of failure results are achieved .
the capacity of the bonded anchor shall be calculated from test results of the dominant mode of failure .
bonded anchors shall be tested to the ultimate load certified by the design engineer for the bonded anchor used in accordance with the requirements of astm e num and astm e num based on the unconfined test method .
c proof load testing of working bonded anchors all working bonded anchors that will be subject to tensile loads and whose failure could lead to failure or instability of a structure shall be subject to a proofload test .
for all other bonded anchors a sample consisting of a minimum of num or num whichever is the greater of the total number of working bonded anchors shall be subject to a proof load test .
for sampling and testing purposes each discrete population of bonded anchors shall be considered as a separate group and tested separately .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num proof load testing shall not occur prior to the completion of curing time stated in the manufacturers installation instructions .
the application of load shall occur smoothly with the proof load being achieved between one to three minutes from the commencement of loading .
a bonded anchor shall be deemed to have failed a test if either visible displacement is detected at a load less than or equal to the test load or if the anchor fails to achieve the required test load .
if failure is encountered in any sample all anchors within the discrete area shall be proof load tested .
working bonded anchors shall be proof load tested to num x the maximum design load certified by the design engineer for the bonded anchor used in accordance with the requirements of astm e num and astm e num based on the confined test methodworking bonded anchors in cracked concrete shall be proof load tested to num x the maximum design load certified by the design engineer for the bonded anchor used in accordance with the requirements of astm e num and astm e num based on the confined test method .
the proof load shall be maintained for a minimum period of num seconds .
d actions if a bonded anchor test fails hp in the event that a bonded anchor fails either the ultimate load testing for suitability or the working bonded anchor proof load test the contractor shall submit rectification proposals for review by the superintendent prior to any further bonded anchor installation .
num reporting the contractor shall provide a test report to the superintendent for review .
the test report shall identify the performance of each tested bonded anchor including the following a testers name and employer b supplier and type of bonded anchor c date of installation of bonded anchor d date of testing e bonded anchor reference number f bonded anchor position g condition of bonded anchor h condition of concrete substrate all defects such as cracks and delamination to be reported i strength of concrete substrate including how this was determined j testing equipment k calibration certificate for testing equipment l test method including load increments and duration of sustained loading m test load and time of holding at the test load n failure load if applicable o mode of failure if applicable p amount of permanent displacement q any other relevant comments or observations .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num cathodic protection of reinforced concrete structures this section crossreferences sections num num num or num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for the cathodic protection cp of steel in reinforced concrete structures which are atmospherically exposed buried or submerged .
the section applies to both new and existing structures including relevant inspection and testing acceptance criteria for both normal reinforcement and prestressed reinforcement embedded in concrete .
cathodic protection of prestressed reinforcement embedded in concrete shall be subject to approval by the superintendent .
note due to the possible occurrence of hydrogen embrittlement high strength steels should not be exposed to a potential more negative than num mv agagclnumm kcl .
prestressing steel may be sensitive to hydrogen embrittlement which can cause catastrophic failure due to high tensile loading of prestressing members .
it is essential that caution be exercised in any application of cp to prestressed elements .
cp of steel in reinforced concrete structures shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of as num unless otherwise stated .
num protection criteria the cp system shall deliver sufficient current to satisfactorily polarise the reinforcement of the whole of the reinforced concrete structure in all cathodic protection zones .
satisfactory polarisation shall be demonstrated by achieving the protection criteria in accordance with the requirements of as num .
satisfactory polarisation of the steel reinforcement in accordance with these protection criteria shall be achieved within num weeks of the date of first energising the cp system for all zones .
num assessment of existing structures the contractor shall undertake an assessment of the structure including its material condition structural integrity and whether and how to repair it in accordance with the requirements of section num of as num .
the assessment of the structure shall include as a minimum a the nature extent location severity and causes of damage andor deterioration and the ability of the structure to perform its function b the likely remaining service life of the structure c what is required to make the structure safe before and throughout any repair work and for the required service life .
any structural assessment that is required shall be undertaken by an engineer who has qualifications admitting to corporate membership of the institution of engineers australia with a minimum of num years practical experience in the design and structural assessment of concrete structures .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num to confirm the suitability determine the extent of the cp system and provide design input for the system the diagnostic investigation shall be representative of the various structural components of the structure and the cathodic protection exposure zones stated in clause num and shall include a visual inspection of all defects such as cracks honeycombing or poor construction joints including a comprehensive photographic record b delamination survey of the cover concrete c chloride determination at incremental depths and analysis d carbonation depth measurement e concrete cover f alkali aggregate reaction aar assessment including any long term residual effects of aar if any over the longer term g steel reinforcement continuity i continuity between elements of the structure within each zone of the cp system ii continuity of reinforcement within elements of the structure iii continuity of metallic items other than reinforcement to the reinforcement itself h potential mapping i concrete electrical resistivity j corrosion rate measurement k compressive strength of concrete l volume of permeable voids vpv of concrete .
the location and frequency of sampling and testing shall be as specified on the drawings and in this section .
num standards a australian standards as num galvanic sacrificial anodes for cathodic protection as num cathodic protection of metals part num pipes and cables as num cathodic protection of metals part num compact buried structures as num cathodic protection of metals part num fixed immersed structures as num cathodic protection of metals part num internal surfaces as num cathodic protection of metals part num steel in concrete structures asnzs num electrical installations known as australianew zealand wiring rules asnzs num electrical installations construction and demolition sites as num liquid membrane forming curing compounds for concrete .
b other standards astm bnum standard specification for titanium and titanium alloy strip sheet and plate .
the requirements of the above standards shall apply unless otherwise stated .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num definitions cathodic protection cp cathodic protection of reinforcing steel in concrete is an electrochemical method used to mitigate active corrosion of steel reinforcement or prevent future reinforcement corrosion by passing a small direct current between an external or embedded anode material and the steel reinforcement .
sufficient cathodic current will ensure the reinforcing steel is entirely cathodic and suppress any existing or future anodes on the steel within the concrete electrolyte .
electrolyte the liquid component in a composite material such as soil or concrete in which electric current may flow by ionic charge transfer .
anode a metal which is placed in or in contact with an electrolyte and connected to the steel reinforcement to apply cp to a reinforced concrete structure .
impressed current cathodic protection iccp cathodic protection effected by applying direct current supplied by an external power source to cathodically protect the steel reinforcement in a concrete structure .
the iccp system necessitates the presence of normal ac power and a transformerrectifier to convert it to a dc power source .
the external dc power unit is used to create an electric circuit between the steel reinforcement and supplemental anodes which are fixed onto the external concrete surface embedded into the concrete or buried or submerged the latter in the case of protection to the buried or submerged zones .
the steel reinforcement is connected to the negative dc output and the anodes are connected to the positive dc output .
sacrificial anode cathodic protection cathodic protection effected by connecting a low driving voltage sacrificial anode i.e .
reactive metals such as zinc aluminium or magnesium or alloys of these metals onto the steel to develop a potential difference between the two metals which is sufficient to counteract any corrosion cells existing on the steel .
the anode material discharges current to the steel through the concrete electrolyte and corrodes preferentially .
reference electrode a monitoring sensor i.e .
agagcl mnmnonum cucusonum which is permanently fixed embedded within an electrolyte such as concrete and close to the steel reinforcement used to measure the electrical potential of that portion of the steel reinforcement .
transformerrectifier tr an electrical power unit which transforms and rectifies ac line voltages to the required lower dc output voltages also referred to as a dc power supply .
zone a discrete part of a reinforced concrete structure andor cp system characterised by different environmental exposure conditions i.e .
submerged tidal splash atmospheric zones within its overall inservice environment .
energising the process of the initial application of power to an impressed current cathodic protection system .
num contractor competency all contractor subcontractor consultant and supplier personnel used in the design and installation of cp of reinforced concrete shall demonstrate competency through a minimum of num years experience in the cementitious patch repair rehabilitation coating and cp of concrete structures and demonstrate competency for surface preparation and associated cp system disciplines and application of the associated cementitious repair materials .
other staff shall work under direct supervision of the competent personnel .
the cp system installation supervisor shall be trained and qualified in all aspects of the applied techniques and shall be present during work at all times .
application personnel shall be adequately trained in installation of the cp system and application of the cementitious repair materials .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate experience qualifications skills and training of personnel subcontractors and suppliers .
the superintendent shall have the sole authority to approve or reject the nominated persons or organisation .
personnel operating powered boats shall hold a current limited coxswains certificate .
no changes to personnel involved in the project shall be made without the superintendents approval .
num materials for cathodic protection systems a general the types of cp systems which are considered to be suitable for incorporation into the protection of reinforced concrete are iccp system with slotted anode ribbons iccp system with internal anodes iccp system with mesh anode and cementitious overlay iccp grid system iccp system with conductive ceramic anodes iccp with remote anodes i.e .
buried or submerged located in the water or mudsoil sacrificial or galvanic anodes for use in soils sea and other waters complying with the requirements of as num .
due to the differing exposure environments of the various structural elements described in clause num more than one system type may be required to be incorporated in the cathodic protection system .
all buried or submerged anodes shall comply with the requirements of as num and as num parts num to num .
conductive anode systems incorporating either organic or metallic coatings or systems not identified in this clause require approval by the superintendent .
b activated mixed metal oxide titanium anodes all anode material embedded within cementitious material shall be activated mixed metal oxide coated titanium mmoti in mesh or solid ribbon or similar mesh grid or tube form that can be installed on the concrete surface recessed in cover concrete or embedded within a new or existing structure .
sufficient anode material shall be installed to provide the necessary current to achieve full cathodic protection in accordance with as num while maintaining a current density on the anode surface of no more than num mamnum .
all titanium used for connecting the anode material shall be grade num titanium conforming to astm bnum .
the anode material and the titanium feeder strips shall be electrically isolated from any reinforcing steel any embedded metal work or any conductor in contact with any embedded metals when installed after cementitious material placement and after curing .
methods of electrical isolation where anodes are likely to accidentally come into contact with any embedded metals may include wrapping the anode material and the titanium feeder strips with insulating tape or application of a layer of epoxy resin .
all such taping application of epoxy or other methods of isolation shall be subject to review by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the depth of cover concrete over the reinforcing steel beneath each cable slot adjacent to core holes or beneath the final location of the anode material and the titanium feeder strips shall be measured and results provided for review by the superintendent .
the minimum separation between the mmoti anode material including the titanium feeder or connecting strip and reinforcement shall be num mm .
where anode ribbon mesh is to be installed in slots within the cover concrete the anode ribbon mesh shall be installed within horizontal slots cut num mm wide x num mm deep along the full width of the concrete component and at num mm centres unless otherwise shown on the drawings or this section .
the anode material shall be fully embedded in well compacted cementitious grout or concrete and continuously covered with a minimum num mm of grout or cementitious material .
c connection of the anodes each individual anode material shall be spot welded to a num mm wide x num mm thick grade num titanium strip with a minimum of three spots .
for connections of mesh anodes num mm wide x num mm thick grade num titanium strip shall be spot welded to the full perimeter of anode mesh panels .
connections that are required by the design between anode mesh panels within the same zone shall be made by at least two titanium strips spot welded to the perimeter strip .
each anode mesh zone shall be spot welded to a num mm wide x num mm thick grade num titanium strip at each end .
each of the titanium strips at each end shall be connected to a num mmnum flexible copper cored cable pvc double insulated which extends to a junction box mounted as shown on the drawings andor as stated in this specification .
all surface mounted conduits shall be supported using grade num stainless steel full saddles and num stainless steel screws into insulating plugs .
the length of the insulated plugs shall exceed the depth of the screws by at least num mm .
connection between the titanium strip and copper cored cable shall utilise a num mm diameter hole drilled centrally through the strip suitably sized copper crimp lug and num mm stainless steel set screw nut and washers .
the completed bolted connection shall be fitted with a pvc former and encapsulated with electrical grade epoxy casting compound .
the electrical grade epoxy casting compound material used for encapsulating connections shall have the following minimum properties as demonstrated through the product data sheet i thermal conductivity num wm.k ii thermal expansion linear num x num knum iii barcol hardness num iv heat deflection temperature numc v volume resistivity num ohm.cm at numc vi dielectric constant num vii power factor num .
cables shall run vertically up columns and other vertical concrete components within a cable slot and cables shall be backfilled to ensure a minimum cover over the cables of num mm .
all items including cables and titanium strips shall be embedded up to locations where components are out of reach of potential damage or vandalism .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num d backfilling of core holes and slots internal anode core holes anode slots connections and cable slots shall be backfilled with a single component proprietary cementitious mortar with a minimum compressive strength of num mpa at num days and an electrical resistivity of less than num cm in accordance with the requirements of section num .
the backfill mortar shall be compatible for use with cathodic protection and of proven suitability and durability as demonstrated by the product datasheet .
the contractor shall provide a work method statement detailing the intended method of ensuring the cementitious backfill grout fully encapsulates the anode material connections and cable within the core holes and slots including quality control testing in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
the general backfilling procedure shall be as follows i ensure the core holes and slots are clean and free from all debris that may obstruct the anode insertion .
the slot surface shall be roughened prior to installing the anode material .
ii presoak the anode material in grout slurry and work the slurry into all parts of the anode geometry .
iii prime the slot using the slurry of the proprietary cementitious mortar in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
iv mix the grout to a putty consistency as per the manufacturers instructions .
v for core holes pack grout in the base of the hole and insert the anode to ensure a minimum num mm cover between the end of the anode and the concrete surface .
the anode to cable connection shall be in this area .
for slots pack grout in the base of the slot and insert the anode material to ensure a minimum num mm cover between the anode material and the concrete surface .
vi place further grout around the anode working in with a suitable tool to ensure penetration of grout down the sides of the hole or the sides of the slot .
use an num mm wide packing tool to ensure the anode material does not lift in the slot .
vii fill and pack the hole with grout .
the mmoti anode material must not be allowed to exit the hole or slot for any connections .
only the titanium strip shall exit the concrete or grout where necessary .
the grout shall be trowel finished to match the existing concrete surface and cured with two coats of an approved curing compound in accordance with the requirements of as num .
the contractor shall provide test method statements for review by the superintendent detailing the intended testing to ensure that total isolation is achieved between the anode materials and the reinforcing steel in accordance with the requirements of as num. e cementitious overlay to titanium anode mesh the titanium anode mesh and prepared concrete substrate shall be overlayed with a single component proprietary spray applied cementitious mortar using the wet or dry sprayed concrete process in accordance with the requirements of sections num and num and shall be compatible and suitable for use with cathodic protection .
the electrical resistivity of the spray applied cementitious mortar shall be less than num cm and shall be compatible with the requirements of the cp system .
specifications for the spray applied cementitious mortar and systems shall be detailed by the contractor and shall include quality control testing in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
the contractor shall comply with all appropriate reference standards for specification and testing .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the contractor shall provide a work method statement detailing the intended method of ensuring the spray applied cementitious material fully encapsulates the anode mesh attached to the concrete substrate .
the concrete substrate shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of section num .
the outer edge of the titanium anode mesh shall be continuously covered with a minimum num mm of spray applied cementitious overlay .
the titanium anode mesh must not be allowed to exit the spray applied cementitious overlay for any connections .
only the titanium strip shall exit the concrete or spray applied cementitious material where necessary .
the spray applied cementitious mortar overlay shall be trowel finished to match the existing concrete surface and cured with two coats of an approved curing compound in accordance with the requirements of as num .
curing compounds shall be removed prior to the application of any protective or decorative coatings in accordance with the requirements of section num unless documented evidence is provided to the satisfaction of the superintendent that the applied curing compound is compatible with any proposed coatings .
immediately after placing and for num days the concrete repair material shall be protected from drying out and against the harmful effects of tidal actions and weather including rain and rapid temperature changes .
the contractor shall provide test method statements detailing the intended testing to ensure that isolation is achieved between the anode materials and the reinforcing steel .
all materials proposed for use as part of the works shall be submitted for approval by the superintendent .
no material shall be used on site without prior written approval of the superintendent .
f transformerrectifier tr the transformerrectifier unit and control panels shall comply with the requirements of as num .
num cathodic protection regulations the contractor shall identify and confirm the existence of any assets attached to the reinforced concrete structure andor their presence within the surrounding ground .
the contractor shall further ensure that the cp system once it has been activated will not create any adverse effect upon those assets or any other part of the reinforced concrete structure by creating stray current or interference and shall design the system appropriately .
the contractor shall obtain approval to operate the system from the superintendent and any authority whose assets could be affected prior to switching on the system .
any required interference testing shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
num cathodic protection exposure zones the following exposure zones have been identified as having different environments which the contractor shall take into consideration when designing the cp system atmospheric zone splash zone tidal zone submerged zone .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num design of cathodic protection systems the contractor shall perform the detailed design of the cp system which shall be capable of delivering sufficient current to satisfactorily polarise and provide num protection to the whole of the reinforced concrete structure as stated in this specification for a design life of not less than num years .
the design shall include a preparation of detailed working drawings and technical specification including details of the location of monitoring devices reference electrodes plus performance requirements of the system b drawings describing the extent and type of concrete repairs prior to and after installation of the cp system c design calculations related to current densities and any anticipated losses in the system d design basis of the actual condition and the actual resistivity of the concrete zones identified in clause num .
the contractor shall design the cp system to ensure protection for all components incorporated into the cp system against power surges caused by lightning strikes andor voltage variation resulting from any other cause .
the design shall conform to the design parameters detailed in clause num and the protection criteria detailed in clause num .
the cp system shall be designed specified installed and commissioned to be in accordance with standards stated in clause num .
the contractor shall nominate with the design documentation publications supporting the proposed system .
num design check and certification design drawings and documentation shall be submitted by the contractor for review by the superintendent .
the contractor shall obtain at its own cost certification of the design including all quality documentation by an independent reviewer .
the independent review shall include confirmation that a the current densities and current requirements are appropriate for all cathodic protection zones b anode materials and anode operating levels are suitable for the intended purpose c reference electrodes connections cables conduits dc power supplies and all other equipment are suitable and adequately rated d all drawings adequately reflect the proposed system and contain sufficient detail to enable correct installation of the system e all installation procedures are adequate f the inspection and testing methods are appropriate to ensure the system will be installed and perform as designed g the commissioning procedures are suitable to ensure the system can be energised and operated as designed h all aspects of the design specification drawings installation commissioning records documentation and operation conform to the requirements of as num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the independent reviewer shall be a person who holds a tertiary qualification in the relevant discipline eligible to satisfy the requirements of the australasian corrosion association certification as a corrosion technologist competent as defined in clause num with at least num years experience in cp system design installation and monitoring of steel in concrete .
the review of the drawings and documentation by the superintendent will not absolve the contractor from any responsibility for the work carried out .
hp the contractor shall not commence installation of the cp system until the design and quality documentation has been reviewed by the superintendent superintendent has been given full and unqualified certification of the whole design from the independent reviewer stating that the design fully complies with the contract requirements .
num design parameters the design life of the whole cathodic protection system and each and every component shall be not less than num years .
the contractor shall supply a listing of all major components incorporated within the system including their anticipated service life shall be not less than num years supported by documented evidence and the relevant australian or international standard to which they comply .
the whole of the cp system shall be capable of operating for the full design life of num years without the replacement of components such as anodes anode cementitious backfill fillers or cables etc .
systems which incorporate components with a design life of less than num years shall not be accepted .
systems which require replacement of any components at any stage within the num year design life shall not be accepted .
the cp system shall a be capable of supplying a minimum num mamnum at the surface of all the steel b be capable of synchronous interruption of all dc power supplies .
all internal and external wiring shall be properly protected against vandalism and tidal and splash zone conditions with conduits and protective covers resistant to corrosion and ultraviolet degradation .
num monitoring and reference electrodes it is essential for the protection of the structure to be easily and readily checked during the intended life of the cp system .
incorporated into the design of the cp system shall be a simple and reliable system to monitor the various parameters which require regular assessment .
as a minimum this shall include permanent reference electrodes embedded within the concrete structure and external to the concrete for the submerged or buried sections .
the reference electrodes and structure connections shall be cabled to a common location such that access to the cathodically protected concrete components is not required to take the measurements .
reference electrodes installed to monitor the performance of the cp system shall comply with the requirements of as num unless otherwise shown on the drawings or stated in this section .
reference electrodes installed in the works shall have a design life of not less than num years .
reference electrodes shall be specifically designed for permanent embedment in reinforced concrete structures and other electrolytes such as soil and water which form part of the cp system for the purpose of accurate monitoring of steel reinforcement potentials .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num reference electrodes shall be installed at multiple representative locations within each individual zone and control area to enable sufficient measurement points to be available to properly assess the performance of the cp system .
the quantity type and location of reference electrodes shall be as shown on the drawings and as specified in the specification .
hp installation of the reference electrodes shall not commence until their location has been approved by the superintendent .
final reference electrode locations shall be accurately located and recorded .
permanent reference electrodes shall be supplied with a calibration certificate prior to installation and shall be stored maintained handled and installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
they shall be calibrated onsite against a master calibrated reference electrode immediately prior to embedment immediately following embedment and within num hours of installation .
care shall be taken not to place any strain on cable to anode or reinforcement connections or reference electrode cables .
num repair and replacement of concrete and treatment of deficient steel the contractor shall complete concrete repairs to all areas of damaged or delaminated concrete as shown on the drawings and as exposed during the removal operation in accordance with the requirements of section num and this section .
new reinforcing steel shall be incorporated into the structure to compensate for any existing reinforcing steel which is exhibiting loss in excess of num of its original crosssectional area .
all defective and delaminated concrete and existing repair materials shall be broken out to leave a sound and dense concrete surface at least num mm beyond the steel reinforcement .
hammer sounding shall be repeated on completion of breakout to ensure that all delaminations have been removed .
the complete concrete surface to be repaired shall have an exposed aggregate finish and be nonfriable and dust free .
the contractor shall carry out epoxy injection of cracks of width equal to or greater than num mm to all concrete components of the specified works .
the epoxy resin shall be applied in accordance with section num .
the exposed reinforcing steel shall be prepared by removal from the full circumference of all surface rust scale dirt grease and any other material that might reduce the adhesion of the new concrete to the steel in accordance with clause numc .
where existing concrete cover is minimal the new repair shall be reprofiled as required to ensure a minimum num mm cementitious repair material cover to the steel reinforcement is achieved in accordance with clause numb for exposure classification c. in addition to the general testing for electrical continuity of the steel reinforcement all reinforcement exposed in the concrete removal for repair work shall also be tested for electrical continuity .
the contractor shall provide multiple electrical connection points to the steel reinforcement in each zone of the cp system in accordance with the requirements of section num of as num and as shown on the drawings and this section to ensure the effective functioning of the cp system in that zone .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num notwithstanding the requirements of section num cementitious materials used for concrete repairs shall be compatible for use with cathodic protection and of proven suitability as demonstrated by the product datasheet .
only cementitious materials shall be used for concrete repairs .
the electrical resistivity characteristics of the repair materials shall be compatible with those of the parent concrete and the requirements of the cp system .
specifications for repair materials and systems shall be detailed by the contractor and shall include quality control testing in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
the contractor shall comply with all appropriate reference standards for specification and testing .
the cementitious material shall be applied and cured in accordance with the requirements of section num .
hp all materials proposed for use on the project shall be submitted for approval by the superintendent .
immediately after placing and for num days the concrete repair material shall be protected from drying out and the harmful effects of tidal actions and weather including rain and rapid temperature changes .
hp the contractor shall not commence concrete repair until it has provided the superintendent with a work method statement for review covering both identification and breakout of concrete repair areas and remediation in accordance with the specification .
hp all prepared areas shall not be reinstated with repair material until a a joint measurement of the repair area by the superintendent and the contractor has taken place b evidence that the preparation conforms with the requirements of this specification has been reviewed by the superintendent .
num installation the installation of any proposed cp system shall take into account the manufacturers recommendations for the use of any particular equipment or material and its suitability for long term performance for a design life of not less than num years in the manner or environment in which it is installed .
the contractor shall be responsible for the provision of all ac power requirements at the required locations for the operation and monitoring of the cp system including the required application to the relevant power authority .
hp any electrical equipment such as transformerrectifiers and control panels shall be housed in powder coated mild steel lockable and weatherproof cubicles with a rating of ip num at suitable secure locations as shown on the drawings and as stated in the specification to be approved by the superintendent .
the contractor shall identify by means of method statements the activities involved in the installation of the cp system and the requirements for access to each particular section of the structure for the application of the various materials and components .
the contractor shall identify any special equipment used during installation and shall ensure that the use of the equipment is covered by the relevant work health and safety regulations num .
num commissioning the system commissioning shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements of as num .
prior to energising the system tests shall be undertaken to ensure that all measurements power and bonding circuits are correctly wired connected and labelled to provide the expected resistances .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the contractor shall then carry out the necessary commissioning procedures including necessary adjustments to demonstrate stability of the system and that the various protection criteria as described in clause num have been achieved .
full cathodic protection against the aggressive action of chloride ions in accordance with the various protection criteria as described in clause num shall be achieved within num weeks of the date of first energising the cp system .
written records shall be maintained for all tests conducted during commissioning .
upon completion of commissioning the contractor shall furnish the superintendent with four copies of the commissioning report into which shall be incorporated results of all tests obtained during the commissioning phase .
submission of the commissioning report which demonstrates full protection of the steel reinforcement within num weeks of the date of first energising the cp system in accordance with the protection criteria as specified in clause num shall be required prior to the superintendents issue of the certificate of practical completion of the whole of the works .
num preparation of a monitoring and maintenance manual the contractor shall prepare and provide the superintendent within num weeks of the date of first energising the cp system four copies of a comprehensive monitoring and maintenance manual which shall contain all information necessary for the department of state growth to operate the system .
the report shall include a asconstructed drawings of the installed cp system showing the exact location of all cables reinforcing connections reference electrodes and conduits .
the drawings shall also define all concrete repair locations b all system wiring diagrams names and addresses of all manufacturers and suppliers of all electrical equipment including system components all cables conduit junction boxes and enclosures as supplied and installed c copies of all quality documentation for the project d fault finding information for minor repair or replacement of the most likely to fail components e transformerrectifier control panel details f wiring schematics and operating manuals for the new electrical equipment details g results of all testing completed during and after the installation h copy of commissioning report as per clause num .
num monitoring and reporting following commissioning the contractor shall monitor the performance of the cp system for num years from the commissioning acceptance date in accordance with clause num and shall make any necessary cp system adjustments .
the minimum frequency of monitoring shall be as follows a once per num weeks for the initial num months following commissioning b once per month for the period num to num months following commissioning c once per num months for the period num to num months following commissioning .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with written reports at num num and num months after system commissioning and thereafter annually and such other times as may be necessary .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num operation and maintenance the period of responsibility by the contractor for defective materials and workmanship shall commence upon practical completion for a period of num months .
during the defects liability period remedial work including the supply of necessary parts materials and labour shall be conducted by the contractor when the contractors periodic inspections or monitoring by either the contractor or the department of state growth indicate that the system is not performing to specification .
all costs for any inspections or modifications or rectifications by the contractor shall be borne by the contractor during this period .
the contractor shall inform the department of state growth num days prior to any onsite modifications carried out to the installed system .
the contractor shall maintain full records of all maintenance work carried out on the system and provide these to the superintendent upon request .
num quality requirements a general the quality occupational health and safety and environmental requirements to which the contractor shall adhere are itemised within sections num and num or num. b quality plan in accordance with clause num.anum the contractor shall submit for review by the superintendent a quality plan which includes concrete repair inspection and testing procedures for each of the exposure zones described in clause num including material type and resistivity and curing procedure for the mixing and application of the cementitious backfill grout to the mmoti anodes described in clause num including material type and resistivity and curing cp system repair and installation procedures cp system commissioning procedures cp system monitoring procedures inspection and test plan procedure for the determination of electrical continuity assessment of concrete surface condition and surface preparation procedures all inspection and testing methods to be undertaken .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num reinforced soil structures this section crossreferences sections num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent .
num general this section specifies requirements for the supply of materials the manufacture and construction of reinforced soil structures rss and certain general requirements for the design .
rss shall comply with the requirements of the tender drawings and this section and shall comprise a composite system of compacted select fill and reinforcement with a precast concrete wall facing .
the contractor shall design and supply all materials and components and construct the rss in accordance with this section and other relevant sections of the specification .
if an rss is used in conjunction with a bridge abutment all vertical and horizontal loads arising from the bridge must be supported independently of the rss on a piled foundation that complies with the design material and construction requirements of vicroads standard specification the australian standard for bridge design the australian standard for piling and the relevant vicroads bridge technical notes .
num standards design and construction of rss shall comply with the requirements of the australian standard for bridge design foundations and soil supporting structures as listed in section num .
where a rss is to function as an earth retaining structure and designed in accordance with the australian standard for earth retaining structures as listed in section num in circumstances where the design requirements differ between the two australian standards the requirements of bridge design foundations and soil supporting structures shall take precedence over those of the requirements of earth retaining structures .
num definitions reinforced soil structure rss an earth retaining structure comprising selected fill and soil reinforcement that is embedded at regular intervals in both vertical and horizontal directions within the fill to form a composite structure .
the visible face of the rss may incorporate decorative or structural reinforced concrete or masonry facing panels that include a strip foundation .
soil reinforcement metallic or synthetic components that are embedded in the select fill and which act through interface friction bearing or other means to provide the required strength and stability of the rss .
soil reinforcement may be anchored at its trailing end .
metallic soil reinforcement soil reinforcement made of steel or other metals in the form of straps or bars .
synthetic or flexible soil reinforcement soil reinforcement in the form of sheets strips or grids made from synthetic materials .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num anchor steel plates transverse bars or vertical pins that are installed permanently in the fill and that connect to the trailing end of the soil reinforcement .
the anchors may be used to transfer load to the rear of the rss or as a means of providing tension in the soil reinforcement during construction .
wall facing panel decorative andor structural reinforced concrete or masonry facing elements retaining the compacted select fill material with provision for connection to the soil reinforcement .
wall facing may be full height sectional or segmental panels .
facing panels and walls include a strip foundation .
connection mechanical or other components which connect the wall facing panels to the soil reinforcement and which are designed to transfer loads between the soil reinforcement and the wall facing panels .
num submission of details should the project require information regarding the proposed rss design prior to award of the contract suitable notes should be included in the conditions of tender specification author to delete this note a prior to manufacture the contractor shall submit the following information for review by the superintendent not less than two weeks prior to the manufacture of facing panels i supplier and type of proposed proprietary rss system ii preliminary drawings describing the geometry of the proposed reinforced soil block drainage provisions soil reinforcement type and arrangement wall facing arrangement and surface finish and connections and iii type and source of select fill including particle size distribution shear strength and coefficient of friction value .
the characteristic value for angle of friction at constant volume of reinforced fill material under effective stress conditions must be carried out using in accordance with australian standard methods of testing soils for engineering purposes soil strength and consolidation tests determination of shear strength of a soil direct shear test using a shear box as listed in section num .
the effective cohesion of the reinforced fill adopted for design shall be taken as zero .
b the contractor shall submit the following information for review by the superintendent not less than two weeks prior to the commencement of construction of the rss or its foundations i forconstruction drawings ii copy of the certificate of compliance design certified by the proof engineer iii sampling and test plan for materials that demonstrates compliance with the specified standards including the shear strength and coefficient of friction for the select fill iv contractspecific quality plan in accordance with section num. c where synthetic soil reinforcement is to be used the type of materials shall be submitted for review including but not limited to the following i dimensions including crosssectional dimensions of strip and grid materials ii characteristic ultimate tensile strength longitudinal and transverse where geogrid is used iii strain at both ultimate and nominated tensile strength in both longitudinal and transverse directions where grid materials are to used iv creeplimited strength in the longitudinal axis at the specified design life v long term tensile strength at num elongation i.e .
initial and creep strain department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num vi minimum breaking load vii considerations of and allowance for strength reduction over the life of the structure due to creep deformation and rupture viii allowance for strength reduction due to variations in manufacturing process ix allowances for extrapolation of uncertainties where test duration is less than the design life x material strength and durability testing for the effects of exposure to num. water num. aggressive fluids num. aggressive soils num .
uv radiation num. temperature effects num. resistance to mechanical damage num. contact with the fill materials intended for use with the rss xi list of partial factors for both construction damage and environmental effects xii predicted maximum lateral displacement in facing panel xiii wall geometry xiv facing panel details including num. intended applications structure name and dimensions num. geometry num. durability considerations in accordance with the requirements of the australian standard for bridge design as listed in section num exposure classification mix design cover num. sealing of joints num. joint details loadtransfer mechanism num. foundations xv foundations geotechnical considerations xvi the performance and durability of synthetic soil reinforcement used as part of the proprietary reinforced soil systems shall comply with the specification and the manufacturers specification xvii installation num. training num. supervision num. general sequence of working num. method of placing and compacting fill and tensioning ties num. details of ties around obstructions such as piles and void formers .
num geotechnical information the contractor shall assess all available site conditions information and consider conducting a sitespecific geotechnical investigation to establish the properties of the existing natural or constructed ground .
the assessment and investigation shall include the soil and ground water properties necessary for the design of the rss and the accuracy of its construction and performance in accordance with the requirements of the specification .
the superintendent will not be responsible for the rss failing to meet the specification or any costs associated with mitigation of the rss to meet the requirements the specification as a result of latent geotechnical conditions .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the contractor shall allow sufficient time in its program for the geotechnical investigation and laboratory testing .
num design rss shall have a minimum design life of num years .
the contractor shall design the rss and prepare a specification and drawings for the manufacture of its components and for its construction .
the contractor shall have in place a quality management system in accordance with section num which ensures compliance with the performance requirements described on the drawings and in the specification .
the design shall be proofengineered by a proof engineer who shall be prequalified at level pe in accordance with the vicroads prequalification scheme or approved by the superintendent .
rss used in conjunction with a bridge abutment shall be independent of the bridge structure .
vertical and horizontal loads arising from the bridge shall be supported on piles .
piles shall be surrounded with a compressible material to ensure that horizontal loads arising from the rss are not be transmitted to the piles .
the rss shall be designed to support dead and live loads arising from bridge approach roads including vertical and lateral loads soil pressures impact loads from barriers and guard fences and loads arising from signs and sign support structures .
void formers shall be provided within the rss to accommodate foundations where specified or detailed on the drawings .
void formers shall be designed to withstand soilpressure and the loads arising from piling activities with appropriate provisions for pile creep .
if a protective barrier is required at the face of the rss the position of the rss shall be adjusted in order to maintain the specified minimum clearance between the edge of the adjacent lane and the barrier .
the rss shall satisfy the stability requirements of the australian standards for bridge design and earth retaining structures .
the contractor shall determine the allowable bearing pressures and the maximum settlement of the founding material under the rss using information obtained from the sitespecific geotechnical investigation conducted in accordance with clause num .
subsurface drainage which complies with this specification shall be provided within the rss where necessary to intercept groundwater and to prevent the development of hydrostatic pressure behind the facing panels .
a separate drainage system which complies with this specification shall be provided to collect and discharge surface water into the storm water drainage system .
the verticality of the rss wall facing shall lean backward at a minimum slope of numh in num v. num materials the contractor shall supply all materials required for the manufacture and construction of the rss .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the initial strength stiffness and durability of materials for use in rss shall be such that on the expiry of the design life the materials possess sufficient strength and stiffness to satisfy the requirements of the design .
not less than four weeks prior to the proposed use of materials and components the contractor shall submit a signed statement including test reports demonstrating compliance of the materials and components with the rss suppliers specification and the specification .
the requirements for rss soil reinforcement that is located in aggressive environments shall be as specified on the drawings and in the specification .
reinforcing strips which are attached to the wall facing panels and embedded in the fill together with their connections shall be fabricated from materials which shall be sufficiently strong stiff stable and durable to satisfy the performance and design requirements of the specification .
the contractor shall submit data from laboratory and site applications in representative conditions that demonstrates the suitability of the proposed system to satisfy the specified design life .
num soil reinforcing a steel nonextensible reinforcement for rss i all steel components for use in rss shall comply with the requirements of section num .
steel straps shall have a thickness of num mm .
all steel components including couplers shall be galvanized in accordance with the australian standard for hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles as listed in section num .
the contractor shall submit certificates of compliance to the superintendent demonstrating that the thickness of steel components and the minimum zinc coating mass for galvanized steel components complies with section num. ii steel soil reinforcement shall incorporate additional sacrificial steel to allow for loss of thickness due to corrosion .
the rate of corrosion shall be determined by nature of installation and climatic conditions relevant to the site .
the minimum rate of corrosion shall be num mm per year .
the total derived thickness shall be sufficient to achieve the specified design life .
at the end of the design life the residual thickness of steel shall be sufficient to safely support the design dead and live loads .
assessment of the rate of corrosion for this purpose shall include an allowance for the effect of stray currents from adjacent power sources .
b synthetic extensible soil reinforcement for rss i synthetic soil reinforcement shall not be incorporated in rss for bridges retaining walls or other structures without the prior approval of the superintendent subject to the requirements of clause num. ii where approval to use geosynthetic soil reinforcement in the works is granted the batches of material delivered to site shall be not more than num months old at the time of their incorporation into the works .
iii joints for synthetic soil reinforcement shall have a strength that is not less than the adjacent synthetic soil reinforcement and shall enable the adjacent reinforcement to achieve its full tensile strength over the design life of the structure allowing for the effects of creep together with any other changes in material properties that may occur over the life of the structure .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num testing of synthetic soil reinforcements a the contractor shall provide a certificate of compliance stating that each batch of synthetic soil reinforcement complies with the type strength and durability requirements of the specification .
the certificate shall provide full details of the required material properties and shall be accompanied by test results .
b certificates dated more than one calendar year before the date of delivery of the materials to site shall not be accepted .
c the contractor shall submit two representative samples of each layer of soil reinforcing material for testing in a nataaccredited laboratory .
the contractor shall provide a statement which shall be supported with the test results certifying that the durability of the effectiveness of the material with time e.g .
chemical and biological degradation creep and elongation when the material is subject to the design loads are in accordance with the manufacturers specification and the associated national or international standards and the requirements of the specification .
the statement of compliance shall be provided for the superintendents review two weeks prior to commencement of construction of the rss .
if nata has not accredited a laboratory for testing the following must be satisfied i materials testing shall be conducted in accordance with recognised standards and test procedures by a nataaccredited laboratory ii testing overseas must be conducted by a laboratory which is accredited in accordance with a mutual recognition agreement and is listed on the nata website .
test reports shall be endorsed with the identifying mark of the accredited laboratory .
in this case the test must be conducted and the results certified in accordance with the accreditation conditions or iii approval by the superintendent including results in an acceptable format .
d testing shall reflect conditions specific to the intended application including the relevant design loads and the intended fill materials .
e test results are to include interpretation where appropriate .
hp evidence that the proposed synthetic soil reinforcement meets the design requirements of the specification shall be provided to the superintendent for review .
construction of the rss shall not proceed until the signed statement and certificates of compliance have been reviewed by the superintendent .
num facing panels facing panels shall be designed in accordance with btnnum detailing of reinforced soil facing panels and manufactured in accordance with section num and section num .
minimum area of reinforcement concrete mix designation cover to reinforcement and standard of surface finish shall be as described in btnnum detailing of reinforced soil facing panels .
facing panels shall be interconnected to prevent relative displacement normal to the wall face .
the maximum differential movement shall be within the limit of the manufacturer of the rss and the specification .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num joint fillers joint fillers shall be provided between facing panels to allow limited rotation at the joints without spalling of panel edges to maintain joint thickness within design tolerances and to prevent loss of fines from the backfill material and staining of the panel faces .
the joint filler shall consist of a flexible durable and inert material .
num connections connections shall have a design life of num years .
connections between facing panels and reinforcing elements shall be made wholly from steel or from similar metals in order to prevent corrosion .
steel components shall be galvanized in accordance with the australian standard for hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles as listed in section num with a minimum average coating thickness equivalent to an application rate of num grams per square metre of zinc .
the contractor shall provide a certificate of compliance certifying that the mass of zinc coating on galvanized steel components meets the specified requirements and that steel components have sufficient sacrificial steel thickness in combination with the galvanizing to achieve the specified design life .
connections made of synthetic materials shall comply with the requirements of clause numb .
where connections are made of synthetic soil reinforcement such as geogrids there shall be no splicing or joining of geogrid layers in the primary strength direction .
num handling transportation and storage prefabricated rss components shall be handled transported and stored in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations in a manner that prevents damage and deterioration .
precast concrete facing panels shall be handled transported and stored in accordance with section num .
num select fill select fill shall comply with the requirements of the rss designer the minimum requirements of section num of this specification for type a filling and shall a consist of naturally occurring or processed natural material which at the time of placing is capable of being compacted in accordance with the specified requirements to form a stable mass of fill b be free from organic or other deleterious material c have a particle size distribution shear strength and coefficient of friction value to ensure the rss design parameters are achieved d have the chemical and electrical properties stated in table num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num soil reinforceme nt site resistivity ohm.cm ph cl mgk g sonum mgkg steel dry land num num num num num num num num num steel submerged not sea wa ter num num num num num polyester na num num hdpe na num num if the site is atrisk of submergence by sea water a specific investigation shall be conducted and selection of fill materials shall be subject to approval by the superintendent .
testing of the select fill material shall be in accordance with the test methods and frequency prescribed for the proprietary rss system and the minimum standards prescribed in section num .
pulverised fuel ash pfa shall not be used as select fill .
num construction the rss shall be constructed at the location and to the shape and dimensions shown on the drawings in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations subject to the tolerances specified in clause num .
where future extensions of the rss are indicated on the drawing or detailed as a requirement in the contract the design of the rss wall shall allow for both initial and future configurations .
for walls which are to be extended in height the first stage reinforcement and facing panels shall have sufficient capacity to support subsequent increases in wallheight together with any surcharge without the need for enhancement .
removal and replacement of facing panel components to allow future extension is permitted .
the reduced levels and position of the soil reinforcement shall not deviate from the specified level and position by more than num mm .
num earthworks hp the contractor shall submit compaction test results for each layer of fill placement to the superintendent for review and acceptance .
no further fill placement shall be allowed if the total thickness of fill placement is greater than num m measured from the last layer that has been accepted .
if any layer is found to be not in compliance with the compaction requirement that layer and the layers above it shall be removed .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num earthworks for rss shall comply with the requirements of section num .
testing and acceptance of compaction shall comply with section num regardless of the manufacturers requirements .
fill materials shall be placed and compacted in a direction parallel to the face of the structure and shall be completed in conjunction with the erection of the facing panels .
compacted layers of fill material shall be horizontal and of uniform thickness .
the upper surface of the fill material shall slope down to the back of the rss block to promote drainage of surface water away from the wall facing .
filling and compaction shall be conducted with care in order to avoid damage to or displacement of reinforcing elements and facing panels .
tracked machines or vehicles shall not be allowed to traffic over or work on reinforcing elements until the reinforcement is protected by a minimum num mm layer of fill material .
sheepsfoot rollers shall not be used for compaction of fill material .
the condition of the soil reinforcement and connections to facing panels shall be inspected by the contractor for compliance and a written record of each inspection shall be filed in the contractors quality system prior to placing the next layer of select fill material .
num erection of wall panels and placement of soil reinforcing elements wall facing panels shall be placed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
each facing panel shall be temporarily and securely supported during and after its erection until the adjacent fill material has been placed and compacted .
reinforcing elements shall be placed at the required level and position directly on top of the compacted fill material and connected to the wall panels in accordance with the design .
any twists kinks sags or deviations in the reinforcing elements shall be removed prior to the placement of fill material on the reinforcing .
wall construction shall include provision of inserts where specified .
the level and alignment of each course of facing panels shall be checked progressively after placement of each course and prior to placement of the next course to ensure compliance with the dimensional and positional tolerances stated in the design .
the contractor shall record the results of this checking together with details of any nonconformances and the associated corrective actions .
num spoon drains spoon drains shall be provided at the top of rss walls to collect surface water drainage from adjacent batters .
the spoon drains shall discharge to collection pits with outlets to a surface water drainage system .
num safety fences where a fallhazard exists at the top of the rss a safety fence shall be provided .
unless otherwise specified the fence shall be num metres high with a galvanized steel tube top and bottom rail faced with galvanized steel chain mesh .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num tolerances on finished dimensions and position of reinforced soil structure the following tolerances shall apply on completion of the rss a plan position shown on the drawings at base of wall shall not exceed num mm b relative displacement of adjoining smooth panel faces shall not exceed num mm measured normal to face of wall c local deviation of the wall face measured at any location with a num m straight edge shall not exceed num mm d the tolerance on position measured at the top of the wall face shall not exceed num mm per num metre of wall height e the wall level shall not deviate from the specified level by more than num mm f variation in gap width between facing panels shall not exceed num mm per metre length and num mm over the full length of the gap .
num shape of reinforced soil structure to ensure compliance with the tolerances specified in clause num the contractor shall install stable and permanent survey reference points on a not more than num m horizontal by num m vertical grid covering the whole face of the rss .
the contractor shall take measurements of the position of the rss at the points defined in clause numa to f at intervals not exceeding one month for the first six months immediately following completion of the rss and at intervals not exceeding six months thereafter until the end of the defects liability period .
the measurements shall be recorded in writing and reported to the superintendent within two weeks of the survey .
the contractor shall extrapolate these measurements in order to predict the position of the rss at the end of its design life .
the predicted position of the rss shall be plotted on a log time scale plot .
if the position of the rss and its rate of movement at the end of the defects liability period indicates that the specified positional tolerances will be exceeded before the end of the design life a the contractor shall take remedial action at its own expense to ensure that the rss will comply with the specified positional requirements throughout its design life b the contractor shall continue to take measurements at its own expense until it is demonstrated that the rss will comply with the positional requirements and c the defects liability period shall be extended by an equivalent period or as agreed by the superintendent .
in respect of clause numa not less than two weeks before the commencement of the remedial work the contractor shall submit its proposals for remedial work to the superintendent for review .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num soil nail walls this section crossreferences sections num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for the supply of materials testing and construction of soil nail walls .
num definitions for the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply soil nail a component of a soil strengthening system consisting of steel or fibre reinforced polymer frp reinforcement bars inserted centrally into a predrilled hole and grouted in place .
a soil nail does not require posttensioning .
soil nail wall a soil strengthening system consisting of soil nails installed at appropriate intervals in both horizontal and vertical directions to provide a permanent support to the material retained by the wall .
bonded length the length of a soil nail along which passive resistance is developed .
num standards table num standards design standards required for as num part num amdt num bridge design foundations and soil supporting structures design and construction of soil nail walls asnzs num amdts num num earth retaining structures design and construction of a soil nail wall designed to function as an earth retaining structure where the design requirements differ between the two australian standards the requirements of as num shall take precedence over those of asnzs num .
material and testing standards american concrete institute aci nummnum specification for carbon and glass fibrereinforced polymer bar materials for concrete reinforcement astm dnumdnummnum standard test method for tensile properties of fiber reinforced polymer matrix composite bars astm anum standard specification for zinc alloy thermodiffusion coatings tdc on steel fasteners hardware and other products astm c num standard test method for expansion and bleeding of freshly mixed grouts for preplaced aggregate concrete in the laboratory as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout part num methods of sampling and testing admixtures for concrete mortar and grout as num calibration and classification of forcemeasuring systems asnzs num guide to the protection of structural steel against atmospheric corrosion by the use of protective coatings as num general purpose and blended cements asnzs num amdt num polyethylene pe pipes for pressure applications asnzs num steel reinforcing materials asnzs num hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles standards are referenced in an abbreviated form e.g .
asnzs num section num details the relevant references to these documents .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num soil nail design soil nail design shall be in accordance with as num and asnzs num and the appropriate material and testing standards listed in table num .
notwithstanding the requirements of these standards a soil nail shall have a minimum of num m bonded length .
the length of a soil nail within num m minimum behind the shotcrete facing shall not be included in development of soil nail capacity .
hp the contractor shall submit construction drawings for review by the superintendent a minimum of four weeks prior to commencement of soil nail installation .
at each layer of soil nailing the construction drawings shall include the following information a the name qualifications and relevant experience of the contractors nominated geotechnical representatives .
b the procedure for inspection of the excavated soil face and verification of consistency with design assumptions including the sampling method and frequency the methodology and parameters for classification of soils and field estimation of rock strength and the records that will be retained for quality assurance .
c the proposed construction procedure for drilling installing and grouting the soil nails including details of the drilling equipment and grouting equipment .
a permanent polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe or polyvinyl chloride pvc grout collar shall be installed in each drilled hole before installation of the soil nail to prevent collapse of soil in the drilled hole .
d a drawings showing i full description of expected material types and groundwater levels ii soil nail diameter hole diameter grout mix iii minimum adhesion between each material type and grout iv bond length of the soil nail along which capacity of the nail is developed v design capacity of individual soil nails vi horizontal inclination of soil nails vii nail assembly including the soil nail type and spacing of centralisers the grout tubes grout collar and grouting bung viii the encapsulation anchor head and any materials required for electrical isolation or corrosion protection .
if the contractor proposes to install the soil nails before applying sprayed concrete to the face of the soil the details to be submitted in accordance with clause num shall include measures that will be taken to preserve the integrity of the excavated face until sprayed concrete is applied .
design and construction of soil nail walls shall comply with the requirements of the australian standard for bridge design foundations and soil supporting structures as listed in section num .
a soil nail wall designed to function as an earth retaining structure shall meet the requirements of the australian standard for earth retaining structures as listed in section num .
where the design requirements differ between the two australian standards the requirements of the australian standard for bridge design foundations and soil supporting structures shall take precedence over those of the requirements of earth retaining structures .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num construction sequence the construction of the soil nail walls shall be carried out in the following sequential order unless otherwise approved by the superintendent a soil shall be excavated in layers as specified on the drawings .
b the excavated soil face shall be inspected by a suitably qualified geotechnical engineer to confirm consistency with the design assumptions .
the contractor shall ensure that the geotechnical engineers inspection records and findings are retained as quality assurance records .
c the exposed soil surface shall be prepared reinforcement placed and one layer of sprayed concrete applied to the face of the soil .
minimum clearance between the reinforcement and the soil surface shall comply with the requirements of the australian standard for bridge design foundations and soil supporting structures as listed in section num .
sprayed concrete shall comply with the requirements of section num. d when the sprayed concrete has attained the specified strength holes for the soil nails shall be drilled and soil nails installed and grouted .
e load tests will be carried out to confirm soil nail capacity before excavation of the next layer .
f drains shall be constructed at the time the layers of wall incorporating the drains are constructed .
hp if the geotechnical engineers inspection reveals that the soil profile differs from that assumed in the design the matter shall be referred back to the designers and soil nails shall not be installed until the design has been verified or amended to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
num soil nails a steel reinforcement i soil nails shall consist of grade numy deformed high strength steel reinforcing bars complying with the requirements of asnzs num and the requirements of section num including the supply to the superintendent of a current certificate of approval issued by the australian certification authority for reinforcing steel acrs .
the bars shall be detailed as shown on the drawings or as specified .
ii where a soil nail consists of two or more steel reinforcing bars joined by a coupler between bars the couplers shall be of the same strength grade or higher grade than the bars .
b carbon and glass fiberreinforced polymer frp reinforcement where the contractor proposes to use carbon or glass fiberreinforced polymer bar materials for soil nails approval may be granted by the superintendent provided that the contractor demonstrates the adequacy of the proposed frp system to meet the design requirements of this specification to the superintendents satisfaction .
in addition the following conditions shall be satisfied i frp bar nut washer and bearing plate shall satisfy all aspects of aci num. ii tensile properties of the frp bar shall comply with the property requirements of astm dnumdnummnum .
iii the frp bar used in a soil nail shall be of continuous length with no couplers and contain no joints .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num iv size of frp bar batches batch sizes and sampling shall comply with aci num. v for certification and quality control batch testing shall be undertaken in australia to astm dnumdnummnum to provide the nataendorsed report directly related and traceable to each batch .
a test method statement shall be provided on the nata endorsed reports .
test certificates for each batch of bar shall be provided to the superintendent prior to frp bar being used .
vi where nuts and bearing plate are required the frp shall be a continuously threaded solid bar with continuously reinforced thread cross section .
bars that have cut or moulded threads applied as a secondary production process shall not be used .
vii the design ultimate tensile strength shall be limited to num of the minimum tensile strength of that published in the technical data sheet of the manufacturer of the frp .
viii frp soil nails shall be tested in accordance with clauses num and num for verification of construction quality .
hp frp bar shall not be installed until nataendorsed test certificates for each batch of bar have been submitted for review by the superintendent and written approval to use frp bar has been given by the superintendent .
num corrosion protection a where frp bars and materials are approved for use as soil nails by the superintendent further corrosion protection is not required .
b all steel soil nails including bars nuts washers bearing plates and couplers shall be either i galvanized in accordance with asnzs num or ii thermodiffusion coated to astm anum to achieve at least coating class num or a minimum thickness of zinc of num microns or iii coated with a zincrich num zinc by weight in the dry film coating product that achieves a minimum thickness of zinc of num microns .
nuts shall be suitably treated after application of corrosion protection to run freely on the bar thread .
c centralisers shall be provided at num m intervals minimum along a soil nail to ensure that a minimum grout cover of num mm is maintained over the entire length of the soil nail .
centralisers shall be manufactured from a corrosion resistant material and shall be shaped to ensure achievement of the specified minimum cover during insertion of the nails minimise disturbance of the hole during insertion and minimise obstruction to the grouting .
d prior to grouting all soil nails shall be insulated from contact with groutshotcrete at the interface between the ground and the underside of the shotcrete facing .
the contractor shall apply corrosion protection over the entire length of the soil nail to be embedded in the shotcrete facing .
the protection shall be extended to a minimum of num mm behind the underside of the shotcrete facing .
very heavy duty and robust wrapping tapes complying with the requirements of asnzs num shall be used for the protection work and these tapes shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
e all steel soil nails shall be encapsulated in a corrugated sheath sealed at the buried end .
the superintendent will not consider the use of nails without encapsulation unless the contractor can i verify by exhumation of sacrificial nails that the soil nail installation procedure will achieve a minimum cover of num mm of dense cement grout for the full length of the nail and ii verify during installation of production nails that the alignment of each hole is at least as straight as the holes drilled for the sacrificial test nails .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num f each encapsulation sheath shall i be manufactured from high density polyethylene complying with as num with a minimum wall thickness of num mm ii have corrugations with a pitch between num mm and num mm and depth not less than num mm iii be securely sealed at the buried end of the nail and at any joints iv extend to the top of the grout collar v withstand a water head of num m without leaking or deformation vi be fitted with internal centralisers at each end of the nail and between the ends at a spacing that will achieve a minimum gap of num mm between the nail and the sheath vii be fitted with external centralisers at a maximum spacing of num m to achieve a gap between the encapsulation sheath and the drilled hole of at least num mm .
num casings a permanent ptfe or pvc grout collar shall be installed in each drilled hole before installation of the soil nail to prevent collapse of soil inside the drilled hole .
unless the contractor can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent that all of the drilled holes for the soil nails will not collapse in any form or shape at any stage during the entire soil nail installation process temporary casings shall be placed for the full depth of the bored holes to support and prevent collapse of the drilled holes until supported by the soil nail system itself .
the casing shall be withdrawn progressively during grouting of the hole .
the thickness of the casings shall be determined by the contractor who shall be responsible for its structural adequacy and the effects of any distortion which is likely to occur to the casings .
num grout tubing grout and bleed tubing of a minimum internal diameter of num mm shall be provided .
tubing shall be made from high density polyethylene type pn num nominal working pressure of num mpa complying with the requirements of asnzs num .
tubing shall have a wall thickness of at least num mm .
tubing shall be of adequate strength to resist damage both during installation and grouting .
the grout collar shall be inserted at least num mm into the drilled hole and may project up to num mm into the sprayed concrete face .
num soil nail design verification test the contractor shall carry out testing on sacrificial nails in accordance with clause num to validate the soil nail design and to demonstrate that the proposed procedure will achieve the specified soil nail durability and load capacity .
hp prior to commencement of sacrificial soil nail installation the contractor shall submit to the superintendent for review a procedure for soil nail installation and grouting .
the contractor shall provide the following information a installation procedure for sacrificial nails including details of the plant and equipment to be used b the method of drilling and the proposed hole diameter c the method equipment and materials to be used for grouting d all details to be recorded on the soil nail lot register e proposed detailed construction procedure .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num tests on sacrificial nails unless approved otherwise by the superintendent the contractor shall carry out the following tests to validate the soil nail design and to demonstrate that the proposed procedure will achieve the specified soil nail durability and load capacity .
a pullout tests on sacrificial nails a batch of at least three pullout tests shall be performed on sacrificial nails for each type of soil profile encountered .
the soil nail configuration and length and the drilling installation and grouting procedure shall be the same as proposed for the production nails except that each test nail shall be constructed initially with a free length ungrouted section at the top of the nail and a bonded length grouted section .
the free length shall be a minimum of num m or as specified by the designers to allow for transfer of load to the bonded section of the test nail .
the bonded length shall be sufficiently long to allow for testing of skin friction bond strength between the bar and the grout and between the grout and the soil nail hole .
the nominated test load shall be a minimum of num times the ultimate soil to grout adhesion value adopted in the soil nail design for each defined soil profile .
the test load shall be applied directly to the head along the axis of the test nail .
the test load shall be applied gradually in increments of num of the nominated test load and each increment shall be held for num minutes .
immediately after the nominated test load has been fully applied the nail head deflection relative to a fixed datum shall be recorded at time intervals of num num num num num and at num minute intervals thereafter .
the load shall be held constant at the nominated test load for four num hours .
the test nail shall then be unloaded in increments of num percent of the nominated test load recording the nail head deflection immediately after each stage of unloading .
results of the soil nail pullout tests shall be documented by the contractor and a copy of the results forwarded to the superintendent within num hours of completing the test .
the pullout test shall be deemed to have failed if the test nail does not meet all of the following criteria the plot of nail head displacement with log time shall be linear or display a decreasing rate of creep and the creep rate shall be less than num mm per log cycle of time at the test load the movement of the steel bar head under the test load shall be less than num percent of the bonded soil nail length the maximum total nail head displacement at the design load shall not exceed num mm beyond the theoretical elastic deformation of the free length plus one half of the bonded length .
should any one of the acceptance criteria not be met the contractor shall revise the design and shall undertake further sacrificial testing until the soil nail design has been validated .
b exhumation test on sacrificial nails the batch of soil nails used for the sacrificial pullout tests shall be exhumed to verify the adequacy of the grout cover .
precautions shall be taken to avoid damage during exhumation to the grout column .
the exhumed nails shall be cut into num mm lengths and the minimum grout cover at each section shall be photographed measured and recorded .
if any section on any nail in the batch has a grout cover less than the specified minimum cover the contractor shall amend the installation procedure and conduct further exhumation tests until the specified minimum cover is achieved at each section of each batch of num sacrificial test nails .
the superintendent shall be notified at least num hours in advance of each load test and each exhumation test .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c exhumation tests on sacrificial nails without encapsulation if the contractor proposes to install production nails without encapsulation the soil nail installation procedure shall be validated by installing and exhuming each batch of three full length grouted nails in each type of soil profile encountered .
if any section on any nail in the batch has less than num mm of dense grout the production nails shall be encapsulated .
hp installation of production nails shall not commence until the soil nail design and the installation procedure have been validated by testing to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
num soil nail installation a general soil nails shall be installed as soon as practicable after completion of excavating each layer .
the soil nail shall be inserted and grouted on the same day as the completion of drilling the hole .
b drilling drilling of holes for soil nails shall be in accordance with the drawings or as specified .
deviation in alignment shall not exceed num in num .
deviation from straight shall not exceed num mm in any num metres .
the holes shall be located within num mm radius of the design nail position .
where no protective sheathing is provided for permanent soil nails the drill hole diameter shall be such that the steel bar shall have a minimum grout cover of num mm .
water or any other liquid shall not be used as drilling fluid or for flushing the holes .
c insertion of soil nails hp all soil nail holes shall be inspected prior to inserting the soil nail .
all drilling records shall be available for inspection by the superintendent prior to inserting the soil nail .
the soil nail shall be installed in one continuous operation to avoid damage to the nail and the drill hole and shall be positioned and secured to prevent movement .
d bearing plates and anchor heads soil nail bearing plates shall have the minimum dimensions in accordance with the drawings and shall have corrosion protection as specified in clause num .
the plates shall be fixed to the nail head through use of a cupped washer and nut to accommodate variation in plate angle .
the plates shall be bedded firmly onto the shotcrete face with nonshrink mortargrout .
if soil nails are anchored within the spayed concrete face the anchor head shall be designed to ensure full penetration of the sprayed concrete .
bearing plates shall not be used as anchor heads in this situation .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num grouting a grout i grout mix design the contractor shall include full details of the grout proportions and additives the equipment and methods which he proposes to use in the soil nail installation procedure specified in clause num .
grout for filling soil nail holes shall be composed of cement water and an admixture to reduce shrinkage and bleeding .
cement shall conform to the requirements for type gp general purpose cement in accordance with as num and shall be free from calcium chloride .
admixtures shall not contain chlorides nitrates or similar electrolytic conducting materials and shall only be used where they will increase workability or reduce shrinkage and bleeding .
the watercement wc ratio shall be as low as possible consistent with adequate workability and shall be between num and num .
all batching shall be by mass with an approved measuring device and to an accuracy of num .
the contractor shall state the maximum watercement wc ratio for the proposed mix design and provide test results including the num day compressive strength bleeding properties and flow cone value .
the grout mix design shall be strictly adhered to by the contractor .
in the event of changes to the agreed grout mix design the contractor shall submit a new grout mix design to the superintendent for review or approval as appropriate .
ii soluble salts chlorideion content the maximum acidsoluble chlorideion content of the grout as placed expressed as the percentage of the total mass of cement in the grout mix shall not be greater than num .
sulphate content the sulphate content of grout as placed expressed as the percentage by mass of acidsoluble sonum to the total cement in the grout mix shall not be greater than num .
sulphate and chlorideion content shall be determined by testing of hardened concrete in accordance with as num. iii testing of grout the following tests shall be carried out both on trial batches of grout for mix design purposes and on production batches at the frequency specified compressive strength test cubes shall be made cured and tested in accordance with the requirements of as num .
the minimum compressive strength for the grout shall be num mpa at num days .
the cube side dimension shall be in the range num to num mm .
at least one pair of cubes shall be taken from each five cubic metres or part thereof of grout .
bleeding at least one bleed test shall be carried out for each five cubic metres or part thereof of grout in accordance with the requirements of astm c num .
the bleeding of the grout shall not exceed num of the volume three hours after mixing and shall not exceed num of the volume at any time .
all separated water shall be absorbed within num hours .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num workability flow cone value testing using a flow cone to determine grout flow time time to first break in continuous flow of grout shall be in accordance with as num .
the flow time of the grout shall be in the range of num to num seconds .
at least one determination of flow time shall be made from each five cubic metres or part thereof of grout .
b grout mixing and pumping equipment details of the mixing and pumping equipment shall be included in the soil nail installation procedure specified in clause num .
grout shall be mixed in a high speed mechanical mixer for at least two minutes until a uniform colloidal consistency is produced .
mixing by hand or by a tumbling action will not be permitted .
water shall be added to the mixer first then the cement shall be added gradually and the grout stirred continuously until pumped into the soil nail hole .
grout shall be stirred for a minimum period of two minutes prior to being pumped into the soil nail hole .
admixtures shall be added to the mix in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the hoppers to the pumps shall be fitted with num mm sieve strainers .
grout shall not be used later than num hours after the addition of cement to the mix .
pumps shall be capable of continuous operation with little pressure variation and shall have a system for recirculating the grout whilst actual grouting is not in progress .
pumps shall be fitted with a pressure gauge and shall be capable of delivery at pressures up to num mpa .
the use of compressed air will not be permitted .
all piping to the grout pump shall have a minimum of bends valves and changes in diameter .
all pipes and fittings shall have a minimum internal diameter of num mm .
all equipment especially piping shall be thoroughly washed with clean water after each series of operations and more frequently if necessary .
c grouting operations grouting shall not be carried out while the air temperature is below numc or while the shade temperature exceeds numc .
just prior to grouting the contractor shall ensure that all loose soil in a soil nail hole is removed .
the soil nail bar shall then be placed centrally in the drill hole .
where a soil nail hole is supported by a temporary casing the casing shall be withdrawn gradually .
a minimum of num m of the bottom end of the casing shall be filled with grout before the casing is fully withdrawn .
grout shall then be injected into each sheathing at a speed of between num m and num m per second .
the contractors grouting procedure shall ensure that there are no air or water inclusions left in the grouted zone .
the volume of grout for each hole shall be recorded .
the contractor shall cease the grouting operation if the volume of grout injected is greater than ten times of the calculated volume to complete the grouting of the soil nail .
the contractor shall report this to the superintendent immediately and no further grouting shall be continued until the condition is reviewed by the superintendent .
where seepage of grout in a soil nail hole has occurred subsequent to grouting the contractor shall top up the soil nail hole with grout to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num soil nail production load tests the contractor shall submit a pullout test procedure to the superintendent for review at least num days prior to commencement of soil nail works .
the test load to be applied shall be as shown on the drawings or as specified .
hp the contractor shall carry out pullout tests per each layer of excavation .
the minimum number of pullout tests per each row of soil nails within each layer of excavation is the greatest number of soil nails calculated based on the following criteria num of the total number of soil nails num number soil nails num number soil nail per each soil type num number soil nail per installation method .
the locations of the soil nails to be tested shall be in accordance with the drawings or as nominated by the superintendent .
the soil nails for these pullout tests shall be supplied installed and tested by the contractor in accordance with the requirements of this section .
the tests are to establish the adequacy of the soil nail installation with respect to skin friction between the nail and soil for the various ground conditions which apply and shall be carried out in the presence of the superintendent .
a test nails a test nail shall be constructed in accordance with the drawings or as nominated by the superintendent .
the test nails shall consist of two components a free length ungrouted section and a bonded length grouted section .
the free length shall be a minimum of num m or as specified to allow for transfer of load to the bonded section of the test nail .
the bonded length shall be sufficiently long to allow for testing of skin friction bond strength between the bar and the grout and between the grout and the soil nail hole .
a test nail shall not form part of the production nails unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
all test nails which do not form part of the production nails shall be trimmed to a minimum of num mm below the finished batter face and shall be fully grouted on completion of the pullout test .
b test load the test load shall be calculated in order that the design allowable cohesion between ground grout can be verified .
the test load shall be a minimum of num times of the design minimum allowable groundgrout pullout resistance based on the bonded length of the test nail .
c pullout testing the test load shall be applied directly to the head and uniaxial to the line of action of a test nail .
the test load shall be applied gradually in increments of num of the maximum test load and each increment shall be held for num minutes .
immediately after the test load has been fully applied the nail head deflection shall be monitored at time intervals of num num num num num and at num minute intervals thereafter .
the test load shall then be held for num hours .
the test load shall be maintained constant throughout the entire duration of the testing .
at each time interval the actual movements of the soil nail independent of the base plate shall be recorded .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the test nail shall be unloaded in increments of num of the test load at num minute intervals recording the nail head deflection immediately after each stage of unloading .
a test shall be deemed to have failed if the movement of the steel bar or frp bar head under the test load is greater than num of the bonded soil nail length .
hp any test nails that fail the pullout test shall be reported to the superintendent immediately .
the reasons for the failure shall be ascertained by the geotechnical consultant nominated by the contractor and forwarded to the superintendent for review .
hp the contractor shall cease installation of the remaining soil nails until such time where the revised design allowable groundgrout pullout resistance has been addressed to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
d calibration of measuring equipment the measuring equipment shall permit elongation to be measured with a maximum uncertainty of num .
the force measuring system shall comply with the grade b requirements of asnzs num .
the tensioning force determined by applying all relevant corrections to the gauge reading from the calibration certificate and the tensioning force calculated from the elongation shall not differ by more than num .
all testing shall be carried out by personnel experienced in this testing and with equipment calibrated by a nata accredited laboratory .
calibration certificates shall be made available upon request by the superintendent .
e acceptance criteria the design allowable groundgrout pullout resistance shall be deemed to have failed if the test nail does not meet all of the following criteria the plot of nail head displacement with log time shall be linear or decreasing rate of creep and the creep rate shall be less than num mm per log cycle of time at the test load the movement of the steel bar head under the test load is less than num of the bonded soil nail length the maximum total nail head displacement at the design load shall not exceed num mm beyond the theoretical elastic deformation of the free length plus one half of the bonded length .
hp should any one of the acceptance criteria not be met the contractor shall revise the adequacy of the design allowable groundgrout pullout resistance and shall not commence installation of the production soil nails until such time where the revised design allowable groundgrout pullout resistance has be addressed to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
f records results of the soil nail pullout tests shall be documented by the contractor and a copy of the results forwarded to the superintendent within num hours of completing the test .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num sub surface drainage geocomposite strip drains shall be securely fixed to the excavated soil face prior to construction of the sprayed concrete wall and shall be masked to prevent concrete adhering to the filter face .
the low point of each strip drain shall be connected to a collector pipe with outlets to a spoon drain in front of the wall or as specified on the drawings .
the collector pipe shall be fitted with a flush out riser connected to an inspection opening at the top of the wall as shown on the drawing .
preformed pvc fittings shall be used for all connections between strip drains and the collector pipe and all connections shall be sealed and protected to prevent ingress of concrete during concrete spraying .
the collector pipe shall be flushed within num hours of the completion of the sprayed concrete surrounding it .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num sprayed concrete this section crossreferences sections num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the supply of materials construction and testing of sprayed concrete for both the wet and dry processes of application .
wet process sprayed concrete using premixed concrete may be used for structural applications such as retaining walls soil nail walls tunnel linings supporting in situ excavated material surface improvement and shortterm support .
wet process sprayed concrete construction using premixed concrete shall comply with the requirements of section num .
both the wet and dry processes of application may be used for concrete repair works and for the construction of overlays for cathodic protection cp of concrete structures using proprietary spray applied cementitious mortars .
concrete repair works using proprietary spray applied cementitious mortars shall comply with the requirements of section num .
num standards australian standards are referenced in an abbreviated form e.g .
as num. a australian standards as num methods of testing concrete as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout admixtures for grout asnzs num hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles .
b other standards astm anum standard specification for seel fibres for fibre reinforced concrete .
section num details the relevant references to these documents .
num definitions sprayed concrete mortar or concrete pneumatically projected from a nozzle sprayed at high velocity onto a receiving surface where the sprayed material undergoes simultaneous placement and compaction to produce a dense homogeneous mass .
as with conventional concrete the properties of sprayed concrete can be modified and further enhanced through the addition of additives or admixtures such as silica fume airentraining admixtures fibers and accelerators .
wet process application i.e .
shotcrete the technique where the premixed concrete or cementitious mortar is pumped down a hose to the exit nozzle where compressed air is introduced via a separate hose to continuously propel the mix onto the prepared substrate .
any conventional concrete mix which is designed as a pump mix can generally be placed with the wet process .
dry process application i.e .
gunite the technique where a dry mixture of cement additives and aggregates or bagged premixed proprietary formulated mortar is conveyed to a nozzle where mixing with pressurised water occurs to produce the suitable consistency for the concrete to stick to the sprayed surface without slumping or rebounding excessively .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num rebound part of the sprayed concrete which having struck the receiving surface does not adhere and deposits onto the ground or adjacent surfaces as wastage .
overspray material outside the intended receiving surface .
sloughingsagging subsidence of the freshly applied sprayed concrete from its initial point of projection on the receiving surface .
layer the thickness of sprayed concrete built up from a number of passes of the nozzle over the working area .
nozzle the equipment consisting of a pipe with a mixing unit into which the various constituents are introduced and fitted at the end of the delivery hose from which the sprayed concrete is projected onto the receiving surface .
nozzle operator the person controlling the nozzle and the application of the sprayed concrete .
aspect ratio the length of a fibre divided by its diameter .
concrete cover distance between the outside of the reinforcing steel and the nearest permanent surface of the sprayed concrete or between the outside of the reinforcement and the nearest point on the receiving surface .
num materials a wet process spray applied premixed concrete wetmixed shotcrete for structural application materials concrete mix design and tests for spray applied premixed concrete shall comply with the requirements of section num. b wet and dry process spray applied cementitious mortars for patch repair and cp overlay proprietary spray applied cementitious mortars shall comply with the requirements of section num. c reinforcement steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of section num .
steel reinforcement placed in sprayed applied concrete retaining walls soil nail walls tunnel linings supporting in situ excavated material and surface improvement shall be hotdip galvanised in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num .
contact between galvanised steel reinforcement and black steel shall not be allowed .
d fibres where steel or other fibres are nominated to be incorporated in the sprayed concrete the contractor shall submit details of the quality and source of fibre for review by the superintendent at least four weeks prior to the commencement of work .
fibres shall be supplied from one manufacturer and be of the same brand and type .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num fibres shall be added to the concrete in such a manner to ensure that they are uniformly distributed balling does not occur and the concrete mix remains workable pumpable and sprayable .
i steel fibres steel fibres shall comply with the requirements of astm anum for type i cold drawn wire or type ii cut sheet .
all fibres shall be deformed and have a minimum tensile strength of num mpa and an aspect ratio between num and num .
fibres shall be stored in dry sealed containers until ready for use and shall be free from corrosion oil grease chlorides and harmful materials which may reduce the efficiency of mixing or spray process or which may reduce the bond between the fibres and the sprayed concrete .
loose steel fibres shall be added through a num mm sieve onto a conveyor belt during the aggregate addition or to the mixer prior to the addition of aggregate and mixed in the usual manner .
glued steel fibres shall not be added through a sieve .
ii synthetic fibres synthetic fibres shall be in accordance with an acceptable national or international standard .
synthetic fibres in the form of fine micro polypropylene monofilament fibres shall be used in the sprayed concrete mix where mitigation of the effects of explosive spalling of sprayed concrete is required for fire protection .
e admixtures chemical admixtures shall comply with the requirements of as num .
the contractor shall submit a detailed procedure for the addition and mixing of admixtures into both wetmixed and drymixed sprayed concrete .
accelerators and other admixtures that are added to concrete at the nozzle or at the delivery hose shall be dispensed by calibrated mechanical means at dosage rates not exceeding the maximum recommended by the manufacturer .
all chemical admixtures added to wet process premixed concrete at the nozzle or at the delivery hose shall be included as part of the concrete mix design reviewed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
hydration control admixtures that suspend the hydration of sprayed concrete until the addition of the activator shall not cause a decrease in concrete strength with age .
f water water shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num additional concrete mix design and operational details a fibre content determination of fibre content shall be based on a sample of a known volume not less than num litres .
the sample shall be washed and the fibre content separated and weighed with results reported to the nearest num grams .
where synthetic fibres are used the samples may be soaked with alcohol stirred until the fibres float to the surface and the fibres recovered .
i steel fibre content steel fibre content determined from any portion of fresh concrete taken from the mixer shall comply with the nominal values stated in table num and the allowed variation as stated in clause numc .
table num nominal steel fibre dosage aspect ratio num num num num num num num nominal dosage kgmnum num num num num num num num ii synthetic fibre content synthetic fibre content determined from any portion of fresh concrete taken from the mixer shall be within the dosage range limits stated in the sprayed concrete mix design .
b drying shrinkage further to clause numj drying shrinkage of the concrete specimens made from the trial concrete mix after num weeks drying period or in the interim after num weeks shall comply with the requirements of table num .
where no exposure classification is stated requirements for exposure classification a shall apply .
table num maximum shrinkage strain of the nominated trial concrete mix design exposure classification maximum shrinkage strain microstrain drying period num weeks num weeks a num num bnum bnum num num c num num c maximum time for the application of sprayed concrete further to the requirements of clause numf for completion of concrete discharge where a hydration control admixture is added to the concrete mix to achieve the required time for the application of the sprayed concrete the approved application time shall not be exceeded .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num competency of personnel involved in sprayed concrete personnel undertaking the sprayed concrete works including the nozzle operator supervisor and finisher shall have a minimum of num years experience in sprayed concrete application and a demonstrated competency for substrate preparation sprayed concrete placement techniques and inspection sprayed concrete material quality equipment operation encapsulation of steel reinforcement finishing and curing .
the nozzle operator shall have a demonstrated competence and ability to produce sprayed concrete complying with the specification and have prequalification to the sprayed concrete procedure requirements as stated in clause num the sprayed concrete supervisor shall be trained and qualified on all aspects of sprayed concrete application techniques and shall be present at each stage of the works .
installation personnel shall be trained and skilled in the application procedures to be used .
documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate experience qualification skills and training of personnel .
num prequalification of spraying procedure a general hp the contractor shall submit details of the proposed sprayed concrete operations including the proposed type of sprayed concrete mix design substrate preparations method of application equipment and nozzle operators for review by the superintendent not less than num weeks prior to commencement of the sprayed concrete works .
the contractor shall produce evidence of the nozzle operators previous experience in the application of sprayed concrete .
the nozzle operators shall have demonstrated their competence and ability to produce sprayed concrete complying with the specification .
b preparation of test panels two test panels num mm x num mm and the greater of the specified thickness or num mm shall be constructed by the contractor for each nominated nozzle operator prior to commencing full scale works for the purpose of checking the suitability of the proposed mix design materials plant and equipment the method of working and the competence of the operator intended for the works .
the test panels shall be representative of the spraying operations to be adopted the in situ materials the location and the actual orientation i.e .
vertical overhead etc .
of the sprayed concrete member at the works .
spraying of concrete into the test panels when placed horizontally on the ground shall not be allowed .
additional panels will be required if the contractor should change the mix design plant and equipment or operator .
the test panels shall be stored and cured under similar conditions to the sprayed concrete placed in the works and in accordance with the requirements of this specification .
where reinforcement in the form of steel fabric steel reinforcement or titanium anode mesh for cp is to be used in the permanent works the same reinforcement detailing and number of layers or titanium anode mesh shall be provided in the test panel .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c sampling and testing of panels the contractor shall cut a sample of num cores from each test panel at right angles to the plane of the panel approximately num hours after the panel has been sprayed .
cores shall not be taken within num mm of the edges of the panel .
the contractor shall ensure that num of the cores per sample are cut from concrete adjacent to steel reinforcement for the purpose of visual assessment of the quality of the sprayed concrete adjacent to steel reinforcement .
for compressive strength testing one core per sample shall be tested at num days one at num days and two at num days after application of the sprayed concrete .
the required compressive strength for each set of two num day cores shall comply with the requirements of clause numeii .
the num day and num day tests shall be used to confirm strength development over time .
two cores per sample shall be tested for vpv values at num days in accordance with the requirements of section num .
vpv test results shall comply with the acceptance criteria as set out in table num for test cores .
d prequalification where it is shown that the same materials mix designs equipment procedures and personnel have given satisfactory results in similar works the superintendent may accept the construction of test panels concurrently with the first sprayed concrete placed in the works .
hp sprayed concrete shall not be placed in the permanent works until the superintendent has reviewed all prequalification procedures the results of testing and visual inspection of both the cores sampled and the test panels in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
concrete shall not be sprayed until the mix design has been reviewed by the superintendent .
hp the prequalified sprayed concrete procedure shall be adhered to throughout the permanent sprayed concrete works .
permanent sprayed concrete works shall only be carried out by the same nozzle operator who performed the prequalified procedure and produced the conforming test panels .
hp the prequalified nozzle operator and prequalified sprayed concrete procedure may only be changed after further prequalification and with the approval of the superintendent .
num testing and acceptance of sprayed concrete a sampling and testing of premixed concrete the concrete supplied for the works shall be sampled at the worksite and tested for compliance with section num .
in addition sampling and testing to determine fibre content shall be as stated in clause numc .
b sampling general sprayed concrete from the test panels and the finished works shall be sampled and tested by taking num mm diameter cores to confirm compliance with the required compressive strength num day volume of permeable voids vpv values thickness and visual verification of quality .
cores shall not contain reinforcing bars .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the cores shall be cored through the whole thickness of the sprayed concrete and visually inspected to verify that the sprayed concrete is dense and homogeneous without segregation of aggregate andor fibre or other visible imperfections as described in clause num .
should any of the cores reveal defects such as lack of compaction dry patches voids or sand pockets the superintendent may require further tests or cores from the sprayed concrete .
core holes in finished works shall be cleaned and repaired with a single component shrinkage compensating proprietary cementitious material in accordance with section num .
the exposed surface of the repaired hole shall be identical in texture and colour to the surrounding finished work concrete .
the cores shall be secured stored cured and tested in accordance with as num .
all cores shall be clearly labelled to identify them with the location they represent .
the strength and vpv requirements shall be in accordance with section num and as detailed on the drawings .
where the length of core from finished works is less than num mm core strengths shall be corrected in accordance with the correction factors given in as num .
coring from the works shall not be undertaken unless steel reinforcement has been located either by prior knowledge of its exact location or by use of a calibrated cover meter supplemented by reference to the drawings .
the location of the steel shall be clearly marked upon the surface of the concrete to ensure the accuracy of the coring activity .
for concrete repair and cp overlay works completed with proprietary spray applied cementitious mortars compliance with the required compressive strength and num day vpv values shall be confirmed by the sampling and testing of cores from production test panels as specified in clause numc .
sampling and testing of cores for compressive strength and num day vpv values from the finished concrete repair and cp overlay works is not required .
c sampling and testing for fibre content further to the requirements of clause numa for sampling and testing of concrete the fibre content shall be determined and assessed for compliance in accordance with clause num by sampling at a frequency of one test per five batch loads of concrete .
the concrete represented by the sample shall be deemed to comply if the fibre content as determined is within num of the fibre content in the approved mix design .
d sampling frequency of completed structural work the contractor shall take sample each days production from production lots established to meet the requirements of table num .
each production lot shall consist of num cores taken at locations which shall be representative of the work completed in a days spraying operation .
the actual core sites shall be selected in accordance with vicroads test method rc num except that areas within num mm of the edges of construction and within one num metre of a lateral construction joint shall be excluded from the lot .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the minimum number of samples shall be in accordance with table num .
table num volume of sprayed concrete per day mnum minimum number of production test lots of six cores num to num num num to num num for each additional num mnum of sprayed concrete constructed one additional sample of six cores shall be taken each sample of cores shall be tested as follows i visual inspection for each core the following shall be reported the height layer thickness of the core the visual appearance and presence of defects such as lack of compaction dry patches voids or sand pockets .
ii compressive strength test and report num core at num days num core at num days num cores at num days .
the num day and num day tests shall be used to confirm strength development over time .
where soil nails are to be inserted through the sprayed concrete the allocated core for the num day test shall be tested for compressive strength and the results assessed for compliance with the requirements prior to drilling proceeding .
iii num day volume of permeable voids vpv values num cores at num days .
e acceptance of testing the work shall be assessed for compliance with the requirements for testing as follows i visual inspection the average layer thickness shall not be less than that specified and no individual layer thickness measurement shall be less than num times the minimum requirement .
areas where the visual appearance and presence of defects on core surfaces is unacceptable shall be inspected and assessed in detail to define portions requiring repair .
ii compressive strength the required compressive strength for each set of two num day cores shall be satisfied if num each core has a compressive strength equal to or greater than num times that specified or num the average compressive strength is equal to or greater than num times that specified and the difference between the strength of individual cores is less than num of the average .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num iii num day volume of permeable voids vpv values test acceptance shall be in accordance with section num .
where layer thickness visual appearance and compressive strength test results do not comply with the acceptance criteria or where vpv test results do not comply with table num the contractor shall carry out rectification works .
these works shall achieve the specified level of durability otherwise the sprayed concrete represented by that sample shall be removed and replaced .
f concrete repair and cp overlay works completed with proprietary spray applied cementitious mortars i production test panels during each days application of sprayed concrete the contractor shall construct samples comprising of one production test panel representative of the work completed in accordance with the requirements of clause numb and c. the minimum number of samples of production test panels shall be in accordance with table num .
the production test panels shall be rigidly fixed alongside the position of application of sprayed concrete to the works .
the production test panels shall be stored and cured under similar conditions to the sprayed concrete placed in the works and in accordance with the specification .
each production test panel shall be sampled for testing to the requirements of clause numc .
where test results for num day compressive strength or vpv test results for production test panels do not comply with the requirements of clause nume the contractor shall carry out rectification works .
these works shall achieve the specified level of durability otherwise the sprayed concrete represented by that sample shall be removed and replaced .
ii quality control testing concrete repair works completed with proprietary spray applied cementitious mortar shall comply with the quality control testing requirements of clause numb c and d. cp overlay works completed with proprietary spray applied cementitious mortar shall comply with the visual inspection and soundness testing requirements of clause num and clause num .
num substrate preparation a surface of in situ material excavation to the required line and grade shall be carried out in accordance with section num .
the integrity of the surface of the in situ or excavated in situ material shall be maintained free of excessive wetting or drying prior to the application of the sprayed concrete .
action shall be taken to control groundwater by the installation of drains to prevent contact with the newly sprayed concrete surface or the development of hydrostatic pressures behind the sprayed concrete effective for the design life .
loose and unsound material which may affect adhesion of the sprayed concrete to the in situ surface shall be removed and the surface shall be cleaned before applying sprayed concrete .
the surface shall be damp but without free water and prepared so that no abrupt changes in the thickness of the sprayed concrete occur .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b concrete surfaces loose and unsound material shall be removed from the existing concrete surface .
the concrete surface shall be thoroughly cleaned down to remove any traces of dirt grease oil remnants of curing compounds and organic contaminants i.e .
moss algae etc .
or other substances that could interfere with the bond of the newly placed sprayed concrete .
where sprayed concrete is to be placed against a smooth concrete surface the surface shall be roughened as a minimum to an exposed aggregate finish by suitable means in accordance with section num .
the concrete substrate shall be adequately prewetted prior to the application of the sprayed concrete .
the surface shall be prepared such that no abrupt changes in thickness of the sprayed concrete occur .
for concrete repair and cp overlay works completed with proprietary spray applied cementitious mortars the concrete substrate shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of section num. c steelwork and reinforcement steelwork and reinforcement bars shall be free of loose or thick rust oil grease paint mud or any other harmful coating over the metal prior to the application of sprayed concrete .
reinforcement shall be firmly fixed to provide the cover clearances and laps described in the drawings or as specified in section num .
num application of sprayed concrete a equipment the equipment used shall have adequate capacity and be capable of delivering the concrete constituents to the nozzle at a uniform rate such that the sprayed concrete leaves the nozzle in a continuous uninterrupted stream and at a velocity of discharge which will maximise compaction minimise rebound and overspray and prevent sagging of the applied concrete .
equipment shall be capable of allowing the nozzle to be maintained perpendicular and at a distance of less than num m from the receiving surface and except where necessary at the required angle which will produce a dense in situ concrete with maximum adherence of material onto the prepared substrate .
delivery hoses shall have an internal diameter for unimpeded flow of material without blockages balling of fibre or segregation of aggregate andor fibre .
chemical admixture dispensing equipment shall be subject to regular maintenance and calibrated at three monthly intervals .
b application hp the contractor shall provide at least num days prior notice of each intention to place sprayed concrete .
hp sprayed concrete shall not be placed until the evidence that the substrate preparation reinforcement and embedments has been reviewed by the superintendent .
sprayed concrete shall be applied as soon as is practical following the preparation of the substrate as specified in clause num .
the finished sprayed concrete shall be dense and homogeneous for its full thickness without segregation of aggregate or fibres and without collapsing excessive rebound or other visible imperfections .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num each layer of the sprayed concrete shall be built up by making several passes over the working area .
during starting and stopping of the spraying operation or whenever flow becomes intermittent or irregular for any cause the nozzle operator shall direct the nozzle away from the work until it again becomes constant .
where a layer of sprayed concrete is to be covered by succeeding layers it shall be allowed to set prior to application of the succeeding layer .
the surface shall be checked for soundness segregated loose or otherwise uncompacted sprayed concrete removed repaired as specified cleaned and wetted using a blast of air and water .
for vertical and near vertical surfaces application shall commence at the bottom .
for overhead surfaces sprayed concrete shall be applied from the shoulder to the crown .
layer thickness shall be limited to a maximum of num mm to ensure that the material does not sag or delaminate .
the spray nozzle shall be held at such a distance and angle to ensure placement of concrete behind and around steel reinforcement before any concrete is allowed to accumulate on its front face .
sprayed concrete shall not be placed through more than one layer of steel fabric reinforcing bars or titanium anode mesh in one application .
any areas where rebound can not escape or be blown free shall be filled with sound concrete .
all overspray or rebound shall be removed prior to the placement of sprayed concrete onto adjacent surfaces .
where the spraying process is adversely affected by wind or other adverse effects during application spraying shall be discontinued unless special precautions can be implemented to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section .
curing compounds shall not be used when a further layer of sprayed concrete or other bonded finish is to be applied .
sprayed concrete shall only be applied in accordance with the requirements of section num with respect to temperature evaporation limits and concreting operations .
num finishing the surface finish of sprayed applied structural concrete retaining walls soil nail walls tunnel linings cp overlay and other structural components forming part of permanent works shall be steel floated and satisfy the requirements of section num for class num surface finish .
the surface finish of concrete repair works completed with proprietary spray applied cementitious mortar shall be in accordance with section num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings other sprayed concrete surfaces shall be left as sprayed .
all surface finishes shall be uniform in texture and free from any blowholes or surface imperfections as defined in clause num .
all freshly sprayed concrete shall be protected in accordance with the requirements of clause num which relate to temperature evaporative limits and concreting operations against harmful effects of weather including sun wind freezing or rapid drying rapid temperature changes rain or water until curing is implemented .
any sprayed concrete which is exposed to dripping water within the period from application to curing shall be nonconforming .
department of state growth vicroads march num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num num curing curing of sprayed concrete shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num .
hp the contractor shall submit details of the proposed method of curing the sprayed concrete to the superintendent for review at least num weeks prior to commencement of the sprayed concrete works .
the contractor shall not proceed with the spraying of concrete until the curing methods has been reviewed and approved by the superintendent .
num tolerances on surface of sprayed concrete the tolerances listed below will be a basis for acceptance of the sprayed concrete works .
tolerances for sprayed applied structural concrete which is used instead of conventionally placed structural concrete shall satisfy the requirements of clause num and table num .
tolerances for concrete repairs and cp overlay completed with proprietary spray applied cementitious mortars shall comply with the requirements of section num .
where sprayed concrete is to be placed to a specified shape it shall be within num mm of that shape and contain no depression greater than num mm below a num metre straight edge .
for sprayed concrete on natural surfaces or surfaces with undefined shape the thickness shall be within num mm num mm of the nominal thickness .
the contractor shall utilise probes during application of sprayed concrete to enable the monitoring of the required thickness .
the contractor may propose alternative methods for the monitoring of sprayed concrete thickness during application for the approval of the superintendent .
cover to the steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of the drawings .
num joints the positions and types of joints shall be as shown on the drawings .
all joints shall be formed square to the face of the panel .
num inspection and soundness of finished sprayed concrete the contractor shall undertake a visual inspection and a soundness inspection of the finished sprayed concrete works at the age of at least num days .
visual inspection shall be for defects such as lack of compaction dry patches voids or sand pockets .
soundness inspection shall be by tapping with a small num kg handheld hammer to locate drummy or hollow response areas that might indicate a possible lack of bond delamination or other defect .
the contractor shall remove and rectify such defects in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num repair of defective areas areas of the finished work that exhibit a lack of compaction or bonding dry patches voids and sand pockets or have slumped or sagged shall be removed and repaired with a single component shrinkage compensating proprietary cementitious material in accordance with the requirements of section num to achieve the specified level of durability .
the exposed surface of the repaired defective area shall be similar in texture and colour to the surrounding sprayed concrete .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num antigraffiti protection and graffiti removal this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for the supply of materials application of antigraffiti coating systems removal of graffiti markings graffiti removal maintenance requirements and relevant testing associated with roadside furniture and structures including bridges pedestrian underpasses facings of reinforced soil structures noise walls barriers retaining walls and traffic control boxes .
this section is applicable to various substrate surfaces including normal concrete lightweight concrete glass fibre reinforced concrete timber acrylic plastic painted steel normal bricks concrete blocks besser blocks cement render sandstone limestone and painted surfaces .
substrate surfaces other than concrete may require some variation of the usual treatment applicable to concrete surfaces .
manufacturers recommendations shall be strictly adhered to for all substrate surfaces unless otherwise stated .
antigraffiti coating shall not be applied to the following surfaces or materials a steel coated with thermoset coatings for example colorbond steel b hot dipped galvanized steel c hotdipped zincaluminium alloy coated steel for example zincalume steel d weather resistant steel complying with asnzs num grade wrnum or asnzs num grade hwnum or similar .
num standards australian standards are referenced in an abbreviated form e.g .
as num. a australian standards as num dry film thicknesspaint inspection gauge as num adhesionpulloff test as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces removal of oil grease and related contamination as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces abrasive blast cleaning of steel asnzs num painting of buildings asnzs num guide to the protection of iron and steel against exterior atmospheric corrosion as num colours standards for general purposes asnzs num guide to longlife coatings for concrete and masonry part num guidelines to methods of test .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b additional test methods astm dnum moisture in concrete by the plastic sheet method astm dnum measurement of wet film thickness by notch gauges .
section num details the relevant references to these documents .
num definitions adhesionbond strength the sum total of the forces of attachment between a dry film and its concrete substrate .
dry film thickness dft the thickness of the applied surface coatings after the curing or drying time has elapsed .
graffiti the unauthorised defacement of a surface by words figures or obliteration .
substrate the material constituting the surface marked e.g .
concrete timber .
graffiti marking the defacement material e.g .
paint felttip pen .
antigraffiti coating a pigmented or clear coating material which improves the graffiti resistance of many substrate surfaces allowing easy removal of graffiti by acting as an impermeable layer which prevents defacement stops the deep penetration of graffiti markings into the substrate pores and prevents a firm attachment to the surface .
nonsacrificial antigraffiti coating longlife permanent coatings which can withstand several cycles of repeated defacementcleaning processes .
sacrificial antigraffiti coatings temporary coatings which are partially or totally removed from the substrate surface together with the graffiti during the cleaning process .
sacrificial coatings are then recoated .
wet film thickness wft the thickness of the wet coating immediately after application .
num materials antigraffiti coatings graffiti removal agents and decorativeanticarbonation coatings shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations material safety data sheets and as specified in this section .
the contractor shall submit for review by the superintendent not less than num days prior to the commencement of the antigraffiti protection works details of the antigraffiti protection operations including information on the proposed antigraffiti coatings graffiti removers decorativeanticarbonation coatings substrate preparation method of application equipment and operators demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this specification .
material details shall include information on the properties of the proposed products documented evidence of previous performance and relevant test results which shall not be more than twentyfour num months old .
hp antigraffiti protection works shall not take place until the contractors proposed materials and procedures have been reviewed and accepted by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num surface preparation the surface preparation shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations for the coating system to be applied and as specified in this section .
all dust dirt and other surface contaminants shall be removed by appropriate means as approved by the superintendent .
the surface shall then be washed with water such that grease and oil contaminants including remnants of curing membranes shall be removed from the surface by the use of appropriate solvents or detergents followed by the water washing in accordance with as num .
where an antigraffiti coating system is specified the substrate shall be free of all graffiti graffiti shadows paints or any other surface contaminants which would be visible through the coating .
where shadows of previously removed graffiti are likely to be clearly visible through a coating a suitable antibleed stain sealer shall be applied prior to the application of any subsequent coatings .
where required to promote adhesion of the coating system some concrete and other substrate surfaces may be cleaned by whip blasting with a fine grade garnet or surface etched with an approved acid wash followed by a water wash in accordance with as num .
any abrasive blast cleaning shall be carried out in accordance with as num applicable work health and safety laws and appropriate regulations imposed by the local government authority and the epa .
num antigraffiti coating systems a general the antigraffiti coating system shall be nonsacrificial clear or pigmented coating to a specified colour .
the coating system shall be an acryliccopolymer acrylicepoxy polyurethane or polyurea type .
all coats in the system shall be of the same brand and must be compatible with each other .
the use of sacrificial antigraffiti coatings is subject to the approval of the superintendent .
substrate surfaces other than concrete may require variations of the usual treatment applied to concrete surfaces .
highly porous substrates may require a porefilling primer coat prior to applying a final antigraffiti finish .
for relatively soft surfaces the primer andor finish coat shall also offer surface binding and toughening effect .
manufacturers recommendations shall be sought in all such cases .
b performance requirements the coating system shall be nonyellowing and uv resistant for its guaranteed exposure life and shall exhibit low dirt retention capability .
the coating shall be impermeable to chlorides water carbon dioxide and acid rain but allow the transmission of water vapour .
the coating system shall carry a guaranteed outdoor exposure life of not less than num years and a guaranteed graffiti removal life of at least num cycles of defacement and removal from the date of application .
sacrificial antigraffiti coatings if approved by the superintendent shall carry a guaranteed outdoor exposure life of not less than num years from the date of application .
the contractor shall provide evidence as to the compatibility of the proposed coating system to the nominated substrate .
such evidence shall include but not be limited to test certificates from a nata accredited testing laboratory and history of previous performance .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num where a primer or undercoat is required as part of the antigraffiti coating system it shall be a different colour to that of the final nominated colour and in accordance with as num .
the coating pigments shall be colourfast and not subject to fading or discolouration .
the finished coating system shall have a minimum wet film thickness wft of num m and a minimum antigraffiti coating dry film thickness dft of num m. where an antigraffiti coating is also used as an anticarbonation coating its minimum dft shall be num m and shall comply with the requirements of section num for anti carbonation coating .
the applied coating system shall have an adhesion value of greater than num mpa to the substrate in accordance with as num .
for penetrating antigraffiti coating systems applied to full saturation the minimum amount of penetration into the substrate and minimum application rate shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num method of application the application of coating systems and removal of graffiti shall be carried out in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations current materials safety data sheets and as specified in this section .
the substrate shall not be coated until it is surface dry .
sufficient time shall elapse between coatings to allow the initial coat to dry and cure .
the finished coating shall be smooth of uniform thickness colour and appearance and without runs beads surface crazing and shall be free of any defects that may impair the performance or appearance of the coating for the life of the coating .
if the coating is too thin or shows evidence of having been applied under unfavourable conditions or the workmanship is poor or the specified requirements are not fulfilled the surface shall be retreated to the extent required by the superintendent .
where the methods of application or removal are unacceptable to the superintendent because of undesirable effects such as over spray spatter or significant disruption to the public alternative methods shall be used .
if in the opinion of the superintendent conditions become unsatisfactory work shall not be continued and newly coated surfaces shall be protected with approved shelters from rain or other damage .
num appropriate timings for application of antigraffiti coatings a newly constructed cast insitu concretenonaccelerated cured precast concrete antigraffiti coating systems shall be applied no earlier than twenty eight days after concrete has been placed .
antigraffiti coating application may be undertaken earlier if it can be established using a commercially available calibrated moisture meter that the concrete moisture content is less than num but not prior to fourteen days after concrete has been placed and provided the concrete surface is dry at the time of application .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b steam or radiant heat cured concrete application of antigraffiti coatings shall be carried out no earlier than fourteen days after concrete has been placed .
c repaired concrete where concrete repairs have been completed with proprietary cementitious materials the application of antigraffiti coatings shall be carried out no earlier than fourteen days after completion of repair .
where normal concrete is used for repair antigraffiti coatings shall be applied no earlier than twenty eight days after the completion of repair .
num environmental conditions a general coating systems shall not be applied under any of the following conditions i windy conditions where over spray andor spatter may be generated ii windborne debris is likely to contaminate the uncured surface of the freshly applied coating iii ambient temperature exceeds numc or is below numc iv relative humidity exceeds num v rain spatter or runoff including leakage through deck joints contaminating the surface and adversely affecting the adhesion to the substrate may occur vi substrate surface is wet or damp vii surface temperature of the substrate is less than numc above the dew point calculated in accordance with asnzs num fig .
num or exceeds numc .
the environmental conditions shall be measured recorded and assessed against the requirements above once every four hours of each shift .
a calibrated commercially available hygrometer psychrometer or electronic climatic measuring gauge shall be used to determine the parameters which require readings i.e .
items i iii iv vi and vii .
b environmental requirements the contractor shall adhere to epa and other local state and federal government requirements with respect to how waste generated during surface preparation coating application and clean up will be collected segregated handled controlled and disposed of .
c disposal of waste materials waste materials which may constitute a fire hazard shall be deposited in suitable containers and disposed of at designated disposal sites .
liquid or other waste material shall not be disposed of through creeks or the stormwater drainage system .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num coating material handling and storage materials shall remain in their original sealed containers until time of use and shall be stored in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
all material shall be brought to site in the original unopened cans clearly labelled with the appropriate markers name product type reference number and batch number .
the contractor shall provide for each batch of coating material a copy of the manufacturers information as specified below a manufacturers name and address b product reference c batch number of identification d quantity manufactured in the batch e certificate of date of manufacture .
the contractor shall maintain records showing which elements were treated with each coating batch .
these records shall be provided to the superintendent .
materials stored beyond the manufacturers recommended shelf life shall not be used .
the material shall be used in the order of manufacture .
all coating materials to be used on the works shall be free from contamination gelling drying out heavy skin formation and severe segregation of ingredients .
coating materials which have exceeded the pot life recommended by the manufacturer shall not be used .
num trial application a trial application on a small test area of the actual substrate or a test panel made from the same substrate shall be conducted seven days prior to the commencement of coating work .
hp the contractor shall not proceed with the full scale coating works until the trial coating application has been carried out and the outcomes reviewed and approved by the superintendent .
the small test area or test panel shall be prepared and coated by the contractor to satisfy the requirements of clauses num num num num num and num and in accordance with the material manufacturers recommendations .
if the coating trial application is deemed to be inadequate by the superintendent a further coating application shall be made until the performance criteria of this specification are met .
in the event that the trial application is rejected the contractor shall remove and dispose of any work deemed as unacceptable by the superintendent submit a new proposal to rectify the deficiencies including prequalification testing of any new materialsmethods and repeat the trial application as described above .
any delays caused through rejection shall not constitute justification for extension of time .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num testing before and after application of coating the contractor shall carry out testing in at least one num m area in accordance with this clause .
testing shall be undertaken by a nata accredited testing laboratory .
a testing before application at least one test shall be carried out before application of materials to ensure that i surface moisture conditions of concrete and other substrates satisfy the manufacturers recommendations ii moisture content of concrete and other substrates is free of water back pressure to satisfy the manufacturers recommendations in accordance with astm dnum num iii environmental conditions as specified in this section are satisfied .
b testing after application at least three tests for each of bond strength wft and dft and amount of penetration of antigraffiti penetrant shall be carried out after the application of materials to demonstrate compliance with this section .
i the bond strength to the substrate and between separate coats shall be tested using aluminium dollies with a minimum diameter of num mm in accordance with as num .
the bond strength shall be greater than num mpa fourteen num days after the application and curing process .
ii the wft of the film forming coating measured in accordance with astm dnum shall not be less than num m as stated in clause numb .
iii the dft measured in accordance with as num using a paint inspection gauge shall not be less than num m as stated in clause numb .
the dft of coatings may be measured using the coating remnants attached to the aluminium dollies from the adhesion testing provided the coating material remains intact and the correct frequency of testing is satisfied in accordance with the requirements of clause numc .
iv measurements of dft shall satisfy the following conditions num not more than num of measurements of dft shall be more than num under the specified thickness num not more than num of the dft measurements taken in the num m test area shall be less than the specified minimum .
v where a penetrating antigraffiti coating system is applied the amount of penetration shall be determined on concrete cores num mm in diameter x num mm deep in accordance with an acceptable national or international standard and shall not be less than that specified in clause numb .
a fugitive dye shall be used to enable clear differentiation between the treated and untreated depths of concrete .
c location and frequency of testing the above testing shall be undertaken in at least one num m test area for every num m on completion of the application of the final coat of the antigraffiti or decorativeanti carbonation coating system .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num inspection and testing a general the contractor shall maintain all required quality documentation including inspection reports records of environmental conditions and test results as specified in this section and section num of the specification for all stages of the work .
the works shall be inspected by the contractor at each stage of the coating operation as a minimum i.e .
after surface preparations prior to each coat and after final top coat application and any touchup coats that may be required .
for the purpose of surveillance and audits as specified in clause num.anum the contractor shall give the superintendent five days written notice of its intention to coat the substrate .
the contractor shall make available to the superintendent all assistance and means of gaining access to the work .
the superintendent shall determine the access requirements for surveillance of the work .
b surface preparation the contractor shall inspect the surface preparation and shall ensure and document that the following requirements have been satisfied i degree of surface cleanliness is as specified ii surface profile is specified iii immediately before painting the prepared surface has had all loose dust and other foreign material removed iv surface is not contaminated by any means after preparation and before painting .
c materials the contractor shall inspect the materials and their preparation for use and shall ensure that the following requirements are met i materials are the correct materials for the system which is to be applied ii material containers are sound and not damaged in any way which may have caused or will cause the contents to deteriorate iii material in the containers has not dried gelled formed a heavy skin or unduly settled iv material is stirred mixed or thinned in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations multipart materials mixed in the correct proportion a reaction time for multipart materials if specified by the material manufacturer shall be allowed and materials shall not be used once their pot life has expired v application method is appropriate for the material .
the contractor shall maintain a sample of not less than num litre from each batch as a reference sample for the shelf life of the product .
d coating condition after application the contractor shall inspect each coat and the finished coating system and shall ensure that the following conditions are satisfied i uniformity colour gloss opacity and appearance are in accordance with the requirements of the specification ii free of any defects that may impair the performance or appearance of the coating for the life of the coating .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num coating repairs should any of the works not comply then the areas concerned shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
such repair work may include removal of the coating followed by surface preparation and application of a new coating .
the procedure for any repair work shall be approved by the superintendent .
for the purpose of this clause unsatisfactory work shall include coating failure due to yellowing loss of adhesion colour change penetration of graffiti into the coating or loss of solvent resistance during the guarantee period .
num reinstatement of damaged coating all areas of coatings damaged by the contractor during its operation shall be made good to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
num contractor competency application personnel and subcontractors undertaking this work shall have a minimum of five years experience and a demonstrated competency for surface preparation and application of protective coatings .
the coatings application supervisor shall be trained and qualified on all aspects of application techniques and shall be present at all times during coating work .
application personnel shall be trained and skilled in the application procedures of the coating to be applied .
documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate experience qualification skills and training of personnel and subcontractors .
num protection of works and property the contractor shall ensure that the coated works are protected from adverse conditions dust and debris during the curing period of the coating system in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
if the antigraffiti coating is airsprayed onto a concrete surface in close proximity of buildings footpaths roadways pedestrians or vehicles no spray painting shall be carried out within ten metres of the above items without approved protective measures or methods being used .
proposals to overcome the above problem shall be submitted to the superintendent a minimum of two working days in advance of the proposed works .
protective measures may include the use of tarpaulins hand brush or roller applied painting .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num graffiti removal as part of a maintenance contract a graffiti removal i general graffiti removal from existing coatings or untreated substrates shall be strictly in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation and as specified in this section .
typical graffiti removal methods shall include but not be limited to num. chemical cleaning num. steam cleaning num. hot or cold high pressure water cleaning with or without detergents num. wet and dry abrasive blast cleaning num. lowvolatile solvent cleaning nontoxic num. nonabrasive lowpressure water jet with granular sodium carbonate additives num. painting out of graffiti where nominated .
the contractor shall be responsible for ensuring the compatibility of the proposed cleaning method without injurious effect to any applied coatings paint systems and uncoated substrates .
damage to the substrate substrate coating or antigraffiti coatings caused by the contractor shall be rectified .
ii removal of graffiti markings for antigraffiti coated substrates the standard of graffiti removal shall be based on no residual graffiti markings being visible .
for uncoated substrates the complete removal may not be possible due to the absorbency of the substrate material .
under these circumstances the superintendent may allow some residual paint staining or shadowing to remain .
the graffiti message or configuration shall not be intelligible or clearly visible from close proximity in the case of a substrate close to pedestrians or from a distance of num metres in the case of proximity to a roadway .
all proposed cleaning methods shall be appropriate and safe for use in public areas and satisfy epa requirements and the requirements of section num. iii painting out of graffiti where painting out of graffiti is specified or approved by the superintendent at least two coats of an approved decorativeanticarbonation coating product vicroads grey or approved alternative colour to asnzs num shall be applied in accordance with asnzs num and the manufacturers recommendations to achieve a uniform colour and texture .
prior to overcoating a suitable antibleed stain sealer shall be applied to prevent any subsequent bleed through of residual graffiti stain in the finish coat .
if a uniform colour and texture is not achieved the contractor shall take remedial measures to produce the required surface finish .
for painting out of graffiti the accepted standard of graffiti removal shall be no residual graffiti being visible .
approved coatings shall be applied at a minimum dft of num m and shall comply with the requirements of section num for anticarbonation coating .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b reports the contractor shall submit a report detailing its graffiti removal and application work undertaken on a monthly basis .
the report shall contain a comprehensive time dated photographic display of all graffiti supported with written detail as to the correct location description area treatment and removal of the graffiti .
the photographs shall be accurately labelled and presented in a suitable mounting system .
c graffiti removal maintenance on a site specific basis the nominated department of state growth structures parts of structures or roadside furniture shall be inspected and cleaned at a frequency nominated by the superintendent or where time periods have not been nominated at a frequency of not less than twice per week .
the inspection days will be monday and thursdays .
at the request of the superintendent the frequency of inspections may be increased to three times per week mondays wednesdays and fridays .
any additional inspection day shall be at the department of state growth expense .
d timings for graffiti removal graffiti shall be removed within num hours of the contractor being aware of its presence either by inspection or notification by the superintendent .
graffiti that is of a sensitive nature racist sexist obscene or offensive shall be removed within num hours .
num graffiti removal as part of a construction contract the contractor shall systematically inspect road and bridge construction works for graffiti at least on a monthly basis during the contract period including immediately after weekends or public holidays until the date of practical completion .
particular attention shall be given to obvious graffiti targets such as bridges and other major structures with large surface area sign structures and other roadside areas highly visible to the public .
where an inspection discovers graffiti on completed works or on those parts of the works that would normally be left for some time before completion cleaning and removal shall be initiated and completed in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
num records of graffiti removers further to the requirements of clause num regarding antigraffiti coating materials applied to the works the contractor shall also maintain records of all compatible chemical graffiti removers and other suitable cleaning methods as recommended by the materials manufacturer .
these records shall be provided to the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num coating of concrete this section crossreferences sections num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for the supply and quality of materials surface preparation application relevant testing and acceptance criteria for decorative and protective coatings and surface treatments of concrete .
this section does not cover other types of concrete deterioration including alkali aggregate reaction sulphate and chemical attack .
requirements for antigraffiti protection of concrete are specified in section num .
num standards concrete coating materials surface preparation and application shall comply with the requirements of the following standards and test methods a australian standards as num paints and related materials methods of test dry film thickness paint inspection gauge as num paints and related materials methods of test adhesion crosscut as num paints and related materials methods of test adhesion pulloff test as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces removal of oil grease and related contamination as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces abrasive blast cleaning of steel asnzs num guide to the painting of buildings asnzs num guide to the protection of structural steel against atmospheric corrosion by use of protective coatings as num colour standards for general purposes asnzs num guide to longlife coatings for concrete and masonry part num guidelines to methods of test .
b additional test methods astm dnum ph of chemically cleaned or etched concrete surfaces astm dnum moisture in concrete by the plastic sheet method astm dnum measurement of wet film thickness by notch gauges bs numpart num initial surface absorption test isat .
section num details the relevant references to these documents .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num definitions adhesionbond strength the sum total of the forces of attachment between a dry film and its concrete substrate .
anticarbonation coating coating applied to concrete and other cementbased substrates to retard their carbonation by atmospheric carbon dioxide conum .
carbonation the reaction of atmospheric conum with alkaline materials such as concrete and cement which lowers the alkalinity ph and thus protection to steel reinforcement .
coat a continuous layer of a coating material resulting from a single application .
coatings an interchangeable term meaning either the actual process of covering the concrete surface with a layers of paint or representing a protective or decorative coating as defined in this clause .
coating systems can be either protective or decorative coating systems as defined in this clause .
decorative coating systems these can be either filmforming coatings surface treatments or combinations of these which can improve the aesthetic appearance of a concrete surface .
dry film thickness dft the thickness of the applied surface coatings after the curing or drying time has elapsed .
filmforming coatings viscous materials which form a pinhole free film on the concrete surface to improve its aesthetic appearance or provide protection by acting as a barrier to the ingress of aggressive agents .
coatings are generally applied in two or more layers .
thin coatings have a dry film thickness dft of num micron high build coatings generally exceed num mm whereas cementitious coatings are generally thick applications ranging from num to num mm thick .
primer the first coat of a coating system applied to an uncoated concrete substrate designed to enhance adhesion of the coating system onto the surface andor impart a surface binding and toughening effect on the substrate .
porelining penetrants hydrophobic impregnations these are low viscosity fluids i.e .
silane silanesiloxane siloxane solid silane or silane cream which react with the available hydroxyl group of the silicate structure of the concrete substrate in the presence of moisture thus depositing waterrepellent silicone resins chemically bonded to the walls of the concrete pore structure .
these hydrophobic products can penetrate the concrete by several millimetres and work by repelling water and waterborne chloride ions .
protective coating systems either filmforming coatings surface treatments or combinations of these which can impart protective qualities to the concrete surface against the ingress of aggressive agents .
sealers these are viscous fluids which are intermediate between porelining penetrants and filmforming coatings .
they can penetrate and block the pores of the concrete substrate and also form a thin film on its surface .
surface treatments viscous materials such as porelining penetrants hydrophobic impregnations and sealers which can penetrate the concrete or block the pores of the concrete to improve its aesthetic or protective qualities .
undercoat highly pigmented coating which can serve as a first coat or intermediate coat before the finish coating to provide hiding power and improved adhesion of a top coat to the substrate .
wet film thickness wft the thickness of the wet coating immediately after application .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num materials coatings surface treatments and decorativeanticarbonation coatings including any primers undercoats and sealers shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and materials safety data sheets .
the contractor shall submit for review by the superintendent not less than twentyone num days prior to the commencement of the coating works details of the concrete coating operations including information on the proposed coatings and primers surface treatments decorativeanticarbonation coatings substrate preparation method of application equipment and operators demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this specification .
material details shall include information on the properties of the proposed products documented evidence of previous performance and relevant test results traceable to the proposed coating system which shall not be more than twentyfour num months old .
hp concrete coating works shall not take place until the contractors proposed materials and procedures and surface preparation in accordance with clause num have been reviewed and accepted by the superintendent .
num protective and decorative coating systems a general requirements the protective or decorative coating system shall be water or acrylic based and solvent free .
the protective or decorative coating system shall be clear or pigmented coating to a vicroads grey colour or a combination of these .
all coats in the system or separate coatingstreatments making up the system shall be physically and chemically compatible with each other .
the contractor shall supply the superintendent with a certificate from the manufacturer in the form of a guarantee confirming that the coating system and materials comply with the requirements of this section including a guaranteed outdoor exposure life of not less than ten num years prior to the need for recoating .
the coating system shall be capable of withstanding cleaning with hot water in the range of numc to numc detergent and scrubbing action without loss of adhesion softening or changing in colour or gloss .
coating systems applied to highly porous andor relatively soft concrete substrates shall include a high quality porefilling primer coat or sealer to be applied prior to the application of at least two coats of the protective or decorative part of the overall coating system .
the primer andor the coating system as a whole shall also offer surface binding and toughening effect .
the contractor shall provide evidence as to the compatibility of the proposed coating system to the nominated substrate .
such evidence shall include but not be limited to test certificates from a nata accredited testing laboratory and history of previous performance .
where a primer undercoat or sealer is required as an integral part of the coating system i.e .
primer coat plus at least two coats of the protective or decorative part of the system the primer undercoat or sealer shall be a different colour to that of the final nominated colour and shall be in accordance with as num .
the coating pigments shall be colourfast not subject to fading or discolouration and exhibit high resistance to chalking and dirt pick up .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the applied coating system shall also satisfy the following requirements i bond strength greater than num mpa when tested fourteen num days after application in accordance with as num ii ability to bridge cracks up to num mm wide iii ability to be recoated within num hours iv have minimum pot life of num hour v not to sag or run when applied correctly to vertical surfaces vi compatibility to an alkaline surface in accordance with astm d num. b performance requirements for decorativeanticarbonation coatings where required concrete surfaces shall be painted with at least two coats of an approved decorativeanticarbonation coating system vicroads grey or approved alternative colour in accordance with asnzs num and the manufacturers specification to achieve a uniform colour and texture .
the primer which forms an integral part of the coating system shall be applied onto the concrete substrate prior to the application of subsequent coats of the approved decorativeanticarbonation coating .
if a uniform colour and texture is not achieved the contractor shall take remedial measures at his own expense to produce the required surface finish .
in addition to the general requirements of clause numa approved coatings shall also satisfy the minimum performance criteria shown in table num as determined by testing in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num and as num .
table num property symbol requirement method reference equivalent air layer thickness r num m asnzs num appendix d equivalent thickness of concrete sc num mm asnzs num appendix d conum diffusion coefficient d num x num cmnums asnzs num appendix d water vapour equivalent air layer thickness sd num m asnzs num appendix c dry film thickness dft at least num m microns as num c performance requirements for moisture and chloride resistance i general protective coating systems shall be applied in at least two layers and in addition to the general requirements of clause numa they shall satisfy the following minimum performance criteria num the water absorption value not to exceed num ml mnum secnum at num minutes following the application and curing process in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and the initial surface absorption test isat as per bs num part num num chloride diffusion coefficient less than num x num cmnumsec and carbon dioxide conum diffusion coefficient less than num x num cmnumsec after num hours of accelerated ultraviolet uv weathering and num dry film thickness dft of at least num microns m in accordance with as num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num ii tidal zone in addition to the general requirements of clause numa and clause numci the coating system for the tidal zone shall satisfy the following requirements num the coating system shall be formulated for application onto surface dry but saturated concrete such as in the tidal range in a marine environment num the coating system shall cure rapidly between the tidal cycles such that it may be immersed in seawater within num hours of application and shall be capable of withstanding hydrostatic penetration of water .
iii atmospheric and splash zones a dual protective coating system consisting of a porelining penetrant i.e .
silane solid silane or silane cream and at least two coats of a filmforming top coat shall be applied to atmospheric and splash zones .
in addition to the general requirements of clause numa and clause numci the dual protective coating system shall satisfy the following requirements num silane porelining penetrants shall consist of at least num active ingredients and shall be applied in two applications at a minimum application rate of num litresmnum with a minimum interval between coats of at least num hours .
solid silane or silane cream porelining penetrants shall consist of at least num active ingredients and shall be applied in one thick application at a minimum application rate of num litresmnum .
silanesiloxane or siloxane porelining penetrants shall only be used if approved by the superintendent .
num the amount of penetration of silane solid silane or silane cream porelining penetrants into the concrete shall be a minimum of num mm .
the amount of penetration of silanesiloxane or siloxane porelining penetrants shall be a minimum of num mm .
num the porelining penetrant shall contain a fugitive dye to enable clear differentiation between coated and uncoated areas .
num the porelining penetrant and film forming coating shall be compatible .
num the filmforming topcoat shall satisfy the requirements of clause numb for decorativeanticarbonation coatings except that its dft shall be at least num m .
a dual protective coating system incorporating a penetrating sealer may be used subject to submission of documentary evidence of previous performance including relevant test results which shall not be more than twentyfour num months old which demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section .
d protective coatings for special applications protective coatings requirements for special applications shall be specified on the drawings .
e concrete subject to graffiti coatings which are subject to graffiti shall satisfy the requirements of section num. f coatings applied to retaining walls where coating systems are applied to the exposed concrete surfaces of retaining walls or other soil retaining structures adequate waterproofing membranes andor drainage systems shall be installed behind the retaining wall to prevent the coating system from blistering or peeling off where applied on exposed concrete surfaces .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num g coatings applied to parapet walls where coating systems are applied on walls or other vertical concrete components which have exposed top horizontal surfaces the coating systems shall be taken over the top of the parapet and at least num mm down to the back of the wall to prevent the coating system from blistering or peeling off unless the whole rear wall requires protection .
h use of porelining penetrants to resist moisture ingress for general applications porelining penetrants alone and in combination with decorativeanticarbonation coatings may be applied to concrete surfaces which are characterized by the following non conforming deficiencies subject to review and acceptance by the superintendent i inactive cracks of width equal to or less than num mm ii deficiency in concrete cover to the steel reinforcement iii vpv values exceeding the maximum allowable limits as stated in table num of section num .
the porelining penetrants shall comply with the requirements of clause numciii and decorativeanticarbonation coatings shall comply with the requirements of clause numb .
num surface preparation a general the surface preparation shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations for the coating system to be applied and as specified in this section .
b uncoated concrete concrete surfaces shall be dry unless otherwise approved by the superintendent and shall be free from oil e.g .
from release oils grease laitance and loose particles remnants of curing compounds and organic contaminants i.e .
moss algae etc .
the concrete surface shall be prepared by high pressure jetting with potable water either with or without added abrasive i.e .
up to num psi or num mpa steam cleaning wire brushing abrasion with angle grinder or by other means to provide a strong hard surface .
areas of persistent contamination shall be removed from the surface by the use of appropriate solvents or detergents followed by washing with potable water in accordance with as num .
any abrasive blast cleaning shall be carried out in accordance with as num applicable work health and safety laws and appropriate regulations imposed by the local government authority and the epa .
any blow holes areas of honeycombing loose surface layers and weak concrete shrinkage cracks of width less than num mm or other defects either revealed by a grinding process or exposed by other surface preparation methods shall be filled with a suitable fairing coat cementitious repair material in accordance with the requirements of section num .
if the surface of the concrete is weak more material shall be removed and repaired in accordance with the requirements of section num .
such repairs shall be sufficient to result in a strong sound substrate suitable for the intended protective or decorative coating system .
projecting fins rough spots and sudden steps shall be removed by light abrasion with an angle grinder to provide a surface which can be easily coated .
inactive cracks of width equal to or greater than num mm shall be sealed by resin injection in accordance with section num .
active cracks equal to or greater than num mm shall be treated by methods approved by the superintendent and in accordance with section num .
a trial application to check the suitability of the surface the surface preparation methods and other requirements shall be undertaken as set out in clause num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c previously painted surfaces previously painted surfaces shall be clean and sound .
all traces of dust dirt and other contaminants i.e .
oils grease etc .
peeling or loose coating shall be removed by suitable methods as stated in clause numb approved by the superintendent .
the compatibility and adhesion of the existing coating to the concrete surface shall be evaluated by the crosscut adhesion test in accordance with as num and as stated in clause num .
a trial application and adhesion testing shall be undertaken to establish the effectiveness of the bond between the existing and new coating in accordance with as num and clauses num and num .
if the compatibility and adhesion tests prove unsatisfactory the existing coatings shall be removed and the concrete surface prepared appropriately to receive the new coating in accordance with clause numb .
num method of application a dry concrete surfaces i general all concrete surfaces to receive a coating shall be dry at the time of application .
sufficient drying time shall be allowed after wet preparation methods to satisfy the requirements of clause num .
the coating shall be applied following the manufacturers recommended application methods overcoating times and coverage rates mixing requirements current materials safety data sheets and as specified in this section .
the coating may be applied by brush spray roller handglove or other technique to achieve the desired surface finish .
coverage rates shall be checked for compliance with the manufacturers requirements .
the surface area of the concrete structure subject to application and the volume of coating used shall be recorded by the contractor .
the coating system shall be applied as soon as possible i.e .
within num hours unless otherwise expressed in writing by the manufacturer after the preparation of the concrete surface .
the prepared surface shall be protected against contamination if it is left uncoated for more than num hours .
for multiple coat applications the manufacturers stated minimum and maximum overcoating times for the prevailing weather conditions shall be satisfied and successive coats shall have slightly different colour shades to assist in achieving uniform coverage .
the difference in colour shall be such that a coat when either wet or dry shall be clearly distinguishable by means of colour difference from the preceding coat .
no application of coatings shall be made if any of the conditions stated in clause num exist .
no coating shall be applied over any coat which contains application defects or any damage until such defects have been repaired .
if the coating is too thin or shows evidence of having been applied under unfavourable conditions or the workmanship is poor or the specified requirements are not fulfilled the surface shall be retreated to the extent required by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num where the methods of application are unacceptable to the superintendent because of undesirable effects such as over spray spatter or significant disruption to the public alternative methods shall be used .
if in the opinion of the superintendent conditions become unsatisfactory work shall not be continued and newly coated surfaces shall be protected with shelters from rain or other damage as approved by the superintendent .
further to the other requirements of this clause porelining penetrants i.e .
silane silanesiloxane siloxane solid silane or silane cream shall be applied by an airless pump system with an operating pressure not exceeding num kpa in order to ensure that no atomization or misting of the material occurs .
application shall be carried out in a series of continuous operations .
the material shall be applied by a continuous spray technique giving saturation flooding working from the lowest level and proceeding upward toward higher elevations .
the treated area shall have a wet look for a few seconds after application .
areas to be treated with a porelining penetrant shall where necessary be protected from adverse weather conditions and shall be surface dry for a minimum of num hours before application commences .
bearings painted steel surfaces plastic and joint sealants adjacent to members to be impregnated with a porelining penetrant shall be maskedoff before impregnation .
a trial application to check the suitability of the method of coating application shall be undertaken as set out in clause num. ii specific requirements all multipart coating materials shall be mixed according to the coating material manufacturers instructions .
the components shall be mixed in the specified proportions .
the specified reaction period shall be allowed from the time the components are mixed until the application begins .
no coating material shall be excessively thinned and any thinners used shall be the correct type as specified by the material manufacturer .
the coating material shall be strained as specified by the material manufacturer .
no coating material shall be applied after its pot life has expired .
where quantities of coating material are being applied by spraying successive batches of premixed multipart material the equipment shall be flushed and purged with clean solvent after num of the pot life of the material has expired from either the mixing of the first batch or since the last purge and cleaning of the equipment .
coating material ingredients shall be kept properly mixed in the spray pots or container during the application of the material whether by continuous mechanical agitation or intermittent manual agitation as required .
where brush or roller techniques are used the brushes or roller heads shall be used for the day only and then discarded .
the equipment shall not be cleaned for reuse .
all coating operations shall be performed in a neat and workmanlike manner by personnel with experience in the use of protective coatings and application methods .
each coat shall have the required colour gloss and opacity .
each coat shall have the specified dft .
this film thickness shall be applied to all edges and corners .
coats which in the opinion of the superintendent show excessive film builds shall be removed .
each coat shall be smooth uniform and free from sags runs mud cracking wrinkling fat edges blisters pinholes holidays dry spray entrapped foreign bodies and heavy brush marks .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b damp concrete surfaces coatings for application on damp concrete substrates shall be specifically formulated for tolerance to moisture during application curing and subsequent service .
all concrete surfaces to receive coating shall be surfacedry at the time of application .
where this requirement is not satisfied temporary protection shall be provided to encase the concrete and coating applicator and prevent moisture penetration ensuring adequate ventilation is provided .
deposits of salt crystals which collect on coated surfaces shall be washed off with potable water and the surface allowed to dry prior to further coating application .
with the exception of the surface moisture condition of concrete the coating shall be applied in accordance with clause numa .
num spray equipment the spray equipment shall be suitable for the work intended .
it shall be capable of properly atomising the coating material to be applied and shall be equipped with accurate pressure regulators and gauges .
the spray gun nozzles and needles shall conform to the coating material manufacturers recommendations for the coating to be applied .
the spray equipment shall be kept in such condition to permit efficient and effective coating material application .
an efficient air line filter shall be fitted as close as possible to the pressure pot to eliminate line condensate and oil in the air supply to the spray gun .
the air of the spray gun impinging against the surface shall show no condensed water or oils .
num drying and curing the contractor shall adhere to the manufacturers instructions regarding drying and curing requirements and overcoating time intervals for the prevailing weather conditions .
num clean up and protection of works and property the contractor shall protect already painted or galvanized surfaces services bearings joints painted signs and nameplates during abrasive blasting operations or any other surface preparation process and during coating application processes .
the contractor shall remove all coating drips and droppings smudges and over spray from all surfaces including surfaces not being treated .
the contractor shall remove from the site all spent abrasive and all other rubbish accumulated during the work .
the contractor shall dispose of such wastes to the satisfaction of the superintendent and by a means which conforms to clauses numb and numc .
the contractor shall ensure that the coated works are protected from adverse conditions dust and debris during the curing period of the coating system in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
hp no spray painting shall be carried out within ten num metres of buildings footpaths roadways pedestrians or vehicles without protective measures or methods being used which shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval a minimum of two working days in advance of the proposed works .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num environmental conditions a general coating systems shall not be applied under any of the following conditions i windy conditions where over spray andor spatter may be generated ii when windborne debris is likely to contaminate the uncured surface of the freshly applied coating iii when the ambient temperature exceeds numc or is below numc unless otherwise expressed in writing by the manufacturer iv when the relative humidity exceed num or where it may be expected to exceed num during the subsequent num hour curing period v when rain spatter or runoff including leakage through deck joints contaminating the surface and adversely affecting the adhesion to the substrate may occur vi when the substrate surface is wet or damp unless the coating is specifically required to be applied on a damp concrete surface in accordance with the requirements of clause numb vii the surface temperature of the substrate is less than numc above the dew point calculated in accordance with asnzs num fig .
num or exceeds numc .
the environmental conditions shall be measured recorded and assessed against the requirements above once every four hours of each shift .
a calibrated commercially available hygrometer psychrometer or electronic climatic measuring gauge shall be used to determine the parameters which require readings i.e .
items i iii iv vi and vii .
b environmental requirements the contractor shall adhere to environment protection authority and other local state and federal government requirements with respect to how waste generated during surface preparation coating application and clean up will be collected segregated handled controlled and disposed of .
c disposal of waste materials waste materials including liquid wastes shall be deposited in suitable containers and disposed of at sites to be located by the contractor that are acceptable to the environment protection authority and other relevant authorities .
liquid or other waste material shall not be disposed of in creeks waterways or the stormwater drainage systems .
num coating material handling and storage materials shall remain in their original sealed containers until the time of use and shall be stored in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
storage facilities shall provide protection from the elements and be safe and secure .
relevant warning signs shall be displayed .
all material shall be brought to site in the original unopened cans clearly labelled with the manufacturers name product type reference and batch numbers .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the contractor shall provide a certificate from the manufacturer for each batch of coating and primer material confirming a manufacturers name and address b product reference c batch number of identification d quantity manufactured in the batch and e date of manufacture .
the contractor shall maintain records showing which elements were treated with each coating batch .
these records shall be handed over to the superintendent before the date of practical completion .
materials stored beyond the manufacturers recommended shelflife shall not be used .
all coating materials to be used on the works shall be free from contamination gelling drying out heavy skin formation and severe segregation of ingredients .
num trial application a trial application of the coating system including any primers and undercoats shall be conducted on a test area of the actual substrate of not less than num m or a test panel made from the same substrate fourteen num days prior to the commencement of coating work .
the test area or test panel shall be prepared and coated by the contractor to satisfy the requirements of clauses num num num num and num and in accordance with the material manufacturers recommendations .
hp the contractor shall not proceed with the full scale coating works until the trial coating application has been carried out and the outcomes reviewed and approved by the superintendent .
actual coverage rates of the coating system shall be recorded in order that due allowance may be made in the full scale application for rough irregular or highly absorbent concrete substrate .
additional requirements or observations shall be recorded and considered for the full scale application .
if the coating trial application is deemed by the superintendent not to comply with the requirements of this section a further coating application shall be made until the performance criteria of this specification are met .
in the event that the trial application is rejected the contractor shall remove and dispose of any work deemed as unacceptable by the superintendent submit a new proposal to rectify the deficiencies including prequalification testing of any new materialsmethods and repeat the trial application as described above .
any delays caused through rejection shall not constitute justification for extension of time .
num testing before and after application of coating the contractor shall carry out testing in at least one num mnum test area in accordance with this clause .
a testing before application all concrete surfaces prepared for coating shall be sampled and tested in accordance with the requirements of this section .
each sample of prepared concrete surface shall be tested as required for surface moisture condition moisture content of concrete environmental conditions and crosscut adhesion of previously painted surfaces as specified in this section .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num at least one test per sample shall be carried out immediately prior to the commencement of each days coating application to ensure that i surface moisture conditions of concrete or other substrates satisfy the manufacturers recommendations ii moisture content of concrete and other substrates is free of water back pressure to satisfy the manufacturers recommendations in accordance with astm dnum iii the environmental conditions as specified in clause num are satisfied .
for previously painted surfaces the crosscut adhesion of the existing coating shall be tested in accordance with as num and shall be deemed to be satisfactory if num of the crosscut surface remains attached to the concrete and provided the surface is free from cracking blistering or heavy chalking .
at least three measurements per sample of crosscut adhesion shall be carried out for every num m of previously painted surface for the first num m and then at least three measurements per sample for every num m thereafter .
b testing after application all applied coating shall be sampled and tested with calibrated equipment in accordance with the requirements of this section .
each sample of applied coating shall be tested as required for bond strength wft and dft amount of penetration of porelining penetrant and water absorption as specified in this section .
at least three measurements per sample of each of the following tests shall be carried out after the application of materials to demonstrate compliance with this section .
i the bond strength to the substrate and between separate coats shall be tested using aluminium dollies with a minimum diameter of num mm in accordance with as num .
the bond strength shall be greater than num mpa fourteen num days after the application and curing process .
ii the wft of the film forming coating measured in accordance with astm dnum shall be as specified by the material manufacturer .
iii the dft measured in accordance with as num using a paint inspection gauge shall not be less than num m microns and num m microns as specified in table num of clause numb and clause numciii respectively .
the dft of coatings may be measured using the coating remnants attached to the aluminium dollies from the adhesion testing provided the coating material remains intact and the correct frequency of testing is satisfied in accordance with the requirements of clause numc .
not more than num of all measurements from all test samples of dft shall be less than num of the minimum specified thickness .
iv where a coating system is applied to resist the ingress of moisture and chloride ions the water absorption value shall not exceed num ml mnum secnum at num minutes in accordance with the initial surface absorption test isat as set out in bs num part num when tested fourteen num days after the application and curing process .
v where a porelining penetrant is applied the amount of penetration shall be determined on concrete cores num mm in diameter x num mm deep in accordance with an acceptable national or international standard and shall not be less than that specified in clause numciii .
a fugitive dye shall be used to enable clear differentiation between the treated and untreated depths of concrete .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num vi for previously painted surfaces pulloff testing shall be made in accordance with this clause and as num fourteen num days after application and curing and adhesion shall be deemed to be satisfactory if adhesion failure of three dollies attached to the new coating occurs at the interface of the concrete substrate and the existing coating .
c location and frequency of sampling and testing after application of coating sampling and testing in accordance with clause numb shall be undertaken in at least one num m test area for every num m on completion of the application of the final coat of the protective or decorative coating system and the application of the porelining penetrant .
num inspection and testing the contractor shall undertake all inspection and testing as specified in this clause and clause num .
the contractor shall maintain all required quality documentation including inspection reports records of environmental conditions and test results as specified in this section and section num for all stages of the work .
the work shall be inspected for defects by the contractor at each stage of the coating operation as a minimum i.e .
after surface preparations prior to each coat and after final top coat application and any touchup coats that may be required .
the surface to be coated shall be clean and free of defects .
when applied the coating shall be free of lumps bubbles inclusions ripples sags runs air holes and other film faults .
for the purpose of surveillance and audits as specified in clause num.anum the contractor shall give the superintendent five num days written notice of its intention to coat the concrete and shall provide adequate access to enable surveillance of the works by the superintendent .
num appropriate timings for application of coatings a newly constructed cast insitu concretenonaccelerated cured precast concrete protective or decorative coating systems shall be applied no earlier than twentyeight num days after concrete has been placed .
b steam or radiant heat cured concrete application of coatings shall be carried out no earlier than fourteen num days after concrete has been placed .
c repaired concrete where concrete repairs have been completed with proprietary cementitious materials the application of coatings shall be carried out no earlier than fourteen num days after completion of repair .
where normal concrete is used for repair coatings shall be applied no earlier than twentyeight num days after the completion of repair .
coating application may be undertaken earlier if it can be established using a commercially available calibrated moisture meter that the concrete moisture content is less than num but no earlier than num of the time periods stated in a b and c above and provided the concrete surface is dry at the time of application department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num coating repairs should any of the coating application work not comply with the provisions of this specification then the areas concerned shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
such repair work may include removal of the coating followed by surface preparation and application of a new coating .
the procedure for any repair work shall be reviewed by the superintendent .
for the purpose of this clause noncomplying work shall include coating failure due to yellowing loss of adhesion and colour change during the contract liability period .
all areas of coatings damaged by the contractor during its operation shall be made good to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
num requirements for future maintenance of coatings the contractor shall provide the manufacturers recommendations as follows a the methods of preparation to be used in the event that recoating of the coated surface is required .
b which types of coating other than the original product are compatible with the finish coat for recoating purposes .
c the technique which can be used to repair local damage to the coating with particular reference to colour and gloss matching of finish coats applied after a time lapse of num years .
the most appropriate techniques for cleaning of the finish coat to remove surface soiling with particular reference to ease of removal of graffiti or glued posters where possible without damage to the existing finish .
num contractor competency the coatings application supervisor and subcontractors undertaking this work shall have a minimum of num years experience and a demonstrated competency for surface preparation and application of protective coatings .
all application personnel undertaking this work shall also have a minimum of num years experience .
the coatings application supervisor shall be trained and qualified in all aspects of application techniques and shall be present at all times during coating work .
application personnel shall be trained and skilled in the application procedures of the coating to be applied .
documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate experience qualification skills and training of all personnel and subcontractors .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num repair of concrete cracks this section crossreferences sections num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for the supply and quality of materials surface preparation application relevant testing and acceptance criteria for the repair of cracks in concrete .
repair of cracks shall not be undertaken unless the cracked concrete structure has been assessed and the influence of cracks on load bearing capacity serviceability and durability has been evaluated by the contractor and reviewed by the superintendent .
a crack repair method shall be selected based on the assessment of the causes of the crack crack width the moisture condition of the crack and whether a crack is active or inactive prior to any repair works taking place .
the crack repair method shall also include details of the crack filling material properties location local environment likely crack behaviour effect on load capacity serviceability and durability surface preparation and method of application .
crack repair methods and crack filling materials other than those specified in this section shall not be used unless their suitability has been demonstrated by the contractor and reviewed by the superintendent .
num standards all strength requirements of crack filling materials shall be tested in accordance with the following standard bs num testing of resin and polymercement compositions for use in construction num definitions active cracks live cracks which are subject to further movement i.e .
opening up .
coating over cracks application of coatings with a crack bridging capability .
crack filling material a resin or resin adhesive or adhesive or sealant applied into a crack for the purpose of filling and closing the crack .
entry port a device or passageway in the surface seal through which the resin adhesive is introduced into a crack .
flexible sealing use of suitable flexible sealants to seal active cracks in the same manner as flexible joints .
gravity feed filling and sealing of horizontally positioned cracks using low viscosity resins by pouring and spreading onto surface or placing into purposely formed reservoirs .
inactive cracks dormant or dead cracks which do not open close or extend further .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num resin or resin adhesive or adhesive the crack filling material that is injected or introduced into a crack for the purpose of rebonding the separated edges to allow the transfer of tensile stress across the crack .
resin injection crack filling under pressure using a selected polymer resin adhesive such as epoxy or polyurethane to restore structural soundness and penetrability of concrete where cracks are inactive or can be prevented from moving further .
routing and sealing enlarging the crack along its exposed face and filling with a suitable joint sealant to produce a repair method for cracks that are inactive and not structurally significant .
sealant the crack filling material that has adhesive and cohesive properties that forms a seal to prevent the ingress of liquid or gases into the concrete .
stitching of cracks anchoring of ushaped metal legs in predrilled holes on both sides of cracks to restore the tensile strength of the crack affected concrete .
surface seal material used to confine the injection adhesive in the fissure during injection and cure .
num contractor competency personnel subcontractors and suppliers used in repair of concrete cracks shall have a minimum of five years experience in the repair and rehabilitation of reinforced concrete structures and a demonstrated competency for surface preparation and application of the crack filling material to be applied .
the concrete crack repair supervisor shall be trained and qualified on all aspects of application techniques and shall be present at all times during repair work .
application personnel shall be trained and skilled in the application procedures of the crack repair material to be applied .
documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate experience qualification skills and training of personnel subcontractors and suppliers .
num general requirements for crack filling materials the properties of the crack filling material and the characteristics of the equipment to be used shall be specifically allowed for by the contractor when assessing crack repair methods .
the crack filling material shall possess the following properties a resin injection i viscosity numc maximum num centipoise ii compressive strength bs num minimum at num days num mpa iii tensile strength bs num minimum at num days num mpa iv flexural strength bs num minimum at num days num mpa v adhesive strength at the crack edges minimum at num days num mpa or failure in concrete whichever occurs first .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b routing or sealing nipple placement gravity feed or stitching i compressive strength bs num minimum at num days num mpa ii tensile strength bs num minimum at num days num mpa iii flexural strength bs num minimum at num days num mpa .
c flexible sealing for live or active cracks the flexible sealant shall provide for a minimum expectant movement of num .
materials shall not be used when the ambient temperature is below numc or is numc on a falling thermometer or is above numc .
the crack filling material shall be compatible with all materials with which it is intended to come into contact .
num equipment a general equipment used for the filling of cracks shall ensure an adequate uninterrupted flow of the crack filling material until capillary suction has ceased and shall be capable of filling the cracks as detailed in the manufacturers requirements .
b equipment for injection equipment for injection shall have the following characteristics easy to handle with simple function checking pressure regulation or limitation in the operating range of the injection equipment simple cleaning and maintenance .
equipment for multicomponent injection such as special purpose twinmetering pumps shall also satisfy the following requirements i type the equipment used to meter and mix the two injection adhesive components and inject the mixed adhesive into the crack shall be portable with positive displacement type pumps with interlock to provide positive ratio control of exact proportions of the two components at the nozzle .
the pumps shall be electrically powered and shall provide in line metering and mixing .
the equipment shall have high dosing accuracy throughout all temperature ranges .
ii discharge pressure the injection equipment shall have automatic pressure control capable of discharging the mixed adhesive at any preset pressure up to num num kpa and shall be equipped with a manual pressure control override .
iii ratio tolerance the equipment shall have the capability of maintaining the volume ratio for the injection adhesive prescribed by the manufacturer of the adhesive within a tolerance of num by volume at any discharge pressure up to num kpa .
iv automatic shutoff control the injection equipment shall be equipped with sensors on both component reservoirs that will automatically stop the machine when one component is being pumped to the mixing head .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c injection fittings and surface seal bondedon injection fittings or injection fittings placed in drilled holes in conjunction with v grooving of the cracks may be used .
where hole drilling is undertaken care shall be taken to ensure that the reinforcement is not damaged .
parts of injection fittings remaining in the structure shall be made of rustproof materials .
the surface seal material shall have adequate strength to hold injection fittings firmly in place and to resist injection pressure adequately to prevent leakage during injection .
suitable rapidcuring repair materials for aftersealing shall be kept ready for use where poor sealing is identified .
num material mixing and application all materials shall be mixed and applied in accordance with the directions for use issued by the manufacturer .
num surface preparation cracks and surfaces located a minimum of num mm either side of cracks on all areas of application shall be cleaned of all loose particles dirt dust grease oil paints curing compounds or efflorescence using appropriate methods i.e .
oilfree compressed air industrial vacuum cleaners or flushing with high pressure water .
impurities which inhibit wetting and adhesion or penetration by the crack filling material shall be removed .
cracks and crack zones shall be allowed to dry thoroughly for a minimum of num hours or dried out by accelerated means prior to the application of materials unless such materials are water tolerant .
num resin injection of cracks a general the contractor shall submit all details of crack filling procedure for review by the superintendent num days prior to commencement of the works .
b materials cold curing two component solvent free unfilled epoxy or polyurethane resin adhesives may be used to seal cracks .
c execution of the works i general each crack shall be treated in a single continuous operation and shall be filled completely .
the contractor shall comply with the temperature ranges for application and any other material specific constraints specified in the directions for use by the manufacturer .
where waterbearing cracks are to be sealed rapidfoaming polyurethane shall where necessary be injected to provide temporary sealing prior to injection of the coldcuring resin .
where cement paste is used dry or moist crack edges shall be wetted thoroughly .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num where reinjection is required this shall be carried out within the temperature dependent period of the crack filling material given in the directions for use by the manufacturer .
at high ambient temperatures the use of cooling to influence the workability time of materials in containers is permissible .
the injection pressure used shall be commensurate with the equipment and materials used to ensure that cracks are completely filled without leaving voids .
ii preparation num surface preparation shall be undertaken in accordance with clause num .
num injection entry ports shall be provided along the crack at intervals of not greater than num mm .
where a concrete component such as a wall or slab is cracked all the way through the injection entry ports shall be located on both sides where access is possible .
the injection entry ports at the reverse face shall be placed midway between those at the front .
where cracks can only be sealed on one side only injection entry ports shall be placed at intervals which are num of the depth to which the resin is required to penetrate or not greater than num mm whichever is the lesser .
num apply surface seal material to the face of the crack between the entry ports .
surface seal material shall also be applied to the reverse face of cracks where accessible .
num resin injection shall not proceed until the surface seal material has achieved adequate strength in accordance with the manufacturers directions for use .
iii resin injection num for vertical cracks injection of resin adhesive shall begin at the lowest entry port and continue until there is an appearance of resin adhesive at the next entry port adjacent to the entry port being pumped .
where resin adhesive drains out of vertical cracks in retaining walls or foundation walls due to the inability to seal the earth backfill side or the bottom of slabs such cracks shall be reinjected until they are full and remain full .
for horizontal cracks the injection shall proceed from one end of the crack to the other .
for horizontal cracks which are on grade the crack shall be reinjected until the crack is full to compensate for any resin adhesive which may drain away due to the grade .
where a concrete component such as a wall or slab is cracked all the way through the resin shall be injected through alternate entry ports on both sides where access is possible .
for slabs injection from the underside shall precede injection from the top .
num when resin adhesive travel is indicated by appearance at the next adjacent port injection shall be discontinued and the entry port capped and the resin injection shall be transferred to the next adjacent port where the resin adhesive has appeared .
num resin adhesive injection shall be performed continuously until cracks are completely filled .
num if port to port travel of resin adhesive is not indicated the work shall cease immediately and the superintendent notified .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num routing and sealing a materials cold curing two component solvent free epoxy or polyurethane sealants or silicones polysulphides or asphaltic materials may be used to seal cracks .
cement grouts shall not be used for this type of crack repair .
sealants shall be able to withstand cyclic deformations and shall not be brittle .
flexible sealants used for the repair of active cracks shall be capable of accommodating the anticipated movement .
b execution of the works i inactive or dormant cracks the crack shall be chased and a vshaped groove with a minimum surface width of num mm and depth of num mm shall be formed to act as the sealant reservoir .
the groove shall be prepared and cleaned in accordance with clause num .
the sealant shall be placed into the dry groove and allowed to cure in accordance with the material manufacturers specified directions .
no routing of cracks shall be undertaken on prestressed concrete components unless the depth of concrete cover has been established .
ii flexible sealing for live or active cracks a rectangular reservoir with a minimum width to depth ratio of num or as required by the material manufacturers directions shall be cut out on top of the active crack and prepared in accordance with clause num .
a bondbreaking polyethylene tape or equivalent shall be placed over the crack at the bottom of the reservoir prior to the application of the flexible sealant .
num gravity feed a materials cold curing two component solvent free unfilled epoxy resin adhesives may be used to close cracks by gravity feed .
b execution of the works filling and sealing of horizontally positioned cracks shall be executed by pouring and spreading suitable crack filling material onto the surface or placing into purposely formed reservoirs .
i pouring and spreading onto surface the crack filling material shall be poured onto the surface and spread with brooms rollers or squeegees .
the material shall be worked back and forth over the cracks to obtain maximum filling .
excess material shall be broomed off the surface to prevent slick shining areas after curing .
the feeding of material to the crack shall be uninterrupted throughout the temperaturedependent workability of the crack filling material until no more material can be absorbed .
ii purposely formed reservoir a reservoir shall be formed by running a bead of silicone or acrylic sealant along both sides of the crack .
the ends of both beads shall be formed together at the termination of the crack to form a reservoir .
the edge of the sealant shall be a minimum of num mm away from the crack and its height shall be a minimum of num mm above the substrate .
the crack filling material shall be poured into the reservoir and be topped up as its level drops .
when the crack filling material in the reservoir starts to gel both the excess resin and the sealant reservoir shall be scraped off .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num coating over of shallow cracks inactive cracks with a width of less than num mm may be coated over with a protective coating system provided such cracks are not associated with earth or water retaining concrete components .
protective coating systems including their mixing and application shall satisfy all requirements of section num .
active or live cracks of width equal to or greater than num mm shall be repaired in accordance with clause num prior to coating over .
inactive or dormant cracks of width equal to or greater than num mm shall be repaired in accordance the requirements of this section prior to coating over .
protective coatings shall be compatible with any previously applied crack fillers or sealers .
num stitching of cracks this crack repair method shall be used where restoration of the tensile strength is required across major cracks .
holes shall be drilled on both sides of the crack cleaned in accordance with clause num and ushaped metal legs stitching anchored in the holes with an epoxy resin based bonding system .
the stitching metal legs shall be variable in length and orientation and they shall be located such that the tension across the crack is distributed over an area in the concrete and not concentrated on a single plane within a section .
such cracks shall also be sealed in accordance with this section .
num quality control for resin injection a low pressure injection resin injection which utilises proprietary injection kits modified grease guns or sealant guns shall continue until firm and sustained hand pressure on the gun trigger signifies that no further resin can be accepted in the crack .
b multicomponent injection i pressure test the mixing head of the injection equipment shall be disconnected and the twoadhesive component delivery lines shall be attached to the pressure check device .
the pressure check device shall consist of two independent valved nozzles capable of controlling flow rate and pressure by opening or closing the valve .
there shall be a pressure gauge capable of sensing the pressure buildup behind each valve .
the valves on the pressure check device shall be closed and the equipment operated until the gauge pressure on each line reads num kpa .
the pumps shall be stopped and the gauge pressure shall not drop below num kpa within three minutes .
the pressure test shall be undertaken twice a day for each injection unit at the beginning and half way mark when the unit is used in the crack repair work .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num ii ratio test the mixing head of the injection equipment shall be disconnected and the twoadhesive components shall be pumped simultaneously through the ratio check device .
the ratio check device shall consist of two independent valved nozzles capable of controlling backpressure by opening or closing the valve .
there shall be a pressure gauge capable of sensing the backpressure behind each valve .
the discharge pressure shall be adjusted to num kpa for both adhesive components .
both adhesive components shall be simultaneously discharged into separate calibrated containers .
the amounts discharged into the calibrated containers during the same time period shall be compared to determine that the volume discharged conforms to the manufacturers specified directions .
iii proof of ratio and pressure test the contractor shall maintain complete and accurate records of the pressure and ratio tests for review by the superintendent .
num curing and finishing a when cracks are completely filled resin adhesive shall be cured for sufficient time in accordance with the material manufacturer specified directions to allow removal of surface seal without any draining or runback of resin material from cracks .
b surface seal material and injection adhesive runs or spills shall be removed from concrete surfaces .
c the face of the crack shall be finished flush to the adjacent concrete showing no indentations or protrusions caused by the placement of surface sealant or entry ports .
d where protective or decorative coating systems are required these shall satisfy all requirements of section num .
num verification of depth of penetration of crack filling material the contractor shall extract at a minimum of seven days after completion of crack repair works a sample of two num mm diameter cores from the first num m of crack repair works and thereafter for every num m or part thereof to verify the depth of penetration of the crack filling material .
the core samples shall be extracted at locations jointly determined by the contractor and the superintendents representative and shall be inspected by the superintendents representative to verify that the crack filling material has penetrated to the full depth of the crack .
core samples shall be located with a calibrated cover meter capable of detecting the presence of steel reinforcement with an accuracy of num mm at a depth of num mm to avoid cutting through the reinforcing steel .
drilling cores in areas of high stress or creating core holes below the waterline shall be avoided .
the contractor shall obtain the approval of the superintendent prior to undertaking any extraction of core samples .
if the contractor fails to adequately verify the depth of penetration of the crack filling material it shall extract additional num mm diameter cores at its own expense .
alternatively the contractor may at its own expense use nondestructive test ndt methods such as ultrasonic pulse velocity upv impact echo ie or spectral analysis of surface waves sasw to establish the extent of penetration of resin adhesive into the cracks .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the contractor shall supply for review by the superintendent a copy of all depth of penetration testing including photographic records within one week of undertaking such verification testing .
the cored holes shall be cleaned and repaired with a suitable shrinkage compensating cementitious repair material in accordance with the requirements of section num .
the exposed surface of the repaired hole shall be similar in texture and colour to the surrounding concrete .
should the crack filling material not penetrate the full depth of the crack the contractor shall carry out rectification works .
these works shall achieve the specified level of durability otherwise the concrete works represented by that sample may be rejected .
num occupational health and safety and environmental management a occupational health and safety requirements further to the requirements of section num the contractor shall include within its health and safety coordination plan specific provisions for the material manufacturers occupational health and safety directions and the work health and safety act regulations and codes of practice .
all material safety data sheets msds shall be kept on site at all times and be readily available .
b environmental management requirements further to the requirements of section num the contractor shall include within its environmental management plan specific provisions regarding the collection segregation handling control and disposal of waste generated during repair of concrete cracks and clean up .
waste materials including liquid wastes shall be deposited in suitable containers and disposed of at sites to be located by the contractor that are acceptable to the epa and other relevant authorities .
liquid or other waste material shall not be disposed of in creeks waterways or the stormwater drainage systems .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num fibre reinforced polymer composite strengthening of concrete structures this section crossreferences sections num num num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for the supply and quality of materials surface preparation trial and permanent installation relevant inspection and testing and acceptance criteria for the strengthening of concrete structures using fibre reinforced polymer composite frpc strengthening systems .
the application of antigraffiti and anticarbonation coatings crack repairs and cementitious patch repairs of concrete which may be required as part of the frpc strengthening system installation work shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of sections num num num and num .
num standards a australian standards as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces method selection guide asnzs num guide to the protection of structural steel against atmospheric corrosion by the use of protective coatings .
b vicroads codes of practices rc num code of practice for selection of test methods for the testing of materials and work .
c vicroads test methods rc num determination of the tensile bond strength of concrete repairs and strengthening systems .
d additional documents bs num testing of resin and polymercement compositions for use in construction section num details the relevant references to these documents .
num definitions fibre reinforced polymer composite frpc frpc repair and strengthening systems are a combination of fibre reinforcing material and resins such as epoxies and other adhesive materials which can act as a composite to enhance the capacity and extend the life of concrete structures .
the role of the resin is to provide the adhesive bond onto the concrete surface and facilitate the transfer of stresses to and from the fibres .
fibre reinforcing polymer material frpm carbon aramid or glass fibres which are used to formulate the various types of fibre reinforced polymer plates strips sheets and fabric materials by impregnating or saturating with a resin matrix such as epoxies and other adhesive materials as part of a complete manufacturing process .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num materials a general hp the contractor shall submit details of the proposed frpc strengthening system including information on the proposed resins primers patties saturants adhesives and reinforcing fibres substrate preparation method of application equipment and operators to the superintendent for review not less than fourteen num days prior to the commencement of the frpc strengthening works .
frpc strengthening and repair works shall not take place until the contractors proposed materials and procedures have been reviewed by the superintendent .
all constituent materials used for the frpc strengthening systems shall be tested to national or international standard test methods .
b material properties the constituent materials used for the frpc strengthening system shall include all compatible resins primers patties saturants adhesives and reinforcing fibres as required .
all property and strength requirements of resin and adhesive materials shall be determined from testing in accordance with bs num .
all frpc materials shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations material safety data sheets and as specified in this section .
material details shall include documented evidence of previous performance relevant test results and certificates of compliance traceable to the proposed frpc strengthening systems which shall not be more than twentyfour num months old .
the frpc materials shall have the following properties i carbon fibre laminate carbon fibre reinforced with epoxy matrix the carbon fibre laminate material shall be a prefabricated pultruded section specifically designed for adding tensile strength as part of a compatible load transferring bonded system .
the carbon fibre laminate shall possess the following properties num available in a range of modulii and strength grades widths and thicknesses num elastic modulus not less than num mpa num tensile strength not less than num mpa num elongation at break not less than num num volumetric fibre fraction of not less than num num temperature resistance between numc and numc num glass transition point tg minimum temperature value of numc .
ii carbon fibre fabric high strength carbon fibres the fibre fabric materials shall be prewoven into sheets specifically designed for adding strength as part of a compatible load transferring bonded system .
the fibre fabric material shall possess the following properties num elastic modulus not less than num mpa num tensile strength not less than num mpa num elongation at break not less than num num thickness for static design not less than num mm per num gm num fibre density not less than num gm .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num iii adhesive for carbon fibre laminate the adhesives shall be a thixotropic paste used to bond frpc laminate systems to the concrete substrate and provide the required shear load path between the concrete substrate and the frpc reinforcing laminate .
adhesives shall also be used to bond together multiple layers of frpc laminates where required .
the adhesive for the carbon fibre laminate shall possess the following properties num adhesive strength not less than num mpa or concrete failure num shear strength not less than num mpa or concrete failure num compressive strength not less than num mpa at num days num tensile strength not less than num mpa at num days num static emodulus not less than num mpa num coefficient of thermal expansion not more than num x num per c num ability to be built up to num mm thickness without additional filler num glass transition point tg minimum temperature value of numc .
iv saturating resin for carbon fibre fabric the saturating resin shall be used to impregnate the reinforcing fibre fabric to fix it in place and shall be capable of providing a shear load path to effectively transfer the load between fibres .
the saturating resin shall also serve as the adhesive for wet layup systems and shall be capable of providing a shear load path between the previously primed concrete substrate and the frpc system .
the saturating resin shall possess the following properties num adhesive strength not less than num mpa or failure in concrete num tensile strength not less than num mpa at num days num flexural emodulus not less than num mpa cured at num days num flexural strength not less than num mpa at num days num compressive strength not less num mpa at num days num viscosity not greater than num cps numc unless part of a compatible carbon fibre fabric strengthening system num application temperature between numc and numc for both ambient and the substrate .
v general resin requirements resins used as part of frpc strengthening systems including primers putty fillers saturants and adhesives shall also have the following characteristics num compatibility with and adhesion to the concrete substrate num compatibility with and adhesion to the frpc system num resistance to inservice environmental effects including but not be limited to moisture salt water temperature extremes and chemicals normally associated with exposed concrete num filling ability num workability num pot life consistent with the application num compatibility with and adhesion to the reinforcing fibre num development of appropriate mechanical properties for the frpc .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num vi primer the primer shall be a very low viscosity resin used to penetrate the concrete surface and provide an improved adhesive bond for the saturating resin or adhesive .
the primer shall have properties similar to the saturating resin in clause numbiv .
vii putty filler the levelling putty filler shall be a thixotropic paste used to fill small voids including bug holes in the concrete substrate to provide a smooth surface to which the frpc system bonds and also prevent bubbles from forming during curing of the saturating resin .
the levelling putty filler shall have properties similar to the adhesive for carbon fibre laminate in clause numbiii .
c handling and storage of materials adhesives and other resins shall be stored in dry conditions not exposed to direct sunlight in strict accordance with the material manufacturers data sheet requirements and within the manufacturers specified maximum and minimum temperature range .
materials shall remain in their original sealed containers until time of use .
all material shall be brought to site in the original unopened cans clearly labelled with the appropriate manufacturers name product type reference number and batch number .
materials stored beyond the manufacturers recommended shelf life shall not be used .
the contractor shall not incorporate into the works any product that is within num days of its expiry date andor shelf life .
the contractor shall provide for each batch of frpc system material a copy of the manufacturers information as specified below i manufacturers name and address ii product reference iii batch number of identification iv quantity manufactured in the batch v certificate of date of manufacture .
frpc system materials including adhesives and resins shall be used in order of manufacture .
frpc plates laminates or strips shall be supplied and stored on site such that damage or contamination does not occur .
plates laminates and strips shall be free from unintended curves bows wraps undulations or twists .
plates laminates and strips shall be handled with clean gloves under dry conditions and touching of ready for bonding surfaces without peel ply shall be avoided .
where frpc materials are fitted with protective peel ply to ensure a clean surface the ply shall be removed immediately prior to application and touching of the surface shall be avoided .
frpc fabric sheets or rolls shall be kept free from any contamination .
the frpc fabric sheets shall be handled carefully and shall be free from wraps twists or fibre misalignment .
any protective peel ply shall be removed immediately prior to application .
they shall be stored either by being rolled to a radius greater than num mm or by being dry stacked after cutting and shall be protected from dust and moisture .
all frpc materials shall be checked for possible damage resulting from transportation handling or incorrect cutting .
handling and preparation precautions shall be in accordance with the material manufacturers recommendations and material data sheets .
the contractor shall maintain records showing which elements were treated with each batch of frpc system material .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num system installation a concrete surface preparation concrete surfaces shall be dry unless otherwise approved by the superintendent and shall be free from all dust oil e.g .
from release oils grease laitance and loose particles remnants of curing compounds waxes coatings impregnations organic contaminants i.e .
moss algae etc .
and other bond inhibiting materials .
the concrete surface shall be prepared with wet or dry abrasive blasting steam cleaning wire brushing abrasion with angle grinder or by high pressure water jet blasting to provide a clean sound surface .
areas of persistent contamination shall be removed from the surface by the use of appropriate solvents or detergents followed by washing with potable water in accordance with as num and allowed to dry thoroughly .
the surface preparation process shall be managed to ensure that all abrasive materials and debris emissions shall be contained collected and removed from site and disposed of in compliance with environment protection authority and local municipal authoritys requirements .
abrasive blasting shall be carried out in accordance with the applicable work health and safety laws and appropriate regulations imposed by the local government authority and the epa .
abrasive blast cleaning shall be carried out in accordance with as num .
dust from the surface preparation shall be removed by blowing with dry compressed air or other suitable means .
the surface shall be vacuumed before the application of the frpc laminate .
the surface layer of the concrete shall be removed to expose small particles of wellbound aggregate such that the roughness to be achieved lies between an amplitude of num mm to num mm with a surface presenting similar to numgrit sandpaper .
the surface shall not be roughened excessively .
hp prior to the commencement of fullscale surface preparation procedures the contractor shall first prepare a representative sample area to be approved by the superintendent .
the sample area shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this section and shall be used as a reference standard exhibiting a satisfactory prepared surface for the duration of the works .
any blow holes areas of honeycombing loose surface layers and weak concrete cracks of width less than num mm or other defects either revealed by a grinding process or exposed by other surface preparation methods shall be filled with a suitable epoxy putty adhesive compatible with the frpc strengthening system to be applied .
if the surface of the concrete is weak more material shall be removed and the amount removed and refilled shall be sufficient to result in a strong sound substrate suitable for the intended frpc strengthening system .
where necessary projecting fins rough spots sudden steps or other surface irregularities shall be ground to less than num mm by light abrasion with an angle grinder or filled with a suitable epoxy putty adhesive to provide a smooth concrete surface .
any breakouts or core holes shall be repaired with handapplied polymer modified cementitious materials to the original surface profile and in accordance with the material manufacturers recommendations .
the polymer modified cementitious materials shall be compatible with the parent concrete in terms of electrical resistivity and compressive strength .
where fibre fabric is to be wrapped around corners the corners shall be rounded to a minimum radius of num mm to avoid local damage to the fabric .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the unevenness of the concrete substrate surface shall be such that the gap under a num m straightedge does not exceed num mm .
the general unevenness with respect to a num m straightedge shall not exceed num mm .
any out of tolerance areas shall be rectified with a suitable rapid setting leveling putty filler .
inactive cracks of width equal to or greater than num mm in both the frpc strengthened and nonstrengthened surfaces of the specified works shall be sealed by resin injection in accordance with section num .
active cracks equal to or greater than num mm shall be treated by methods approved by the superintendent and in accordance with section num .
cementitious repairs undertaken in accordance with the requirements of section num shall be cured for at least num days prior to undertaking any frpc strengthening application .
frpc strengthening system application may be undertaken earlier than num days but no earlier than num days if it can be established using a commercially available calibrated moisture meter that the moisture content of cementitious repairs is less than num and provided the concrete surface is dry at the time of application .
a trial application of the overall frpc system to check the suitability of the surface the surface preparation method method of application and other requirements shall be undertaken as set out in clause num. b primer and epoxy putty requirements where the frpc strengthening system requires the use of a primer to seal the surface it shall be uniformly applied to all areas of the prepared concrete surface using brush or roller in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and specified rate of coverage .
airless spray equipment can be used provided thorough back rolling is undertaken to work the primer into the concrete surface .
compatible epoxy putty shall only be used to fill voids smooth surface discontinuities and treat minor imperfections prior to the application of other materials .
rough edges or lines of cured putty shall be ground smooth prior to proceeding with the installation .
the putty shall have rapid strength gain characteristics which enable overbonding to be carried out after a short time and shall be capable of being applied in thin layers where required .
prior to applying the adhesive or the saturating resin the primer and putty filler shall be allowed to cure for the required period in accordance with the material manufacturers specified requirements to ensure satisfactory adhesion at the interface of the two materials .
where the primer and putty filler are completely cured additional surface preparation may be required prior to the application of the saturating resin or adhesive consistent with the frpc strengthening system compatibility requirements .
c mixing of resins the mixing of resins shall be in accordance with the frpc system manufacturers recommended procedures including recommended batch sizes mix ratios mixing methods mixing times current material safety data sheets and as specified in this section .
the ambient temperature of all resin components shall be between numc and numc at the time of mixing .
resin and hardeners shall be mixed together in the correct proportions and required mixing times until there is a uniform homogeneous mixing of components and colour streaks are eliminated .
no excess material shall be left in the individual component containers .
resin components shall be mixed using slow speed electrically powered mixing paddles .
all mixed resin shall be used within the resins specified pot life .
any resin remaining at the end of the specified pot life shall be discarded .
scales or volumetric equipment used shall be calibrated at nummonthly intervals .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num d drying and curing requirements the contractor shall adhere to the manufacturers instructions regarding drying and curing requirements reapplication time intervals for adhesives and other resins and prevailing weather conditions .
e environmental conditions frpc strengthening systems shall not be applied under any one or more of the following conditions i windy conditions where over spray andor spatter may be generated ii when windborne debris is likely to contaminate the uncured surface of the freshly applied coating iii when the ambient temperature exceeds numc or is below numc unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the manufacturer iv when the concrete surface temperature exceeds numc v when the concrete surface temperature is below numc unless an appropriate heating method is in place vi when the relative humidity exceeds num unless an appropriate drying method is in place vii when rain spatter or runoff including leakage through deck joints contaminating the surface and adversely affecting the adhesion to the substrate may occur viii when the surface temperature of the substrate is less than numc above the dew point calculated in accordance with as num fig .
num ix when the moisture content of the concrete or cementitious repairs exceeds num x when the surface moisture condition of the concrete is not dry and it does not satisfy the manufacturers recommendations .
the environmental conditions shall be measured recorded and assessed against the requirements above once every four hours of each shift .
a calibrated commercially available hygrometer psychrometer or electronic climatic measuring gauge shall be used to determine the parameters which require readings i.e .
items i iii iv v vi and viii .
f application of plates laminates or strips the bonding surface of the frpc plate laminate or strip shall be thoroughly cleaned and where required abraded lightly as per the manufacturers recommendations prior to application .
where cutting of the frpc laminate is required it shall be installed securely to prevent any longitudinal splitting .
the adhesive shall be applied to the prepared bonding concrete surface as a thin layer by means of a notched steel trowel or equivalent immediately after mixing .
the adhesive shall cover the whole of the bonding area and shall be maintained at a thickness in the range of num mm to num mm .
a further adhesive layer shall be applied to the cleaned and fully dried frpc plate laminate or strip to form a dome profile across the plate with num mm of adhesive material in the centre and num mm on the edges .
the frpc plate laminate or strip shall be brought into contact and lightly pressed with the fingers onto the prepared bonding area .
the frpc material shall be further pressed on with a hard rubber roller until the extra adhesive is squeezed out along the sides .
the roller pressure shall be applied from the centre going to the outer edge such that no voids are formed between the laminate and the concrete substrate surface .
the excess adhesive shall be removed .
the layer thickness of the final adhesive along the bond line of the laminate shall be a minimum of num mm and a maximum of num mm .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num adhesive residues on the laminate surface shall be removed with a compatible chemical remover prior to hardening .
where required additional parallel frpc plates laminates or strips shall be applied at a minimum distance of num mm from the adjacent frpc material .
where frpc plates laminates or strips are lapped the minimum overlap in the longitudinal fibre direction shall be num mm .
if temporary support of the frpc plate laminate or strip is required to be retained in position then the frpc system shall be fully cured before removing the support .
g application of fabric sheets the saturating resin or bonding adhesive shall be uniformly applied to saturate the concrete surface using handheld foam roller brush or scraper at the coverage rates specified in the material manufacturers data sheet to ensure adhesion of the fabric material .
the fabric sheets shall be cut to the prescribed sizes using suitable cutters .
the frpc sheets shall be applied to the resinsaturated concrete surface by pressing manually onto the adhesive such that it is stretched by avoiding any wrinkles or the introduction of voids .
the surface of the fabric shall be rolled over the backing paper to force the impregnation of the resin into the fabric material .
rolling shall be in the longitudinal direction of the fibres along the centreline and working outwards to expel excess adhesive at the edges to ensure the removal of any entrapped air and produce an even adhesive line .
the backing paper shall then be peeled away .
where subsequent layers of saturation resin are required as part of the frpc strengthening system the required time shall be allowed between the first and second coat of resin in accordance with the material manufacturers data sheet .
the time between mixing and application of the saturation resin shall be in accordance with the material manufacturers data sheet .
where frpc fabric sheets or strips are lapped the minimum overlap in the longitudinal fibre direction shall be num mm .
additional resin shall be applied to the outer surface of the fabric layer to be overlapped .
no lapping in the lateral fibre direction shall be allowed .
any lifting or delamination that may occur during the application period shall be corrected by pressing the fabric sheet using a foam roller or spatula .
where multiple layers of frpc fabric sheet are required as part of the design of the frpc strengthening system these shall be applied in accordance with the material manufacturers recommendations data sheet and as specified in this section .
where the resin is factory applied or it is applied onto the fabric on site using hand held foam rollers brushes or impregnation machines prior to application additional procedures on how the installation shall be supported shall be submitted to the superintendent for review .
h anchorage requirements where required anchorage shall be provided as detailed on the drawings .
fibre anchors shall not be fabricated onsite and shall be manufactured and delivered directly from the manufacturer .
fabrication and protective treatment of steel anchorage plates and bolts used as part of frpc strengthening systems shall comply with the requirements of section num and section num .
num trial system application a trial application of the complete frpc strengthening system shall be conducted on a test area of the actual substrate of not less than num m fourteen num days prior to the commencement of permanent frpc strengthening installation works .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num hp the contractor shall not proceed with the permanent frpc strengthening installation works until the trial system application has been carried out and the outcomes reviewed and approved by the superintendent .
the test area shall be prepared and strengthened by the contractor to satisfy all the requirements of the material manufacturers recommendations .
selection of a suitable test area is to be approved by the superintendent .
as a minimum the concrete surface of the test area shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of clause numa .
the surface layer of the concrete shall be removed to expose small particles of wellbound aggregate such that the roughness to be achieved lies between an amplitude of num mm to num mm with a surface presenting similar to numgrit sandpaper .
the surface shall not be roughened excessively .
the trial frpc strengthening application including testing shall prove the adequacy of the contractors proposed materials and methods to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
actual coverage rates of adhesives and other resins shall be recorded in order that due allowance may be made in the fullscale application for rough irregular or highly absorbent concrete substrate .
additional requirements or observations shall be recorded and considered for the fullscale application .
if the trial application is successful the frpc strengthening system shall be utilised in the works .
if the trial application is deemed by the superintendent not to comply with the requirements of the specification a new trail application shall be made until the performance criteria of this section including the requirements of clauses num num and num are satisfied .
in the event that the trial application is rejected the contractor shall remove and dispose of any work deemed as unacceptable by the superintendent submit a new proposal to rectify the deficiencies and repeat the trial application as described above .
any delays caused through rejection shall not constitute justification for additional claims andor an extension of time .
num contractor competency the frpc system installation contractor or subcontractor and installation personnel shall have a minimum of num years experience in the repair and rehabilitation of reinforced concrete structures and a demonstrated competency for surface preparation and application of the frpc system to be installed .
such experience shall be supported with documented evidence of previous experience including previous projects and relevant references .
the contractor shall also provide documented evidence from the frpc system manufacturer demonstrating that the contractors application personnel are adequately trained and skilled in the installation procedures of the frpc system to be installed .
the frpc system installation supervisor shall be trained and qualified in all aspects of the applied techniques and shall be present at each stage of both the trial and permanent frpc strengthening installation works .
num inspection and testing a general the contractor shall undertake all inspection and testing of the installed frpc strengthening system with calibrated equipment as specified in this clause .
the contractor shall maintain all required documentation and results as specified in this section and section num for all stages of the work .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the work shall be inspected by the contractor at each stage of the frpc strengthening operation as a minimum i.e .
after surface preparations mixing of materials prior to and after adhesive and resin application and any touchup that may be required and both during and after installation of frpc plates laminates strips or fabric sheets .
for the purpose of surveillance and audits as specified in section num the contractor shall give the superintendent five num days written notice of its intention to carry out repair or strengthening works and shall provide adequate access to enable surveillance of the works by the superintendent .
b testing for drummy areas a visual inspection of the frpc works shall be conducted immediately after installation is complete and any defects recorded .
the cured frpc strengthening system shall also be visually inspected and checked for delaminations air voids and bubbles between multiple layers or between the frpc system and the concrete num days after completion of installation .
the drummyness test shall be conducted along the whole length of each applied frpc plate laminate strip or fabric sheet using a small hammer or similar .
areas where the frpc material has not bonded correctly to the concrete or to subsequent layers will be characterised by a drummy or hollow sound .
delamination size location and quantity relative to the overall application area shall be recorded and evaluated with respect to structural integrity and durability of the frpc system .
small delaminations less than num mm x num mm do not require corrective action provided the total delaminated area is less than num of the frpc strengthened area and there are no more than num such delaminations per num m .
where these requirements are not complied with the effective delaminated area shall be considered as a large delamination area and repaired in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
individual or isolated delaminations air voids or bubbles larger than num mm x num mm shall be marked and repaired in accordance with the requirements of clause num. c testing for flatness the evenness of frpc plates laminate strip or fabric sheets shall not deviate by more than num mm when checked with a num m straightedge .
in addition evenness shall not deviate by more than num mm when checked with a num mm straightedge .
where the requirements of this subclause are not complied with additional frpc plates laminates strips or fabric sheets shall be fixed in locations as approved by the superintendent .
d adhesion pulloff testing the contractor shall conduct partially cored direct pulloff tests of the fully cured frpc system to verify the tensile bond between the frpc material and the existing concrete substrate num days after the completion of installation .
the pulloff testing shall be undertaken in accordance with vicroads test method rc num as described in the vicroads code of practice rc num .
testing for frpc plates laminates or strips shall be carried out at a frequency of three num tests per num lineal metres of frpc strengthened area .
testing for frpc fabric sheets shall be carried out at a frequency of three num tests per num m of frpc strengthened area .
the mean bond strength at num days shall be greater than num mpa provided no individual result is below num of num mpa .
the mode of failure of the pulloff test shall be in the concrete substrate .
mean bond strengths less than num mpa or failure between the frpc system and the concrete substrate or between layers of frpc shall be raised as a non conformance for approval by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num after the pulloff test is complete the cored holes shall be filled and smoothed with a polymer modified cementitious material in accordance with section num or with the frpc system putty filler in accordance with clause numb .
e compressive strength of adhesives and resins the contractor shall take three num num mm test cubes from the first batch of material mixed then three num num mm cubes for every num kg of material used thereafter to test for compressive strength .
the cubes shall be cured for num days as per the material manufacturers recommendations .
two num cubes shall be tested at num days and the third cube at num days to confirm compliance with the minimum compressive cube strengths as specified in clause numb .
test cubes shall be made cured and tested in accordance with bs num .
num system repairs hp should any of the frpc strengthening system application work not comply with the provisions of this specification then the areas concerned shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
such repair work may include removal of the frpc areas concerned followed by surface preparation and application of new layers of frpc .
the procedure for any repair work shall be reviewed by the superintendent .
for the purpose of this clause noncomplying work shall include delaminations air voids or bubbles larger than num mm x num mm .
large delaminations greater than num mm x num mm shall be repaired by selectively cutting away the affected frpc material followed by surface preparation and application of overlapping frpc layers .
delaminations air voids or bubbles greater than num mm x num mm in size but less than num mm x num mm shall be repaired by either resin injection or frpc layer replacement in accordance with this clause .
wrinkling of the frpc material or broken fabric shall be repaired by the application of additional layers in accordance with this clause .
any area of the frpc system damaged by the contractor during its operation shall be made good in accordance with this clause .
num protection of works and property and clean up a protection of worksproperty the contractor shall protect already completed works during abrasive blasting operations or any other surface preparation process and during frpc system application processes .
the contractor shall ensure that the frpc works are protected from adverse conditions dust and debris during the curing period of the frpc system in accordance with the requirements of clause nume .
the contractor shall undertake suitable protective measures and methods during the installation of the frpc system to ensure that vehicles and pedestrians are adequately protected from these works .
the proposed protective measures or methods being used shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval a minimum of two working days in advance of the proposed works .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b environmental and occupational health and safety requirements the contractor shall remove all adhesive residues droppings and smudges from all surfaces including surfaces not being treated .
the contractor shall remove from the site all spent abrasive and all other rubbish accumulated during the work on a daily basis .
the contractor shall dispose of such wastes and shall adhere to epa and other local state and federal government requirements with respect to how waste generated during surface preparation frpc system application and clean up will be collected segregated handled controlled and disposed of .
all relevant requirements of the work health and safety act num and work health and safety regulations num shall be satisfied with respect to all formwork .
c disposal of waste materials waste materials including liquid wastes shall be deposited in suitable containers and disposed of at sites to be located by the contractor that are acceptable to the epa and other relevant authorities .
liquid or other waste material shall not contaminate creeks waterways or stormwater drainage .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num cementitious patch repair of concrete this section crossreferences sections num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for the supply of materials surface preparation application relevant inspection and testing and acceptance criteria for the patch repair of concrete structures using cementitious repair materials .
num types and selection of patch repair methods this section includes the following types of patch repair of concrete structures using cementitious repair materials corrosion deteriorated concrete repair noncorrosion deteriorated concrete repair and filling of blowholes and surface imperfections .
repair of concrete shall include breaking back to sound and dense concrete to receive repair material preparation of steel reinforcement and concrete substrate application of an appropriate steel primer and substrate bonding coat and rebuilding to the original surface profile .
hp prior to commencement of any patch repair of concrete the contractor shall assess the affected concrete structure or component to determine the influence of spalled deteriorated damaged or honeycombed concrete on load bearing capacity serviceability and durability and submit the assessment to the superintendent for review .
a cementitious patch repair method shall be selected based on an assessment of the causes and extent of the spalled deteriorated damaged or defective concrete the location of the patch repair on the concrete structure or component the proposed repair material properties likely patch behaviour and the effect on load capacity and structural safety serviceability and durability .
a patch repair method shall be submitted which includes requirements for surface preparation method of application curing and surface finish to ensure the longevity of the repair solution .
any proposal to use patch repair methods and repair materials other than those specified in this section shall be submitted to the superintendent for review .
the application of antigraffiti and decorativeanticarbonation coatings and crack repairs which may be required as part of the concrete repair work shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of sections num num and num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num standards a australian standards as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces as num liquid membraneforming curing compounds for concrete as num bridge design .
b vicroads test methods vicroads test method rc num determination of the tensile bond strength of concrete repairs and strengthening systems .
c other standards bs num testing of resin and polymercement compositions for use in construction .
num definitions blowholes small regular or irregular cavities usually not exceeding num mm in diameter or num mm in depth resulting from entrapment of air bubbles in the surface of formed concrete during placement and consolidation .
bond the adherence between the repair material and the existing concrete substrate .
bond strength or pulloff strength the resistance to separation of a repair material from the existing concrete substrate .
corrosion deteriorated concrete concrete with deterioration delamination cracking or spalling due to contamination by deleterious substances such as chlorides and carbon dioxide associated with the overall mechanism of corrosion of steel reinforcement .
delamination the separation of a section of concrete from solid concrete usually along steel reinforcement which is identified by a drummy or hollow sound instead of a clear ringing sound when metal hits the concrete .
exposure classifications in accordance with table num of as num bridge design concrete and summarised as follows a mild c very severe bnum moderately severe u special consideration bnum severe .
fairing coat a thin layer of cementitious material used to render large surface areas and cover fill or smooth blowholes and surface imperfections flush with the finished concrete surface .
featheredging cementitious repair material applied to the edge of the repair in a very thin layer instead of a thicker layer which is contained at the edge with a square cut .
noncorrosion deteriorated or defective concrete concrete with deterioration damage or defects due to accidental or physical loadings temporary overloading impact and other mechanical or uncontaminated damage excessive early shrinkage or thermal stresses and low quality honeycombed or off form voided concrete .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num surface imperfections surface voids or cavities not exceeding num mm in depth left on the concrete surface in the form of surface honeycomb due to failure of the mortar to effectively fill the spaces among coarse aggregate particles during placement and consolidation .
spall a fragment of concrete broken off or detached from the edge of solid concrete due to the corrosion of steel reinforcement or due to accidental physical or mechanical damage .
num contractor competency personnel subcontractors and suppliers utilised in cementitious patch repair of concrete shall have a minimum of num years experience in the repair and rehabilitation of reinforced concrete structures and a demonstrated competency for surface preparation and application of the repair material to be applied .
the concrete repair supervisor shall be trained and qualified on all aspects of application techniques and shall be present at all times during repair work .
application personnel shall be trained and skilled in the application procedures of the repair material to be applied .
documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate experience qualification skills and training of personnel subcontractors and suppliers .
num material properties a general materials used for reinstatement of concrete shall be single component polymer modified cementitious nonshrink repair mortars or be part of a complete polymer modified cementitious repair system .
only whole bags of material shall be used .
test certificates material data sheets and health and safety data sheets shall be available for all materials .
b repair material the proposed repair material shall i be capable of being hand applied in vertical and overhead sections up to num mm thick in one application with no slumping ii achieve strength conforming to the requirements in table num table num repair material strength requirements concrete structure strength repair material strength num day num days num days minimum compressive strength in accordance with bs num pt num dry cure num mpa to num mpa num mpa num mpa num mpa greater than num mpa to num mpa num mpa num mpa num mpa greater than num mpa num mpa num mpa num mpa minimum flexural strength in accordance with bs num pt num num mpa to num mpa num mpa greater than num mpa to num mpa num mpa greater than num mpa num mpa minimum tensile strength in accordance with bs num pt num num mpa to num mpa num mpa greater than num mpa to num mpa num mpa greater than num mpa num mpa minimum bond or pulloff strength to concrete substrate num days in accordance with vicroads test method rc num all concrete structure strengths num mpa department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num iii achieve a drying shrinkage of less than num microstrain at num days in accordance with astm prism at numc and relative humidity of num iv minimum wet density of num kgmnum v maximum waterpowder ratio of num vi resistant to alkaline solutions .
steel reinforcement primer and substratebonding coat shall be compatible with the repair mortar and be part of the same range of proprietary repair system .
c fairing coat fairing coat cementitious repair material required to fill blowholes and imperfections on concrete structures shall be i a single component polymer modified material ii capable of application at num num mm thick and fill blowholes and imperfections flush with the finished concrete surface iii capable of application over a large area without being subject to shrinkage cracking .
num handling and storage of materials repair materials shall be stored in accordance with the material manufacturers requirements including in dry conditions not exposed to direct sunlight within the specified maximum and minimum temperature range in their original sealed moisture resistant bags or containers .
all material shall be brought to site in the original sealed bags or unopened containers clearly labelled with the appropriate manufacturers name product type reference number and batch number .
materials stored beyond the manufacturers recommended shelf life shall be discarded .
the following information shall be provided for each batch of repair material a manufacturers name and address b product reference c batch number of identification d quantity manufactured in the batch and e certificate of date of manufacture .
num preparation and application a general the contractor shall perform concrete repair work in conformity with the manufacturers specification .
hp any deviations from the manufacturers specification and the requirements of this specification shall be submitted to the superintendent for review accompanied by certification from the manufacturer prior to commencement of repairs .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b steel reinforcement where the existing concrete cover to steel reinforcement is less than the design requirements the concrete repair shall be profiled to ensure that the following minimum cover of polymer modified repair material is achieved i exposure classification a and bnum num mm minimum cover ii exposure classification bnum and c num mm minimum cover for a corrosion deteriorated concrete repair new reinforcing steel shall be incorporated into the structure to compensate for any existing reinforcing steel which is exhibiting loss in excess of num of its original crosssectional area .
steel reinforcement incorporated into the structure shall comply with the requirements of section num. c surface preparation i general for all types of patch repair all defective and delaminated concrete and existing repair materials shall be broken back to a sound and dense concrete surface .
defective concrete shall be removed using light hand held percussive equipment or high pressure water jetting .
care shall be taken to ensure that any steel reinforcement exposed is not cut or damaged .
the method of breaking back or scabbling shall ensure that excess dust does not form a hazard in the surrounding area .
hammer sounding shall be conducted on completion of breakout to ensure that all delamination has been removed .
a perpendicular saw cut of at least num mm shall be provided around the perimeter of the area to be repaired to prevent featheredging of the repair material .
the saw cut surface shall be roughened by removing the surface layer to expose small particles of well bound aggregate .
all concrete surfaces and mortar substrates shall be sound clean and free from dust oils and grease and surface contaminants .
all loose and unsound materials and surface laitance shall be removed .
the concrete substrate and any exposed steel reinforcement shall be cleaned by a final wash down or by blowing down with oil free compressed air to ensure removal of all residual contamination .
the prepared concrete substrate shall be thoroughly prewetted with clean fresh water and shall be surface dry prior to application of repair material .
ii corrosion deteriorated concrete repair in addition to other requirements for repair of corrosion deteriorated concrete repair all defective and delaminated concrete and existing repair materials shall be broken back to a sound and dense concrete surface to a minimum of num mm behind and around the rusted steel reinforcement .
concrete shall be removed along the length of visibly corroding steel reinforcement until at least num mm of sound rust free metal is exposed at each end of the rusted section .
all corrosion products shall be removed from the exposed steel reinforcement .
steel reinforcement shall be cleaned to a bright metal to achieve a surface preparation equivalent to asnum part num class num. iii noncorrosion deteriorated or defective concrete repair hp the superintendent shall review the depth of removal of concrete for non corrosion deteriorated or defective concrete repair and the amount of exposure of steel reinforcement prior to commencement of application of repair material .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num d application of reinforcement protection and substratebonding coat all exposed steel reinforcement shall be coated immediately following preparation and cleaning with a primer which forms part of the proprietary repair system to provide immediate protection against corrosion .
the steel primer shall be adequately applied to the back of the steel reinforcement where it is fully exposed and where steel bars are tied together .
overcoating of the concrete substrate with the steel primer shall be avoided unless it is a requirement of the overall repair system .
a substratebonding coat which also forms part of the proprietary repair system shall be worked into the concrete substrate using a short bristle brush to enhance the bond at the repair interface .
the steel primer and substrate bonding coat shall be thoroughly mixed to achieve a uniform colour and consistency .
materials shall not be thinned and the whole container contents shall be mixed without split mixing between mixes .
e application of repair mortar the contractor shall include within its quality procedures the manufacturers specifications for use of the repair materials and test plans that meet the requirements of the standards and this section .
hp reinstatement of prepared areas shall not commence until i a joint measurement of the repair area by the superintendent and the contractor has taken place ii evidence that the preparation of the repair area conforms to the requirements of this specification and iii the contractors quality procedures has been sighted by the superintendent .
all materials shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers specifications or instructions for use in a continuous process .
the repair mortar shall be thoroughly mixed in whole bags with potable water prior to commencement of application .
mixing of repair materials shall be undertaken in a forced action mixer or in a suitably sized drum using a spiral paddle fitted to a low speed heavyduty drill .
freefall mixers shall not be used .
repair material shall be applied while the substrate bonding coat is still tacky .
concrete shall be rebuilt to the original surface profile using a cementitious repair material .
where the existing concrete cover to the steel reinforcement is less than the design requirements the new repair shall be profiled as required to ensure that a minimum cover of polymer modified repair material to the steel reinforcement is achieved as specified in clause numb .
where formwork is used to facilitate the patch repair it shall be pretreated such that it prevents moisture absorption from the repair mortar and positioned such that it does not inhibit effective compaction of the repair material .
repair material shall only be applied when the concrete substrate temperature and the air temperature measured at the point of application is above numc or numc and rising .
no material shall be applied when the air temperature measured at the point of application is above numc .
where the ambient temperature at the point of application of material is above numc and the area to be treated is subject to direct sunlight protective shading shall be used and equipment that comes into direct contact with the repair material shall be kept cool and not exposed to direct sunlight .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num f blowholes and surface imperfections blowholes and surface imperfections shall be filled with a scrape coat application of a single component cementitious fairing coat repair mortar .
a cementitious fairing coat repair mortar may also be used in a thin layer where a uniform concrete surface is required prior to the application of a protective or decorative coating .
the quality control testing requirements of clause num shall not apply to cementitious fairing coat repair mortars .
num curing and protection immediately after placement and for seven days thereafter the repair material shall be cured and protected from drying out and against the harmful effects of water movement and weather including rain and rapid temperature changes .
cementitious material shall be cured with a curing compound in accordance with the material manufacturers specification .
in addition to a curing compound heavy duty polyethylene sheeting fastened and sealed at the edges shall also be provided for concrete patch repairs greater than num mm x num mm in size and for all concrete repairs to chloride affected concrete structures or components .
curing compounds shall comply with as num .
curing compounds shall be removed prior to the application of any protective or decorative coatings unless documented evidence is provided to the satisfaction of the superintendent that the applied curing compound is compatible with any proposed coatings .
num finishing and surface condition all surfaces shall match surrounding surface finish by use of steel forms or steel trowel finish .
the surface of the concrete repair shall not have cracks of width greater than num mm measured at the concrete surface nor craze cracking covering a significant area of the repair at the completion of the curing period .
cracks in repair material shall be repaired in accordance with section num .
there shall be no cracking at the interface of the concrete repair with the existing concrete .
a joint inspection of all concrete repaired areas with the contractor and superintendent shall be undertaken num months after completion of the repair works or prior to the end of the defects liability period whichever is earlier .
the surface of the concrete repair shall not have cracks of width greater than num mm measured at the concrete surface nor craze cracking covering a significant area of the repair num months after completion of the repair works or at the end of the defects liability period whichever is earlier .
any necessary remedial works shall be undertaken within two weeks of the date of inspection .
num tolerances the tolerance on edges and surfaces in plan and level shall be num mm .
maximum allowance for irregularities when measured with a num metre straightedge shall be num mm .
in addition evenness shall not deviate by more than num mm when checked with a num mm straightedge .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num quality control testing a compressive strength of cementitious repair material three num mm test cubes shall be taken from the first batch of material mixed then three num mm cubes for every num kg of material used thereafter to test for compressive strength .
the cubes shall be cured for num days under laboratorycontrolled conditions .
two cubes shall be tested at num days and the third cube at num days to confirm compliance with the minimum compressive strength requirements as specified in table num .
test cubes shall be made cured and tested in accordance with as num. b bond strength pulloff testing the contractor shall conduct partially cored direct pulloff tests of the fully cured in situ repair material to verify the tensile bond strength between the in situ repair material and the existing concrete substrate num days after the completion of application .
the pulloff testing shall be undertaken in accordance with vicroads test method rc num .
the test locations shall be jointly determined by the contractor and the superintendent .
testing shall be carried out at a frequency of three tests per num mnum at representative test locations of a completed repair area .
the mode of failure shall be determined by visual inspection of the test specimens and categorised as follows mode num tensile failure within the existing concrete substrate .
mode num tensile failure within the repair material .
mode num bond failure at the interface between the existing concrete substrate and the repair material .
mode num bond failure between the adhesive layer and the dolly .
mode num partial bond failure at the interface between the existing concrete substrate and the repair material and partial tensile failure within the repair material .
mode num partial bond failure at the interface between the existing concrete substrate and the repair material and partial tensile failure within the existing concrete substrate .
where a combination of modes of failure exist the percentage of each mode of failure shall be recorded to the nearest num based on the surface area of the failure face .
the mean bond strength at num days shall not be less than num mpa with no individual result less than num mpa .
the mode of failure of the pulloff test shall be in accordance with mode num with tensile failure within the existing concrete substrate .
mean bond strengths less than num mpa or failure modes num num num num and num shall be raised as a nonconformance .
c testing for drummy areas a visual inspection of all concrete repair areas shall be conducted immediately prior to the application of any decorativeanticarbonation coating for delaminations and any defects recorded .
the test for drummy areas shall be conducted using a small hammer along the whole surface area of the concrete patch repairs and delaminated areas shall be characterised by a drummy or hollow sound .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num delaminated patch repairs shall be removed and repaired in accordance with the requirements of this section .
testing for drummy areas shall be conducted in the presence of the superintendent .
d test results the contractor shall supply for review by the superintendent a copy of all quality control testing including photographic records within one week of undertaking such testing .
e nonconformances for any test batch that fails to meet the specified standards all repairs to which the test batch relates shall be removed and the repairs repeated in accordance with the requirements of this section .
num occupational health and safety and environmental management a occupational health and safety requirements further to the requirements of section num the contractor shall include within its health and safety coordination plan specific provisions for the material manufacturers occupational health and safety directions and the work health and safety regulations num and codes of practice .
all material safety data sheets msds shall be kept on site at all times and be readily available .
b environmental management requirements further to the requirements of section num the contractor shall include within its environmental management plan specific provisions regarding the collection segregation handling control and disposal of waste generated during concrete patch repair works and clean up .
waste materials including liquid wastes shall be deposited in suitable containers and disposed of at sites to be located by the contractor that are acceptable to the epa and other relevant authorities .
liquid or other waste material shall not be disposed of in creeks waterways or the stormwater drainage systems .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num materials to be supplied by the department of state growth num general the materials listed in schedule num and specified elsewhere herein will be supplied by the department of state growth free of cost to the contractor under the conditions of delivery specified .
num quantities the quantities supplied will be the net quantities as determined from the drawings or as specified elsewhere herein .
any loss or damage to the materials after the contractor has taken delivery of them shall be made good at the contractors expense .
the contractor shall notify the superintendent of any loss or damage to materials as soon as is practicable after the removal of materials from the road trucks and he shall confirm such loss or damage to the superintendent within seven days of delivery of the materials .
num delivery delivery by road transport shall be to the road pavement or firm ground in the vicinity of the bridge site .
should the contractor require delivery to a location such that the transport is required to leave the road pavement he shall provide a suitable access track and shall assume full responsibility for the safety of the contents of the vehicle and the movement of the vehicle while on the access track .
where delivery is by road transport the contractor shall unload the materials within one hour of the arrival of the vehicle unless otherwise specified and shall bear all costs resulting from any longer delays .
the contractor shall take charge of the materials upon arrival and shall be responsible for their unloading andor transport to the bridge site and for their satisfactory storage .
the contractor shall give advance notice to the superintendent of the dates on which he requires deliveries of materials .
the minimum periods of notice are listed in the following schedule .
num delays in the event of delay in the supply of materials by the department of state growth as specified herein causing delay to the progress of the work the contractor will be entitled to claim an extension of time beyond the specified contract time for completion of the work .
such claim for extension of time will be assessed by the superintendent in accordance with the general conditions of contract .
however the department of state growth will not accept liability for any other claims which may be made by the contractor on account of such delays in the supply of materials by the department of state growth .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num schedule of materials to be supplied the materials to be supplied conditions of delivery and advance notice required are listed in the following schedule .
materials quantity delivery condition required advance notice department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num underground stormwater drains this section crossreferences sections num num num num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for the supply delivery transport and installation of underground stormwater drains referred to as culverts together with the construction of inlet and outlet structures endwalls catchpits basins etc .
erection of marker posts and the removal andor relaying of existing culverts as shown on the drawings or as specified .
num standards materials design and construction of underground stormwater drains shall comply with the requirements of relevant australian standards including as num elastomeric seals for waterworks purposes as num helical lockseam corrugated steel pipes as num design and installation of helical lockseam corrugated steel pipes as num methods of testing for elastomers asnzs num buried corrugated metal structures as num general purpose and blended cements as num precast concrete pipes pressure and non pressure as num fibrereinforced concrete pipes and fittings .
section num details the relevant references to these documents .
num definitions culvert an underground stormwater drain consisting of pipes arch or box sections .
precast reinforced concrete pipes pipes manufactured from portland cementbased concrete or geopolymer binderbased concrete as specified in section num .
in the context of the manufacture of reinforced concrete pipes portland cement concrete and geopolymer binder concrete are equivalent products .
num materials a precast reinforced concrete box culverts precast reinforced concrete box culverts shall comply with the requirements of section num. b precast reinforced concrete pipes i general portland cementbased conventional precast reinforced concrete pipes shall comply with the requirements of as num .
geopolymer binderbased precast reinforced concrete pipes shall comply with the requirements of as num and this section except that the concrete used shall comply with the requirements of section num for geopolymer concrete with compressive strengths appropriate to the nominated load class performance requirements .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num precast reinforced concrete pipes covered by this section shall be used for drainage not subject to internal pressure and the required sizes and load classes shall be as shown on the drawings .
rubber ring joints shall comply with the requirements of as num .
the clear cover to steel reinforcement shall be based on normal environments and shall not be less than shown in table num of as num .
aggregates for precast reinforced concrete pipes shall comply with the requirements of section num .
pressure pipes shall be as specified on the drawings and in this section .
ii additional requirements additional routine sampling and testing of precast reinforced concrete pipes shall include ultimate load water absorption cover to steel reinforcement dimensional accuracy and joint assembly in accordance with the requirements of as num .
the design diameter as defined in as num shall not be less than num of the nominal size shown on the drawings for all classes of pipes up to and including class num. c fibrereinforced concrete frc rigid pipes i general frc rigid pipes shall comply with the requirements of as num and shall have a design life of num years .
frc rigid pipes shall comply with the rigid pipe strength requirements of clause numa of as num with the load regression factor r determined in a manner consistent with the design life of num years .
frc rigid pipes may be supplied in diameter sizes up to and including num mm .
frc rigid pipes shall be used for drainage and the required sizes load classes and installation conditions shall be as shown on the drawings .
the frc rigid pipe jointing shall consist of flexible elastomeric double vring joints in accordance with as num and an external collar in accordance with as num appendix m figure mnum bi .
flush or butt joints shall only be used for the first pipe when extending existing pipes .
ii additional requirements further to the requirements of as num the following tests shall be undertaken num one pipe per num pipes or part thereof of each size and class shall be load tested in accordance with clause num of as num .
num one pipe per num pipes or part thereof of each size and class shall be tested for internal diameter wall thickness pipe length squareness of ends and straightness in accordance with the dimension and tolerance requirements of clause num of as num .
num testing for restrictions on chemical content acidsoluble chloride and sulphate ions as described in section num of as num shall be at num monthly intervals .
the design diameter as defined in as num shall not be less than num of the nominal size shown on the drawings for all classes of pipes .
d buried corrugated metal culverts buried corrugated metal culverts shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of section num as num as num and asnzs num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num e bedding and backfill materials materials used for bedding and selected backfill shall be free from perishable matter and lumps and shall conform with the requirements of table num and table num below .
ordinary backfill shall be free from perishable matter and shall conform with the requirements of table num .
table num material sieve size as mm num num num num num percentage passing by mass bedding num num selected backfill num num ordinary backfill num num table num test test value plasticity index max .
num f concrete castinplace concrete edgings paths and other surfacings shall comply with the requirements of section num. g mortar mortar used in the laying of box culvert sections or as jointing for pipes shall comply with the requirements of clause num. h marker posts marker posts shall comply with the requirements of section num .
num conformity with drawings the contractor shall set out the drainage work in accordance with the drawings .
hp prior to commencement of excavation for the culverts the contractor shall confirm the position of all culverts with the superintendent .
the culverts constructed shall be constructed true to line and level .
where it is necessary to modify the line or levels of drainage lines shown on the drawings the superintendent shall be notified of the proposed design change prior to excavation for the drainage lines .
the design change notice shall include certification by the designer that the change complies with the design requirements .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num unless specified otherwise the tolerance on location of pipes compared to the design or a change to the design notified in accordance with this clause shall be a offset of entry pits required to match lines of kerbs or barriers num mm b plan location of pits other than offsets to kerb lines or barriers num mm c invert level of pipes at pits num mm d departure from design grade of pipe runs num mm in num m provided minimum grade is not less than num the location of each run of underground drainage shall be verified by a survey certificate prior to backfilling the culverts and shall be recorded progressively on the contractors asconstructed drawings .
num stockpiling of materials materials shall not be stockpiled or stored on any carriageway or footpath without the consent of the superintendent .
num provision for drainage during construction the contractor shall provide for the safe discharge of seepage and stormwater at all times during the construction of any culvert and for the effective dewatering of excavations .
before obstructing any waterway channel culvert or pipe the contractor shall make provision for temporary diversion of flow and obtain prior written approval from the relevant waterway authority .
num installation of culverts in fills under construction before laying any single row or multiple row culvert in fill the fill shall first be constructed and compacted to subgrade level or to a level num m above the top of the proposed culvert whichever is the lower for a distance of not less than num m clear on either side of the proposed trench .
the trench shall then be excavated through this fill as provided in clause num and the culvert installed .
num construction loading on culverts until the minimum compacted thickness of cover specified in table num below for a particular range of axle or track loading has been provided over any culvert construction traffic shall not be permitted to cross that culvert .
a temporary embankment extending not less than num m on both sides of the culvert may be used to provide the necessary cover .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num range of axle or track loading tonne required cover thickness metre min .
type size and class of culvert pipe corrugated metal box culvert num kn proof load pipe class d num mm num num num dnumm dnumm dnumm dnumm dnumm dnumm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num this range of loading not permissible .
d nominal pipe diameter d less than num mm not permitted d more than num mm as directed by the superintendent .
num excavation excavation for installation of culverts shall include all excavation necessary to prepare the culvert foundation and provide the full specified depth of culvert bedding .
where necessary the foundation shall allow for pipes with protruding sockets .
where practical trench walls shall be vertical with temporary protection as required .
for box culverts the width of the trench shall be such that the clearance from the outside of the culvert to the wall of the trench is in the range num to num times the overall height of the culvert .
for pipe culverts the width of trench at and below the level of the top of the pipe shall be such that the horizontal clearance from the outside of the pipe to the wall of the trench is within the limits shown in table num .
table num pipe type nominal pipe diameter or width mm horizontal clearance to wall of trench min .
mm max .
mm corrugated metal culvert all num num other all num num the base of the trench shall be compacted to refusal using mechanical plant .
the contractor shall treat or replace all soft wet or unstable material below the level required to provide the minimum specified thickness of culvert bedding as specified in clause num .
replacement material if used shall be compacted in accordance with clause num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num culvert bedding bedding material shall be provided and placed for the full width of the trench or where the culvert is to be placed without trenching to a width num m greater than the overall width of the culvert .
the compacted thickness of bedding material following any shaping necessary shall be not less than num mm where d num mm num mm where d num mm where d is the nominal pipe diameter or culvert width .
when the sections are in position an additional layer of bedding material shall be placed to a height equal to num of the nominal pipe diameter or culvert height .
this material shall be placed between the pipe and the outer limits of the lower layers of bedding and shall be compacted as specified in clause num .
num laying a general laying of pipes or box culverts shall not commence until the contractor has verified that culvert bedding complies with the specified lines and levels and compaction requirements and that pipes or box culverts are not damaged and comply with the requirements of clause num. b pipe culverts rebate and socket ends of pipe sections shall be placed facing upstream and be fully entered .
the lower portion of the pipe shall be in contact with the bedding for the full length of each section .
the compacted bedding shall be shaped to accommodate the joint collar and ensure that the pipe is supported along its full length .
where applicable the top of the pipe as marked shall be within five degrees of the vertical axis of the culvert .
corrugated metal culverts shall be assembled and laid as specified in clause num .
the spacing for multiple row culverts shall be as shown in table num .
table num pipe type corrugated metal corrugated metal pipe arch other nominal diameter d or width mm less than num over num less than num over num less than num num to num over num clear space between rows dnum num m dnum num m num m dnum num m c box culverts consecutive sections of box culverts shall be firmly butted together .
the top sections shall be matched to the bottom sections and shall not be lapped over adjoining bottom sections .
the contact areas between the top and bottom sections shall be mortared .
multirow box culverts shall be laid with the sections in each row in contact with the sections in the adjacent rows .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num d cutting of culverts where it is necessary to cut any culvert section to length or to create a penetration cutting shall be done by machine to achieve a clean vertical face and any exposed reinforcement shall be coated with an approved epoxy treatment to prevent corrosion .
num jointing all interlocking flush joint reinforced concrete pipes shall be mortar jointed or wrapped with a num mm wide external joint rubber band .
external rubber bands shall be manufactured from natural rubber and have a minimum tensile strength of num mpa and a minimum elongation of num at break as determined in accordance with as num method num .
rubber band thickness shall not be less than num mm .
in the case of internally jointed pipes num mm diameter and larger the mortar shall be struck off flush with the bore of the pipe .
rubber ring joint pipes shall be jointed with rubber rings .
rubber rings shall be kept undisturbed clean and free from dirt and other foreign materials and shall be stored undercover if pipes are not to be installed immediately .
rubber ring joints shall be assembled and prepared in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
where rubber rings are disturbed they shall be cleaned and reassembled prior to refitting .
num placement of filling a unless the culvert is installed through an existing paved area selected and ordinary backfill shall be placed as follows under around and above the culvert after the sections are bedded and compacted as specified in clause num. i culvert under area to be paved where the trench has been excavated from design subgrade level or above the trench shall be backfilled to design subgrade level with selected backfill material and above that level with appropriate pavement material .
where the trench is excavated from below design subgrade level the trench shall be filled with selected backfill material .
ii culvert under area not to be paved the trench shall be backfilled with selected backfill material to a level num m above the top of the culvert and with ordinary backfill material above that level .
b where nontrench conditions are permitted the following shall apply selected backfill material shall be placed for the full width of the previously placed bedding material to a height of num m above the top of the culvert or to subgrade level whichever is the lower .
to provide support for the selected backfill material ordinary backfill material shall be placed simultaneously with the selected backfill material to a distance two culvert diameters clear of the culvert .
during filling the maximum difference between filling placed on opposite sides of the culvert shall not exceed the lesser of onequarter the height of the culvert or num m. filling shall not be placed within num m of an exposed culvert end where a further section is to be placed .
c backfilling with cement stabilised sand where approved by the superintendent culverts in trenches may be backfilled to half the pipe diameter or box culvert height with num cement stabilised sand with a water content sufficient to ensure penetration beneath the pipe or box culvert invert without leaving free surface water .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction and moisture content bedding and backfill materials shall be placed and compacted in layers not exceeding num mm loose thickness .
bedding and backfill shall be assessed for compaction and or moisture in lots .
the number of tests per lot shall be three .
a lot shall consist of one layer of bedding or backfill for a culvert length between adjacent pits or endwalls .
notwithstanding the provisions of section num a minimum of num of all lots for each culvert shall be tested .
the calculation of density and moisture ratios shall be based on standard compactive effort .
where the nominal size of bedding or backfill material after compaction is greater than num mm the moisture ratio shall be determined on material that passes the num mm sieve .
a bedding bedding shall be compacted to refusal using hand held mechanical equipment .
bedding material which has a swell equal to or greater than num shall be maintained at a mean moisture ratio of num between the completion of rolling and the placement of the overlying layer .
b backfill i material of nominal size num mm or less after compaction backfill material which will have a nominal size after compaction of num mm or less shall be compacted to a mean value of density ratio of not less than num .
backfill material which has a swell equal to or greater than num shall be maintained at a mean moisture ratio of num between the completion of rolling and the placement of the overlying layer .
ii material of nominal size greater than num mm after compaction backfill material which will have a nominal size after compaction greater than num mm shall be compacted using a grading mixing watering and rolling procedure .
backfill material which has a swell equal to or greater than num shall be maintained at a mean moisture ratio of num between the completion of rolling and the placement of the overlying layer .
num assembly of corrugated metal culverts all corrugated metal culvert sections supplied by the contractor shall be assembled in accordance with the manufacturers assembly instructions .
where culvert sections are supplied free to the contractor the following will be provided manufacturers assembly drawings schedule of parts supplied general assembly instructions department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num installation of culverts through existing paved areas the trench of culverts through existing paved areas shall be backfilled to the existing subgrade level with selected backfill material and the pavement restored using materials as shown below pavement layer material type thickness mm num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
num removal of existing culverts a general where specified the contractor shall remove culverts from existing paved areas .
except where the pavement under which the culvert passes is to be abandoned the trench shall be kept to the minimum width to allow removal of the culvert or laying a replacement .
b treatment of residual excavation where a culvert has been removed and the excavation is not to be backfilled the excavation shall be neatly trimmed to slopes not steeper than num in num and the ends of the trench shaped to facilitate the smooth flow of water .
where the trench is to be backfilled this shall be done in accordance with the provisions of clause num and the final surface shall be shaped to conform with the adjoining profile .
c pavement restoration pavement restoration shall be carried out using materials as shown below pavement layer material type thickness mm num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num inlet and outlet structures inlet and outlet structures shall be constructed in accordance with the drawings and specification .
concrete used for the construction of inlet and outlet structures shall comply with the requirements of section num .
footings shall extend to the depths shown on the drawings or as necessary to achieve a satisfactory foundation .
if backfilling to the specified level is required selected backfill material shall be used .
when the proposed foundation is unsatisfactory due to neglect or the use of inappropriate methods no payment will be made for the work and materials necessary to provide a satisfactory foundation at the specified level .
num marker posts strikethrough if not required at all locations specified the contractor shall supply and erect guide posts at the edges of the formations on the side of the culvert nearer approaching traffic .
num exit and entry channels channels shall be excavated to facilitate the flow of water .
they shall be of regular shape and sufficient area to take the flow of water without any low spots that might retain water .
any low areas shall be filled with suitable excavated material and firmly compacted .
num flushing of culverts all culverts shall be flushed clean from end to end on completion and maintained in proper working order .
num minimum testing requirements the contractor shall test the bedding and backfill material at a frequency as shown in table num to ensure that all materials comply with the specified requirements .
table num test minimum frequency of testing grading one per num tonnes or part thereof plasticity index one per num tonnes or part thereof num inspection of drainage lines beneath pavements hp unless approved otherwise by the superintendent all drainage lines constructed beneath pavements shall be inspected after completion of earthworks to subgrade level and prior to construction of pavement layers by an independent testing organisation using closed circuit television cctv .
reporting of the cctv inspections shall be in accordance with wsa num conduit inspection reporting code of australia published by water services association of australia .
the report shall be provided to the superintendent with a copy of the cctv record and a summary of the location of any defects detected by the survey .
any sections of damaged pipe shall be removed and replaced prior to construction of the pavement layers and a further cctv survey shall be undertaken to verify correction of the defects .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num repairs to damaged pipes and box culverts a steel reinforced concrete pipes any steel reinforced concrete pipes that have cracks wider than num mm or are damaged prior to laying and backfilling shall be rejected .
where inspections after backfilling identify any of the following defects they shall be notified as a nonconformance cracks wider than num mm spalling of concrete exposed reinforcement joints that are not fully engaged .
any pipes with defects greater than the following limits shall be removed and replaced longitudinal cracks greater than num mm circumferential cracks around the full circumference with width greater than num mm or with lateral displacement of the cracked sections exceeding num mm circumferential cracks around part of the circumference with width greater than num mm penetrations with area greater than num mmnum pipe joints that are separated .
the superintendent may agree to accept pipes with defects as noted above subject to demonstration that repairs will ensure that pipes will operate effectively for their design life .
consideration will only be given to products and procedures with proven performance and to the following types of treatments hot sprayed epoxy coatings for cracks not wider than num mm with no lateral displacement fibre glass reinforced epoxy sleeving for cracks not wider than num mm with lateral displacements up to num mm spalled concrete exposed steel reinforcement and penetrations shall be treated as patch repairs and repaired with polymer modified cementitious repair materials in accordance with the requirements of section num .
the contractor shall submit details of proposed rectification treatments including manufacturers product specifications and warranties the area and thickness of repair treatment detailed repair procedures and inspection and test plans .
hp no repairs shall be undertaken without the superintendents approval of the repair materials and procedures .
all repairs shall be inspected using cctv to verify compliance with the repair specifications .
b fibrereinforced concrete frc rigid pipes any frc rigid pipes that have cracks wider than num mm or are damaged prior to laying and backfilling shall be rejected .
where inspections after backfilling identify any of the following defects they shall be notified as a nonconformance cracks wider than num mm any other type of defect joints that are not fully engaged .
frc rigid pipes subject to such nonconformance shall be removed and replaced unless the superintendent approves repairs to be undertaken in accordance with the frc pipes manufacturers repair procedures and materials .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c other types of pipes other types of pipes which exhibit defects or are otherwise damaged prior to laying and backfilling shall be rejected .
where inspections after backfilling identify any defects such pipes shall be removed and replaced unless the superintendent approves repairs to be undertaken in accordance with the manufacturers repair procedures and materials .
d box culverts box culverts which do not comply with the requirements of clause num prior to laying and backfilling shall be rejected and removed from the site .
where inspections after backfilling identify defects which do not comply with the requirements of clause num such culverts shall be removed and replaced unless the superintendent approves repairs to be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of section num and section num for crack repairs and section num for conventional patch repairs .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num subsurface drainage this section crossreferences sections num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the requirements for the supply and installation of subsurface drainage pipes geocomposite drains and filter materials as shown on the drawings .
num definitions pervious pipe system a pervious pipe system comprises drainage pipes which permit the entry of water from surrounding material and convey it to a discharge point .
such pipes may be perforated slotted or porous pipes or impervious pipes laid with open joints .
subsurface drain a subsurface drain is a pervious pipe system laid in a trench and surrounded by granular filter material or sleeved with a geotextile .
geocomposite drain a geocomposite drain comprises a highly permeable core material wrapped in a geotextile .
the core shall be noncrushable and flexible and shall completely support the geotextile fabric .
the geotextile shall have the filtration and separation properties to perform the functions of a single or second stage filter .
single stage filter single stage filter is granular filter material placed in contact with the trench sides and surrounding the pervious pipe system .
first stage filter first stage filter is granular filter material or geotextile placed in contact with the trench sides and surrounding a second stage filter .
second stage filter second stage filter is granular filter material or geotextile placed in contact with the pervious pipe system and surrounded by a first stage filter .
num conformity with drawings subsurface drains whether pipe or geocomposite systems shall be constructed true to lines depths or levels as shown on the drawings .
the invert of the subsurface drainage pipe or the geocomposite drain shall be not more than num mm from the specified level and not more than num mm from the specified line .
changes of grade shall not be abrupt or occur at a rate exceeding num mm in any num m length or lead to ponding of water within the drainage pipe .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num drainage pipes and geocomposite drains subsurface drainage pipes and geocomposite drains shall be supplied by the contractor .
subsurface drainage pipes and geocomposite drains are grouped into three categories as follows category num perforated plastics class num precast concrete class num category num perforated plastics class num category num geocomposite drains .
pipes supplied shall be of the category and diameter shown on the drawings or specified in clause num and shall comply with the requirements of the appropriate australian standard in accordance with section num or as follows perforated plastics as num except for perforation dimensions precast concrete section num .
category num pipes may be substituted for category num .
geotextiles used for the outer covering of the geocomposite drain shall comply with the requirements of clause num and section num .
perforated plastic pipes and geocomposite drains supplied in coils shall be free from any permanent curved set when uncoiled .
plastic pipes and geocomposite drains shall be stored away from sunlight and shall not be exposed unnecessarily to sunlight during delivery storage and placement .
num granular filter materials a general granular filter material shall consist of hard durable and clean sand gravel or crushed rock free from clay balls and organic matter and shall have a ph value greater than num and less than num .
the portion of granular filter material passing a num mm as sieve shall have a sand equivalent value not less than num .
the grading of granular filter material shall comply with the requirements of table num relevant to the granular filter type specified in clause num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num grading requirements for granular filter material sieve size as mm limits of grading passing by mass single and first stage filters second stage filters anum anum anum anum anum anum bnum bnum bnum bnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num b source rock source rock for crushed rock components of granular filter material shall comply with the requirements of section num source rock for the production of crushed rock and aggregates .
c crushed rock components the percentage by mass of unsound and marginal rock in that fraction of an aggregate retained on a num mm as sieve shall not exceed the values specified in table num .
table num marginal and unsound rock total of marginal and unsound rock by mass max unsound rock by mass max num num d no fines concrete no fines concrete shall consist of bnum filter as defined in table num and mixed with num by mass of cement and num by mass of water in a mixing plant .
num geotextile filters a geotextile filter shall consist of a fabric manufactured from synthetic fibres of a longchain polymer such as polypropylene polyethylene polyester or similar material and shall be stabilised against deterioration due to ultraviolet light .
after forming the geotextile shall be processed so that the fibres retain their relative positions with respect to each other .
the geotextile shall be free from defects or flaws which significantly affect its physical andor filtering properties .
a geotextile filter may be nonwoven or knitted fabric and shall comply with the requirements of table num relevant to the geotextile filter type specified in clause num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num continuous knit seamless sleeve geotextile filter may be used as a second stage filter .
table num requirements for geotextile filter geotextile filter type minimum robustness g num eos num microns minimum num elongation num .
first stage filter num moderately robust num num num num .
second stage filter nonwoven num num num num num num .
second stage filter knitted seamless sleeve na num num num num g geotextile strength rating num eos equivalent opening size using as num determination of pore size distribution dry sieving method .
num elongation at break as determined by as num determination of tensile properties wide strip method .
geotextiles shall be stored away from sunlight and shall not be exposed unnecessarily to sunlight during delivery and placement .
num drainage system at structures where a geotextile drainage system is used at structures the system shall consist of geocomposite drains placed vertically over the full height of the backfilling at the intervals as shown on the drawings .
where a geocomposite drainage material is made up of a permeable drainage layer with one or both faces bonded to a geotextile filter fabric such a system shall be placed over the full height of fill which is in contact with the structure .
the geotextile filter used in such drains shall be a nonwoven product conforming to the requirements of clause num .
the geocomposite drainage layer shall have the following minimum hydraulic properties under unit hydraulic gradient a permeability perpendicular to the geocomposite under num kpa normal pressure num cmsec b transmissivity in the plane of the geocomposite normal pressure transmissivity num kpa num x num mnumsec num kpa num x num mnumsec num kpa num x num mnumsec num kpa num x num mnumsec geocomposite drains shall be connected to a collector pipe with an outlet to a fitting immediately adjacent to the structure or as shown on the drawings .
the collector pipe shall be fitted with a flushout riser connected to an inspection opening in the verge adjacent to the structure or as shown on the drawings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num preformed pvc fittings shall be used for all connections between the geocomposite drains and the collector pipe and all connections shall be sealed and protected to prevent displacement during backfilling .
num excavation where a geotextile is to be used as a first stage filter in contact with a trench wall the trench wall shall be excavated to allow the geotextile to be in close contact with the wall when the granular filter material is placed against the geotextile .
the bottom of the trench shall be compacted and shall be not more than num mm below the specified level of the invert of the pipe .
there shall be no departures from the grade of the base of the trench that would allow ponding of water .
excess trench excavation shall be made good by filling back to grade with compacted material of permeability similar to that of the surrounding material and any loose material shall be removed .
hp the base of the trench shall be inspected to verify compliance with the requirements in this clause prior to placing bedding in completed excavations .
the superintendent shall be notified at least num hours prior to the inspection .
num installation a depth subsurface drainage pipes or geocomposite drains shall be laid to the depths or levels shown on the drawings .
the top of any subsurface drainage pipe shall be at least num mm below subgrade .
b grade the grade of pipes or geocomposite drains shall be not flatter than num in num. c bedding for drainage pipe system a bedding of granular filter material of thickness between num mm and num mm shall be placed across the bottom of the trench .
the bedding shall be tamped and screeded or graded to level .
bedding is not required for geocomposite drains .
d placing of pipes pipes shall be placed centrally in the trench on the prepared bedding and held firmly in place .
slotted pipes shall be laid with the openings in the lower half of the pipe .
e placing of geocomposite drains geocomposite drains shall be placed such that the drain stands vertical held firmly in place and is centrally located within the trench .
f jointing preformed pipe joints and fittings may be used .
splice joints in geocomposite drains and pipes shall be made either with preformed geocomposite drain joints or fittings or by butting together the sections of drain to be joined and wrapping the joint area with geotextile .
joints made by butting and wrapping with geotextile shall be secured to prevent separation during installation .
the minimum width of geotextile used for wrapping shall be num mm .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num lap joints in geotextile used as first stage filters shall consist of an overlap of not less than num mm longitudinally and num mm transversely .
lap joints in geotextile used as second stage filters shall consist of an overlap of not less than num mm .
g placing granular filter material filter material shall be placed moist and compacted with minimal disturbance to pipes or geocomposite drains geotextiles and trench walls .
the loose thickness of layers shall not exceed num mm .
no fines concrete shall be placed and compacted within num hour of mixing .
hp the method of compaction shall be in accordance with the contractors procedures and reviewed by the superintendent .
h flushing a flushing test shall be carried out on each subsurface drainage line after completion of subsurface drains flushers and outlets and after completion of all adjacent kerb and channel barriers and road furniture .
the test shall be witnessed by a representative nominated by the superintendent .
each drain shall be flushed with sufficient water to remove material that has entered the pipes during construction and to ensure that the drainage line is free from obstruction .
the contractor shall maintain a record of flushing tests for every subsurface drainage line including the date and time of notification to the superintendent the date and time of flushing and witnesses to the flushing num access points and inspection openings subsurface drainage pipes andor geocomposite drains shall have access points at the beginning and end of the drainage run and shall have inspection openings at intervals of between num and num metres along the drainage run .
where stormwater drainage pits are used as access points the invert at the beginning of each drainage run shall be located above the top of the pit outlet and the invert at the end of each drainage run when not shown on the drawings shall be located not less than num mm above the invert of the pit outlet .
flushout risers for drainage pipes shall have the same diameter as the pipe .
flushout risers for geocomposite drains shall consist of a preformed riser fitting or a pipe of diameter not less than num mm .
flushout risers shall have surface fittings as shown on the drawings .
the outlet point at the end of each drainage run shall be located at a drainage pit culvert endwall or outlet in a fill batter or drain .
inspection openings as shown on the drawings shall consist of pits having a diameter not less than num mm .
pits shall be fitted with concrete or cast iron frame covers as shown on the drawings .
num marker posts at all fill batter and drain outlets supply and erect marker posts as shown on the drawings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num schedule of details drainage run nominal depth of trench mm pipe filter type geocomposite drain cate gory dia meter mm perfor ation size mm single or first stage second stage eos of geo textile microns gran ular geo textile gran ular geo textile type width mm granular backfill continuous knit seamless sleeve geotextile filter .
num minimum testing requirements the contractor shall test the granular filter material at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that all materials supplied under the contract complies with the specified requirements but which is not less than that shown in table num .
table num minimum frequency of testing test minimum frequency of testing grading on each production day one per num tonnes or part thereof unsound rock content on each production day one per num tonnes or part thereof sand equivalent one each production month ph one each production month department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num general concrete paving this section crossreferences sections num num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for the supply of materials and construction of portland cementbased and geopolymer binderbased concrete paving for edgings footpaths other surfacing and shared use paths together with the necessary excavation and backfilling .
in the context of general concrete paving portland cement concrete and geopolymer binder concrete are equivalent products .
concrete for edgings footpaths and other surfacings shall be normal class to as num as specified or equivalent geopolymer concrete as defined in this section .
concrete for shared use paths shall be concrete grade vrnum in accordance with section num or equivalent geopolymer concrete .
requirements for structural concrete for bridgeworks and other major concrete components and structures are specified in section num .
num standards australian standards are referenced in an abbreviated form e.g .
as num. a australian standards as num methods of testing concrete method num determination of properties related to the consistency of concreteslump test as num specification and supply of concrete as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout part num admixtures for concrete as num concrete kerbs and channels gutters manually or machine placed as num supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement part num fly ash as num supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement part num slag ground granulated iron blast furnace as num supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement part num amorphous silica as num formwork for concrete as num liquid membraneforming curing compounds for concrete as num general purpose and blended cements asnzs num steel reinforcing materials asnzs num hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles b other standards and referenced specifications astm cnum standard specification for fiberreinforced concrete astm cnum standard test method for flexural performance of fiberreinforced concrete using beam with thirdpoint loading astm cnum standard test method for obtaining average residualstrength of fiber reinforced concrete astm dnum standard test methods for density and specific gravity relative density of plastics by displacement astm dnum standard test method for tensile properties of single textile fibers department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num details the relevant references to these documents .
num definitions for the purpose of this section the following definitions apply alkaline component combinations of alkali and alkali earth containing salts minerals and glasses .
cement material complying with the requirements of as num .
cementitious material portland cement or a mixture of portland cement with one or more of fly ash ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbf slag or amorphous silica complying with the requirements of as num as num and as num respectively .
edgings kerbs channels mowing and other edge strips including those behind kerbs and channels .
geopolymer binder binder containing greater than num fly ash ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbf slag or amorphous silica complying with the requirements of as num as num and as num respectively metakaolin and up to num alkaline components .
geopolymer concrete concrete which comprises geopolymer binder aggregates water and admixtures .
local streets collector roads and all other local roads and streets .
macro synthetic fibres fibres used to provide the concrete with significant postcracking capacity and which subject to satisfactory test results provide the same performance as steel reinforcement in ground supported concrete paving and shared use paths .
micro synthetic fibres fibres that create a support network within the concrete which increases its tensile strain capacity for control of plastic shrinkage cracking but do not offer concrete postcracking bearing capacity .
portland cement general purpose portland cement type gp complying with the requirements of as num .
shared use path path which is designated for shared use by pedestrians cyclists and maintenance vehicles .
steel fibres straight or deformed pieces of colddrawn steel wire straight or deformed cut sheet fibres melt extracted fibres shaved cold drawn wire fibres and fibres milled from steel blocks which are suitable for homogeneous mixing into concrete or mortar to improve prescribed properties .
surfacings traffic islands median slabs grass mowing strips bicycle paths footpaths vehicle and pram crossings and other similar slabs or pathways on prepared bedding .
traffic routes all state roads .
num kerb and channel and other edgings kerb and channel and other edgings shall comply with the requirements of as num .
num supply of premixed concrete a portland cementbased concrete portland cementbased concrete shall be either nnum nnum or nnum standard strength grade as specified for concrete paving complying with the requirements of as num or concrete grade vrnum for shared use paths .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b kerb and channel concrete used in kerb extrusion machines will not be subject to compressive strength requirements but shall have a minimum cementitious material content in the finished concrete as follows traffic routes a minimum of or equivalent to num kg of cementitious material or geopolymer binder per cubic metre of concrete local streets a minimum of or equivalent to num kg of cementitious material or geopolymer binder per cubic metre of concrete .
where kerb and channel is placed and compacted with internal vibration between previously placed formwork concrete shall be traffic routes nnum portland cementbased concrete or num mpa geopolymer concrete standard strength grade and local streets nnum portland cementbased concrete or num mpa geopolymer concrete standard strength grade as specified .
c geopolymer concrete i general geopolymer concrete for concrete paving shall be manufactured to comply with the minimum num day compressive strength requirements for each strength grade ranging from num mpa to num mpa or for shared use paths geopolymer concrete equivalent to concrete grade vrnum .
the mix design for each geopolymer concrete strength grade shall have a unique identification number .
geopolymer concrete shall not be mixed when the air temperature is lower than numc or greater than numc .
water may be added to the freshly mixed geopolymer concrete prior to commencement of discharge subject to the manufacturers approval and provided a means of accurately measuring the volume of water is available .
no water shall be added after commencement of discharge of geopolymer concrete unless expressly approved by the manufacturer .
geopolymer concrete which has begun to stiffen shall not be used in the works .
prior to the discharge of geopolymer concrete at the site the mixer or agitator shall be operated at mixing speed for not less than three minutes until the geopolymer concrete achieves the required uniformity .
ii water the quality of water used in the manufacture of geopolymer concrete shall comply with the requirements of clause num except that no recycled water shall be allowed .
iii moisture content of aggregates the determination of moisture content of the fine and coarse aggregates shall comply with the requirements of clause numd .
iv addition of water at the slump stand addition of water to the mixed batch of concrete at the slump stand shall comply with the requirements of clause numh .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num v delivery docket all information recorded on the delivery docket shall comply with the requirements of clause nume .
vi period for completion of discharge the period for completion of discharge shall comply with the requirements of clause numf except that this time may be extended beyond num minutes provided the geopolymer concrete complies with the specified requirements .
vii water left in the mixer or agitator water left in the mixer or agitator from the previous load shall comply with the requirements of clause numg .
viii calibration of weighing and metering equipment all batch plant weighing and water metering equipment shall comply with the requirements of clause numi .
ix manufacturer competency manufacturers andor licensed technology providers utilised in the supply of geopolymer concrete shall have a minimum of three years continuous experience in commercial supply and a demonstrated competency in the technology of the geopolymer concrete to be applied .
documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate supply experience and competency of manufacturers in the geopolymer concrete technology .
num aggregates concrete aggregates shall comply with the requirements as set out in section num .
num chemical admixtures chemical admixtures shall comply with the requirements of as num .
they shall be used in accordance with the requirements of clause num of as num and the manufacturers recommended method of use .
air entraining admixtures shall not be used unless approved by the superintendent .
chemical admixtures containing calcium chloride calcium formate or triethanolamine shall not be used .
chemical admixture dispensers shall be subject to regular maintenance and calibrated in accordance with the requirements of as num except that in the case of geopolymer concrete production they shall be calibrated as specified in section num .
num placing compacting and finishing concrete concrete shall be transported handled and placed to prevent segregation loss or leakage of materials .
fresh concrete shall not be placed against concrete which has taken its initial set except at properly formed construction joints .
concrete shall be thoroughly compacted by means of continuous tamping and internal vibration and shall be worked around any embedments and into corners of formwork or excavations to produce a dense concrete free from voids honeycombing segregation or surface defects .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num unformed surfaces shall be hand tamped to ensure a smooth surface with a uniform colour and appearance and screeded to achieve the specified level dimensions falls and tolerances .
geopolymer concrete shall be placed and finished in accordance with this clause and the geopolymer manufacturers placement guidelines .
any concrete repairs shall be carried out using a method and materials accepted by the superintendent .
num ambient weather for concreting operations concreting operations shall comply with the requirements of clauses numa numb numc and numd for limits restrictions and treatments to be applied for concreting in hot cold and wet weather except that curing shall be in accordance with clause num .
num curing of concrete a general the curing of exposed concrete surfaces shall commence immediately after finishing operations are progressively completed and shall continue uninterrupted for a period of not less than num days after placing the concrete with the exception of concrete edgings which shall be cured for a period of not less than three days after placing the concrete .
concrete shall be cured either by water curing wet hessian polyethylene sheeting which is adequately sealed curing compound or a combination of these .
freshly finished exposed concrete surfaces shall be effectively protected from rain or damage from other sources until hard set has occurred .
curing compounds shall comply with as num .
the curing compound shall be applied in two coats using a fine spray at the rate stated on the certificate of compliance .
the curing membrane shall be maintained intact for not less than the specified period of curing .
any damage to the curing membrane during the period of curing shall be repaired immediately at the original rate of application .
at the end of the curing period concrete paving and shared use paths shall provide a dense hard wearing surface .
b curing of geopolymer concrete geopolymer concrete shall be cured in accordance with the requirements of clause numa including the specified minimum curing periods and as follows i the curing methods acceptable for curing of geopolymer concrete are num covering with polyethylene sheet num maintaining the formwork in place in accordance with the requirements of clauses nume and clause numf respectively num covering with wet hessian blankets .
hessian or burlap mats shall consist of at least two layers of hessian having a combined weight of at least num kgmnum dry and shall have a width after shrinkage of at least num mm greater than necessary to cover the entire width and vertical faces of concrete paving and shared use paths .
the hessian blankets or mats shall be new or have only been used for curing concrete shall be free from tears and shall be soaked in water for at least one hour prior to concrete placement proceeding .
ii further to the requirements of this clause curing of geopolymer concrete shall also be carried out in conjunction with the procedures as stated in the manufacturers placement guidelines .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num conformance testing for concrete strength and consistency the minimum compressive strength requirements for each strength grade shall be as shown in table num .
table num portland cement concrete strength grade geopolymer binder concrete strength grade minimum compressive strength at num days mpa nnum num num nnum num num nnum num num vrnum num num sampling and testing of the strength of concrete shall be carried out in accordance with clause num of as num .
the frequency of sampling and testing shall provide at least one sample at the point of discharge to be tested of each num mnum or part thereof of each strength grade placed on any one day .
where less than num m is provided for any one day then one sample shall be tested of each strength grade .
the consistency of the concrete shall be determined by a slump test of each concrete strength sample in accordance with as num and clause num of as num .
the concrete represented by the samples shall be deemed to comply with the nominated concrete slump if the measured slump is within the limits given in table num of clause num of as num .
sampling and testing for concrete used in shared use paths shall be in accordance with section num .
compressive strength testing and slump testing shall not be required for concrete used in extruded kerbs and channels and other edgings .
num formwork the materials design construction and stripping of formwork shall comply with the relevant requirements of as num .
joints in formwork shall be constructed such that loss of mortar is prevented .
prior to placing concrete in an earth excavation formwork shall be erected so that fresh concrete is not placed directly against the sides of the excavation .
formwork shall not be stripped until the minimum times specified in as num table num have elapsed from the time of completion of the placing of concrete .
the minimum time shall also not be less than a num days for vertical formwork on external surfaces and b num day for vertical forms on permanently hidden surfaces .
num steel reinforcement steel reinforcement shall comply with the relevant requirements of asnzs num .
galvanising where specified shall be in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the minimum cover of any steel reinforcement to the nearest concrete surface shall be num mm unless shown on the drawings .
reinforcement shall be supported using either concrete or plastic chairs .
wire chairs with or without plastic tips bricks or pieces of timber or coarse aggregate shall not be used to support steel reinforcement .
num fibre reinforced concrete a general concrete paving and shared use paths may be constructed with fibre reinforced concrete in lieu of steel reinforcement provided the fibre reinforced concrete provides equivalent performance to steel reinforced concrete in accordance with this section .
b macro synthetic fibres where it is proposed to replace up to slnum steel mesh with synthetic fibres such fibres shall be in the form of fine macro synthetic high performance fibres produced from virgin polypropylene or copolymer .
macro synthetic fibres shall be collated or supplied in water soluble pucks and supplied in fully biodegradable bags to ensure that fibres are uniformly distributed .
micro synthetic fibres shall not be used alone to replace steel reinforcement or to achieve long term crack control .
where required micro synthetic fibres shall only be used for control of plastic shrinkage cracking impact and abrasion resistance and explosive spalling resistance of concrete .
where specifically designed into concrete paving and shared use paths micro synthetic fibres shall only be used in conjunction with macro synthetic fibres or steel fibres or with steel reinforcement .
c steel fibres where specified the type and quantity of steel fibres used shall as a minimum provide equivalent performance to concrete paving and shared use paths constructed with steel reinforcement .
the use of steel fibres in concrete paving and shared use paths shall be such that the steel fibres are not exposed at the surface to eliminate any potential injury to users .
d performance requirements fibres shall comply with the requirements of astm cnum and shall be supported with documentary evidence confirming their long term resistance to deterioration when in contact with the moisture and alkalis present in cementitious paste or the substances present in chemical admixtures and shall have nil absorption .
a current certificate of compliance shall be provided to the superintendent .
fibres shall be tested to the requirements of astm cnum flexural toughness and astm cnum average residual strength of fibre reinforced concrete .
fibres shall be added to the concrete in such a manner to ensure that they are uniformly distributed balling does not occur and the concrete mix remains workable and cohesive without any segregation .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num i macro synthetic fibres the macro synthetic fibre shall be capable of absorbing maximum energy without breakage and shall be designed to retain its cross sectional shape and avoid brittle failure .
num properties of macro synthetic fibre the macro synthetic fibres shall possess the following properties tensile strength astm dnum num mpa modulus of elasticity astm dnum num gpa specific gravity fibre density astm dnum num gcm fibres shall be at least num mm or at least twice the length of the aggregate that will be used in the concrete mix i.e .
num mm aggregate requires minimum num mm fibre .
where specifically designed and tested macro synthetic and micro synthetic fibres may be used in combination to address both early age and long term crack control provided the minimum performance requirements of this clause are satisfied .
num properties of macro synthetic fibre reinforced concrete macro synthetic fibre reinforced concrete shall possess the following properties average residual strength astm cnum num mpa flexural toughness astm cnum num mpa renum flexural toughness factor astm cnum num note renum of flexural strength at num mm deflection of standard beam test .
macro synthetic fibres shall have supporting evidence in the form of satisfactory test results by an accredited and independent testing facility stating that the fibres at the dosage rate specified by the manufacturer provide the same performance as the steel reinforcement being replaced .
where macro synthetic fibres are proposed to replace slnum steel mesh they shall be added into the concrete mix at the minimum dosage rate of num kg per cubic metre in fully degradable and disintegrating bags .
where macro synthetic fibres are proposed to replace up to slnum steel mesh they shall be added into the concrete mix at the minimum dosage rate of num kg per cubic metre .
ii steel fibres steel fibre reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of astm anum for type i cold drawn wire or type ii cut sheet .
all fibres shall be deformed and have a minimum tensile strength of num mpa and an aspect ratio between num and num. e fibre content determination of fibre content shall be based on a sample of a known volume not less than num litres at the minimum sampling frequency as stated in clause num .
the sample volume shall be determined to the nearest num litres .
the fibre content shall be separated from the concrete for example by sieving andor washing and then dried .
where synthetic fibres are used the samples may be soaked with alcohol stirred until the fibres float to the surface and the fibres recovered .
the dried fibre content shall be weighed to the nearest num gram .
the actual fibre content shall then be calculated and reported to the nearest num kg per cubic metre .
the worksheet andor report for determination of fibre content shall be submitted to the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num tolerances on line level and shape all surfaces shall be finished in conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and cross sections shown on the drawings or as specified within the following limits a concrete paving including footpaths edgings other surfacings and shared use paths shall be shaped to match existing fixtures e.g .
pit covers edgings and vehicle crossings within num mm .
b the departure of the finished work from line or level shall not exceed num mm at any point and the rate of change of deviation from line or level shall not exceed num mm in num m. except on curves or in shaped areas the deviation of the finished work from a num m straightedge shall not exceed num mm at any point .
c section dimensions shall not differ from those shown on the drawings by more than num mm except that overall width shall not exceed the specified width by more than num mm and on dimensions less than num mm the tolerance shall be num mm .
d where median surfacings are to be constructed between edge sections of the same level paving shall be crowned to produce a crossfall between num and num towards the edges .
e kerb and channel shall be constructed to the level of the adjoining pavement with a tolerance of num to num mm .
except on curves or in shaped areas the deviation of the finished work from a num m straightedge shall not exceed num mm at any point .
num thickness and steel mesh requirements the following thickness and steel mesh requirements shall apply a concrete paving including footpaths edgings and other surfacings shall be num mm thick and when steel reinforcement is specified they shall be reinforced with slnum steel mesh .
b shared use paths shall be num mm thick and when steel reinforcement is specified they shall be reinforced with slnum steel mesh .
c median surfacings within num m of the edges of medians and bays of footpath adjacent to intersecting kerb and channel shall be num mm thick and reinforced with slnum steel mesh .
d private entrance vehicle crossings shall be num mm thick and when steel reinforcement is specified they shall be reinforced with slnum steel mesh .
e commercial vehicle crossings shall be num mm thick and when steel reinforcement is specified they shall be reinforced with slnum steel mesh .
num setting out the contractor shall set out the work in accordance with the drawings and as specified .
hp the superintendent will review and confirm the set out .
the work shall be constructed in accordance with the confirmed set out to the line and level and crosssectional profiles as shown on the drawings .
num provision for drainage during construction before obstructing any waterway channel or culvert the contractor shall make appropriate provision for its temporary diversion and obtain prior written approval from the relevant waterway authority .
the contractor shall make provision for the safe discharge of drainage and stormwater at all times during construction .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num household drainage connections existing household drains which are not connected to underground stormwater drains shall be altered as necessary and connected through the kerbing to drain into the channel .
provision shall be made for connection of future household drains as specified or shown on the drawings .
num excavation the contractor shall carry out any necessary excavations and disposal of excavated material .
the contractor shall box out to a sufficient depth to allow for the required compacted thickness of bedding material under the full width of concrete paving .
where it is necessary to excavate existing pavement the excavation shall not extend more than num mm from the edge of the adjacent face .
existing asphalt or bituminous surfacing shall be saw cut for a sufficient depth to produce a neat vertical face .
num bedding preparation all bedding material used for cast in place concrete paving works shall be compacted size num mm class num or class num crushed rock or class num or class num crushed concrete manufactured and supplied in accordance with sections num or num respectively .
bedding material for shared use paths shall be compacted size num mm class num crushed rock or class num crushed concrete in accordance with section num or num respectively and section num. a edgings where edgings are constructed over pavement layers bedding shall be provided between the pavement layer and the underside of the edging or the edging thickened to match the pavement layer .
where edgings are not constructed over pavement layers bedding shall be not less than num mm compacted thickness .
b shared use paths bedding shall be not less than num mm thick compacted in accordance with section num. c footpaths and other surfacings bedding shall be not less than num mm compacted thickness .
bedding shall be trimmed to the appropriate levels moistened as necessary and firmly compacted .
for footpaths other surfacings and shared use paths the foundation shall be true to grade and cross section as shown on the drawings by filling and excavating as necessary .
all soft wet or unstable material shall be removed to a depth of not less than num mm below the design level of the underside of bedding and filled with bedding material moistened and compacted to form a stable foundation .
immediately before concrete is placed the bedding shall be moist but shall have no free water on the surface .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num provision for permanent signs sign post sockets shall be supplied and placed by the contractor to provide for erection of permanent signs in the areas to be paved .
sockets shall be placed at the locations shown on the drawings .
socket depths dimensions and installation requirements shall be in accordance with section numd .
any concrete which falls into the sleeve shall be removed .
num machine extrusion where an extrusion or slipform machine is used the datum for grade and alignment of the section to be extruded shall be established by the contractor .
concrete shall be fed to the machine at a uniform rate .
the machine shall be operated to produce a satisfactorily compacted dense mass of concrete free of any faulty or honeycombed patches .
surfaces shall be substantially free from surface pitting larger than num mm diameter .
where work using fixed forms is combined with extruded work and similar concrete mixes are used for both the concrete in the fixed form sections shall be compacted with internal vibration to produce a satisfactory compacted mass of concrete .
num profile transitions and matching existing sections where it is necessary to join to an existing section of profile different from that being constructed the change of profile shall be made at a constant rate between num and num mm per metre .
transitions between different profiles shall be made in accordance with the drawings .
matching of new to existing concrete paving shall be such that it appears identical to the existing section .
when replacing damaged sections of concrete paving or shared use paths the damaged section shall be removed completely to the nearest construction joint and replaced with identical material to the existing .
num surface finish exposed surfaces shall be treated as follows a edgings all edgings shall be rendered and have a steel trowel finish .
rendering shall be applied within num minutes of placing or extruding concrete .
the mortar used shall consist of two parts of fine aggregate one part of cement and sufficient water to produce a mix of suitable consistency .
the thickness of rendering shall not exceed num mm .
exposed surfaces shall be given a steel trowel finish .
b footpaths other surfacings and shared use paths fresh concrete shall be compacted with internal vibration and worked until all the coarse aggregate is below the surface and the mortar comes to the top .
it shall then be struck off and finished to grade and cross section with a wooden float to produce a lightly textured non skid surface .
all outside edges of slabs and all joints shall be finished with a suitable edging tool .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num after finishing all work shall present a consistently neat appearance of uniform colour .
all edges shall be sharp and clean and bullnoses shall be regular and of uniform radius .
all discoloured concrete shall be cleaned or replaced by the contractor .
permanently hidden concrete surfaces of concrete paving including footpaths edgings other concrete surfacing and shared use paths shall have a class num surface finish in accordance with as num .
all other concrete elements constructed with reference to section num shall have a class num surface finish for external surfaces and a class num surface finish for permanently hidden surfaces in accordance with as num .
num joints transverse joints shall be constructed at right angles to the back of edgings and the edge of footpaths and shared use paths .
joints in footpaths and shared use paths shall be opposite to joints in adjacent edgings .
a edgings i transverse joints transverse joints shall be constructed at regular intervals not exceeding num m. for extruded edgings this shall be done by a method which does not damage or distort the adjacent surfaces .
for edging constructed using fixed forms templates shall be removed as soon as practicable after finishing the work .
the guillotine for extruded work or template for fixed work shall cut between num and num of the area of the section .
in both cases the resultant slot in the edging shall be tooled to a depth of num mm to produce a neat groove not less than num mm wide on the exposed surfaces following which a vertical cut shall be made through the base of the groove to a depth not less than num mm from the surface .
ii expansion joints expansion joints shall be placed at junctions with bridges and shall be num mm wide and filled with cork or bituminous impregnated particle board strip extending for the full width and full depth of the edging .
the filler shall be placed in position before concrete is placed and shall be held firmly in position during the placing of the concrete .
b footpaths other surfacings and shared use paths i expansion joints expansion joints shall be placed at intervals not exceeding num m on either side of vehicle crossings at junctions with existing footpaths and shared use paths at junctions with bridges and around all abutting structures such as pits utility services power poles kerbs and other such features .
the expansion joint shall be num mm wide and filled with cork or bituminous impregnated particle board strip extending for the full width and full depth of the paving .
the filler shall be placed in position before concrete is placed and shall be held firmly in position during the placing of the concrete .
where required dowelled expansion joints shall be installed in accordance with the details and locations as shown on the drawings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num ii control joints control joints at least num of the paving thickness deep and num mm wide shall be formed with a cutting tool at num m intervals along the full width of footpaths other surfacings and shared use paths within four hours of placing the concrete where the air temperature measured at the time of placement is between numc and numc and within num hours of placing the concrete where the air temperature measured at the time of placement is less than numc .
c between concrete paving and shared use path except on narrow medians less than num m wide surfaced full width bonding between the concrete paving or shared use path and the edging shall be prevented by painting the back of the edging with bitumen or by using a strip of bituminous felt material between the edging and the concrete paving or shared use path .
num protection of concrete all concrete shall be protected from damage from early loading by pedestrians animals vehicles and from rain or any other cause .
the contractor shall ensure that no vehicles are permitted to cross over private entrance or commercial vehicle crossings a minimum of four days after completion of casting of the concrete .
vehicles equal to or less than num tonnes in weight may be permitted to cross after num days vehicles greater than num tonnes may be permitted to cross after num days .
num marking of conduit positions the positions of any existing conduits passing under edgings shall be marked by a chase in the edging immediately above the conduit together with a suitable identification mark .
num backfilling and pavement restoration as soon as the concrete has cured sufficiently and not earlier than num days after placing topsoil material free from perishable matter and lumps shall be placed and firmly compacted in layers not exceeding num mm in thickness and to a width not less than num mm behind the edging to the top of the edging .
where edging has been constructed alongside an existing pavement part of which has been excavated to permit the construction of the edging the excavated space shall be backfilled to the surface level of the existing pavement .
size num or size num asphalt shall be used for this work and firmly compacted in layers not exceeding num mm in thickness .
num cracking of concrete the concrete shall have no surface cracks at any stage after construction of width greater than num mm .
where such cracks exist they shall be identified as a nonconformance .
cracked sections of concrete shall be either removed and replaced or repaired in accordance with section num repair of concrete cracks as directed by the superintendent .
for damaged kerb and channel and edgings a length of at least num m shall be removed and the replacement section shall be a constructed on compacted bedding b dowelled into the adjoining sections with num mm diameter hot dip galvanised dowels embedded at least num mm each side of the joint and c shaped and finished with curved trowels to match the profile and surface finish of adjoining sections .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num precast concrete kerb this section crossreferences section num .
if section num is relevant it should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the requirements for the supply and placing of precast concrete kerb as shown on the drawings or at locations as specified .
num supply of kerbs strikethrough a or b below a all kerbs required under this contract will be supplied free of cost to the contractor on site or at another agreed location in lengths of num m. all sections shall be carefully inspected at the time of delivery by the contractors representative and any damaged sections clearly marked in the presence of the superintendent .
the contractor shall notify the superintendent at least two weeks in advance of the date on which kerb sections are required .
b all kerbs required under this contract shall be supplied by the contractor and shall conform with the profiles shown on the drawings .
unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings concrete shall be nnum standard strength grade complying with the requirements of as num specification and supply of concrete .
aggregates for the concrete mix shall comply with the requirements as set out in table num of section num .
the construction of the items covered by this section shall comply with the relevant requirements of as num concrete structures and as specified herein .
kerbs shall be cast in lengths of num m and in order to ensure that all sections butt together neatly holes for placing dowels or interlocking joints shall be provided in each section .
any section damaged during handling storing and transporting shall not be used .
the surface of all sections shall be consistently smooth and of uniform colour .
num placing of precast kerbs a preparation of base the foundation shall be excavated or filled to levels num mm below the levels fixed for the base of the kerb .
all soft wet or unstable material shall be removed to a further depth of num mm and the resulting space filled with earth sand or gravel of a quality that when moistened and compacted will form a stable foundation .
bedding material consisting of sand gravel or crushed rock shall then be placed and fully compacted to the specified level .
b placing the kerb shall be set so that the top conforms with the line and grade specified within a tolerance of num mm .
all sections shall be firmly butted together .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num placing of precast spiked kerbs where precast kerbs are to be pinned to existing pavements they shall be placed true to line with adjoining sections firmly butted together .
where necessary the sections shall be bedded on num to num cement mortar in order to maintain an even grade along the top of the kerb .
the kerb sections shall be held in position by num mm diameter steel spikes num mm long driven into the pavement so that the tops are at least num mm below the tops of the kerbs .
the holes in the tops of the kerbs shall then be filled level with the top with num to num cement mortar .
num backfilling where specified filling shall be placed and thoroughly compacted behind and up to the level of the top of the kerb .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num drainage pits this section crossreferences sections num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section specifies the requirements for the supply of materials and construction of drainage pits including the associated excavation backfilling culvert connections and supply and fitting of covers and associated components .
the supply of concrete and construction of items covered by this section shall comply with the requirements of section num .
num standards standards are referenced in an abbreviated form e.g .
asnzs num. a australian standards asnzs num structural steel hot rolled bars and sections asnzs num steel reinforcing materials asnzs num hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles as num bridge design set b other standards and referenced specifications astm cnum standard specification for fiberreinforced concrete astm cnum standard test method for flexural performance of fiberreinforced concrete using beam with thirdpoint loading astm cnum standard test method for obtaining average residualstrength of fiber reinforced concrete astm dnum standard test methods for density and specific gravity relative density of plastics by displacement astm dnum standard test method for tensile properties of single textile fibers astm anum standard specification for steel fibres for fibrereinforced concrete section num details the relevant references to these documents .
num definitions drainage pit a reinforced concrete chamber constructed or installed below ground which is designed to receive water from the surface and from connected upstream underground stormwater drains and facilitate its discharge into a connected downstream stormwater drain .
fibre reinforced concrete frc a concrete mixture containing uniformly dispersed and randomly oriented fibres .
prototype testing load testing of the first type of units from a specific design and production .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num materials a concrete i conventional portland cementbased concrete all concrete shall be manufactured to the concrete mix design registered by state growth and comply with the requirements of section num .
concrete grades shall comply with table num table num minimum concrete grade used for vrnum drainage pits reinforced with steel reinforcement vrnum precast drainage pits using fibre reinforcement ii geopolymer concrete geopolymer binderbased concrete as defined in section num may be used for the construction of drainage pits provided the supply of geopolymer concrete and construction comply with the requirements of section num and satisfy the concrete grade requirements of table num. b registration of concrete mix designs concrete mix designs shall be registered in accordance with the requirements of section num and reregistered on an annual basis unless mix components change prior to the expiry of registration .
c covers grates lids and lintels covers grates lids and lintels shall be as shown on the drawings .
d step irons step irons shall be manufactured from steel to asnzs num grade num or asnzs num grade nnum and after fabrication shall be prepared pretreated and hot dip galvanized in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num with a minimum average coating thickness equivalent to num gmnum or manufactured from num mm steel bar covered with polypropylene plastic to a design and sample approved by the superintendent .
e reinforcement all steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of section num. f fibres when relevant to the registered concrete mix fibres shall comply with the requirements of astm cnum and shall be supported with documentary evidence confirming their long term resistance to deterioration when in contact with the moisture and alkalis present in cementitious paste or the substances present in chemical admixtures .
fibres shall be tested to the requirements of astm cnum flexural toughness and astm cnum average residual strength of fibre reinforced concrete to ensure compliance of the fibre reinforced concrete with the requirements of as num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num fibres shall be added to the concrete in such a manner to ensure that they are uniformly distributed balling does not occur and the concrete mix remains workable and cohesive without any segregation .
i synthetic fibres synthetic fibres shall be in the form of fine micro and macro virgin copolymer or polypropylene consisting of twisted bundle nonfibrillated monofilament and fibrillated network fibre .
the synthetic fibre shall be capable of absorbing maximum energy without breakage and shall be designed to retain its cross sectional shape and avoid brittle failure .
num properties of synthetic fibre the synthetic fibres shall possess the following properties tensile strength astm dnum num mpa modulus of elasticity astm dnum num gpa specific gravity fibre density astm dnum num gcm aspect ratio length divided by the equivalent diameter of the fibre between num and num num properties of synthetic fibre reinforced concrete synthetic fibre reinforced concrete shall possess the following properties average residual strength astm cnum num mpa flexural toughness astm cnum num mpa renumflexural toughness factor astm cnum num note renum of flexural strength at num mm deflection of standard beam test .
ii steel fibres steel fibres shall comply with the requirements of astm anum for type i cold drawn wire or type ii cut sheet .
all fibres shall be deformed and have a minimum tensile strength of num mpa and an aspect ratio between num and num .
num excavation a general excavation shall be to the depth indicated on the drawings or as necessary to secure a satisfactory foundation .
backfill material conforming to the requirements of section num shall be supplied placed and compacted in accordance with clause num. b precast pits for precast pits the excavation shall provide a clearance from all external faces of the pit to each face of the excavation of not less than num mm .
bedding conforming to the requirements of section num shall be supplied placed and compacted to a thickness not less than num mm on a clay foundation or num mm on a rock foundation .
num cast in place pits cast in place pits shall be constructed at the locations and to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
cast in place pits shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num precast steel reinforced concrete drainage pits precast steel reinforced concrete drainage pits shall be manufactured supplied and installed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
where precast steel reinforced concrete drainage pits do not conform to the drawings the contractor shall submit to the superintendent detailed drawings and design computations carried out by a prequalified consultant and proof engineered by a proof engineer who is prequalified in accordance with the vicroads scheme for prequalification or approved by the superintendent .
num precast fibre reinforced concrete drainage pits a general precast fibre reinforced concrete frc drainage pits shall be manufactured supplied and installed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
precast frc drainage pits shall be subject to the following conditions i the design of frc drainage pits shall comply with the requirements of as num and the following additional loading requirements num the combined factored lateral pressure from axle loadings at any point at the ultimate limit state shall be not less than num kpa num adequate drainage to be provided to pit walls to avoid hydrostatic pressure num vertical load num kn applied anywhere on the pit num equivalent minimum reinforcement area to be num mmnumm .
the design shall as a minimum provide equivalent performance to drainage pits constructed with steel reinforcement .
ii the design of the frc drainage pits shall be supported by detailed drawings and design computations carried out by a prequalified consultant and proof engineered by a proof engineer who is prequalified in accordance with the vicroads scheme for pre qualification .
iii frc drainage pits shall not be located under roads .
iv concrete used for the construction of frc drainage pits shall comply with the requirements of clause num and section num. b prototype testing a sample of two prototype frc drainage pits shall be load tested in accordance with the requirements of as num to demonstrate that frc drainage pits manufactured under the same conditions and to the same design satisfy the requirements of this section .
where a new design or a significant departure from a proven design is proposed prototype testing appropriate to the design or design change shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements of this section .
a significant change to an existing design shall be a change in the concrete mix design decrease in the quantity of reinforcing fibre change in the agreed brand type and source of reinforcing fibre or decrease in the design wall thickness .
c fibres fibres used in the manufacture of precast frc drainage pits shall comply with the requirements of clause numf .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num additional requirements for precast concrete drainage pits a general precast pits shall be installed at the locations and to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
b provision for stormwater drainage connections provision shall be made for the connection of all stormwater drainage culverts and subsurface drains as shown on the drawings .
holes for subsurface drains shall be num mm diameter .
weepholes of num mm diameter shall be provided in all precast pits and shall be placed between the midpoint and top of the stormwater drain in those walls which have openings for drains .
c segments if a precast pit is cast in segments each section of the pit shall be rebated to ensure correct alignment and to prevent horizontal movement .
a minimum rebate of num mm shall be used .
d completion on site where precast pits are to be completed on site the provision of cut outs and protruding reinforcement shall be as specified or in accordance with the drawings .
num stormwater drainage connections all stormwater drainage connections to pits shall be neatly made and where necessary the ends of all drains shall be trimmed off and finished with cementitious mortar as stated in clause num .
openings into drainage pit walls to facilitate stormwater drainage connections shall be neatly saw cut to the required size .
weepholes or holes installed on site shall be cut .
breaking out of holes is not permitted .
pits shall be replaced if circumferential or longitudinal cracking occurs as a result of installing holes or if the hole exceeds the pipe diameter by more than num mm .
reinforcement exposed by the cutting of holes shall be coated with an approved epoxy treatment to prevent corrosion prior to rendering around the pipes .
num step irons pits greater than num m deep shall be fitted with step irons as shown on the drawings .
steps shall be located so that they do not obstruct openings and that water does not discharge onto them .
steps shall be set into a wall which has no openings or beside an opening or across a corner of the pit .
step irons shall be installed horizontal vertically in line and shall project uniformly from drainage pit walls .
where drainage pits are extended in height from the lowest pit step irons shall be located such that an equidistant spacing between step irons is still maintained .
step irons of an approved proprietary type shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num where step irons are cast in place they shall be epoxy mortared into drilled holes using an epoxy material and method approved by the superintendent .
the joints between the step irons and the shafts shall be completely filled and neatly pointed so that the step irons are held rigid and the joints are watertight .
num shaping of floor pit floors shall be smoothly shaped from the inlets to the outlet for a height of onethird of the diameter of the outlet pipe with cementitious mortar to provide a profile that will ensure smooth flow conditions between inlet and outlet pipes and prevent any snagging of debris .
the cementitious mortar shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
num surface finish the method of construction and the materials used in the concrete and formwork shall remain consistent and shall comply with the requirements of this specification for surface finish .
surfaces shall be finished uniform in appearance with a class num surface finish in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num jointing the ends of components shall be free of any foreign matter at the time of jointing and shall be arranged to give best fit .
the joints between various components such as drainage pits access chambers and pipes shall be made watertight using a cementitious mortar in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
the joint areas shall be thoroughly cleaned and wetted just prior to filling .
the cementitious mortar shall be used within its allowable application time and shall not be retempered .
the joints shall be finished to provide smooth surfaces uniform with the inner surfaces of pits and access chambers .
mortared joints and recesses shall be cured for a period of not less than num hours .
backfilling operations against end structures shall not be carried out during the curing period .
num concrete repairs the method of repair of minor surface imperfections including porous spots shallow honeycombing rough areas and blow holes not conforming to the class of surface finish as specified in clause num and the method of cementitious patch repair of other concrete defects shall be in accordance with section num .
epoxy materials shall not be used for the patch repair of concrete .
the exposed surface of the repaired area shall be similar in texture and colour to the surrounding concrete .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num fitting of covers frames for pit covers shall be cast into the top of the pit or bedded on fresh mortar num mm thick consisting of two parts of sand one part of cement and sufficient water to produce a mix of suitable consistency .
the level at every point of the perimeter shall be within num mm of the design level for that point and the line of the cover shall be within num mm of the design kerb line .
num backfilling around pits backfilling around pits shall be placed in layers not exceeding num mm loose thickness and compacted to refusal using hand held mechanical equipment .
num tolerances the tolerances listed in clause num are the allowable deviations of the finished product from the dimensions shown on the drawings .
these tolerances will be a basis for acceptance of the work .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num installation or replacement of utility infrastructure within road reserves this section crossreferences section num .
if section num is relevant it should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers requirements for the installation or replacement of utility infrastructure e.g .
conduits pipes service pits poles aerial servicescables within the state road network reserves as shown on the drawings or as specified .
num legislative framework all road crossings by any cable or water supply pipeline less than nummm nominal diameter shall be installed in a conduit .
drainage culverts shall not be used to accommodate a service crossing .
for minimum surround clearances between the service and conduits refer to table num .
table num surround clearances pipe and cable diameter surround clearance inside conduit nummm nummm nummm nummm for water supply pipelines pipes shall be of the material and classes shown on the drawings or in the project specification .
fittings for pipework shall be rated to the class of pipe specified .
conduits shall be upvc pipe of at least class num with a minimum diameter of num mm or a reinforced concrete pipe class num with a nominal diameter of num mm .
num positioning depth and height clearance all utility infrastructure within road reserves shall be clear of road carriageways and parallel or at right angles to the centreline of road carriageways unless otherwise agreed with the superintendent .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings or specified utility infrastructure and associated conduits installed under road carriageways for all state roads shall be at depths to provide the following cover over the top of the infrastructure including conduit a num mm minimum cover to the finished road surface level and b num mm minimum cover to the invert level of road carriageway open drains .
num boring under carriageways unless otherwise specified or approved by the superintendent all utility infrastructure including conduits under road carriageways shall be installed by boring .
detailed proposals for boring under carriageways or alternative underground methods proposed by the contractor shall be submitted to the superintendent for review two weeks prior to the programmed commencement of work .
unless otherwise specified boring by water jetting will not be permitted .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num unless otherwise specified the annulus between the bore and the pipe or carrierconduit shall be filled by pressure grouting .
num excavation where the open trench method of crossing under a carriageway pavement is accepted the line of the trench shall be straight at right angles to the carriageway and form the shortest link between terminals wherever practical .
the width of trench shall be not greater than that necessary to carry out the work .
the edges of all trenches located within a road pavement shall be sawcut .
any infrastructure located within the road reserve that is disturbed as a result of the work shall be reported immediately to the superintendent and shall be reinstated promptly in consultation with the relevant infrastructure manager .
num materials unless otherwise specified materials used for bedding and backfilling shall be uniform in composition and free from perishable matter and shall comply with the requirements specified in table num .
table num material properties material sieve size as mm plasticity index percentage passing by mass num num num num num min max bedding num num num num selected backfill num num num num common backfill num num pavement material shall be as specified in clause num and shall comply with the requirements of the specified sections as applicable .
num bedding where specified in clause num that bedding is required bedding shall be placed below around and above the pipe or carrierconduit for the full width of the trench .
not less than num mm compacted depth of bedding shall be placed below and not less than num mm compacted depth of bedding shall be placed above the pipe or carrierconduit .
bedding shall be placed in layers not exceeding num mm loose thickness and shall be compacted as specified .
num backfilling unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings selected and common backfill shall be placed and compacted as follows under around and above the conduit after the sections are bedded a conduits under area to be paved including shoulders and verges where the trench has been excavated from the nominated or designed subgrade level or above the trench shall be backfilled up to the nominated or designed subgrade level with selected backfill material placed and compacted in layers not exceeding num mm loose thickness and above that level with common backfill material .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num page num of num where the trench is excavated from below the nominated or design subgrade level the trench shall be filled with selected backfill material placed and compacted in layers not exceeding num mm loose thickness .
b conduits under area not to be paved the opening shall be backfilled with common backfill placed and compacted as specified in layers not exceeding num mm loose thickness .
c conduits through existing paved areas including shoulders and verges unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings the opening shall be backfilled to the existing subgrade level with selected backfill material placed and compacted in layers not exceeding num mm loose thickness and the pavement material placed and compacted in layers not exceeding num mm loose thickness using materials in accordance with clause num b .
num compaction standards a bedding and backfill except pavement unless otherwise specified bedding and backfill shall have during compaction a uniform moisture content within the range num to num of the optimum moisture content as determined in the standard compactive effort .
for backfill of nominal size greater than num mm the fraction of material passing the num mm sieve shall have during compaction a uniform moisture content within the range num to num of the optimum moisture content as determined for that fraction in the standard compactive effort .
bedding and backfill shall be compacted to refusal using hand held mechanical equipment .
backfilling beneath areas to be paved shall be assessed for compaction in lots as defined in section num .
the number of tests per lot shall be three .
backfill the whole of which passes the num mm as sieve shall be compacted to a mean value of density ratio of not less than num .
the calculation of density ratio shall be based on standard compactive effort .
a lot shall consist of a single layer of work .
a minimum of num of all lots constructed shall be tested .
detailed proposals for the compaction of backfill materials of nominal size greater than num mm shall be submitted to the superintendent for review before commencing work .
b pavement unless otherwise specified pavement material shall have during compaction a uniform moisture content within the range num to num of the optimum moisture content as determined in the modified compactive effort .
pavement material shall be assessed for compaction in lots as defined in section num .
the number of tests per lot shall be three .
all pavement layers shall be compacted to a mean value of density ratio not less than the percentage specified in clause numb .
the calculation of density ratio shall be based on modified compactive effort .
all pavement layers shall be tested .
num cleaning of site surplus excavated material shall be removed from the road reserve .
areas affected by the work shall be restored to a condition similar to that which existed prior to the commencement of the work .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num page num of num num maintenance of pavement the reinstated surface shall be maintained in a trafficable condition after the completion of backfilling .
additional pavement material shall be placed in the trench and compacted as specified where in paved areas settlement or loss of material from the surface exceeds num mm measured from a straight edge laid across the top of the trench .
num schedule of details a bedding clause num strikethrough required or not requiredrequired not required b pavement material clause num pavement layer material type thickness mm density ratio modified num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num fencing this section crossreferences section num .
if section num is relevant it should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for the supply and quality of materials preparation of the site removal of existing fencing supply and installation of all fencing materials including gates and connections to existing fencing at the locations shown on the drawings or described in this specification .
the contractor shall conduct its operations in such a manner as to prevent the escape or improper movement of livestock .
existing fencing shall not be removed until the new fencing has been erected and is stockproof .
existing fencing which has been damaged by the contractor and which is required to remain in place shall be repaired or replaced to the satisfaction of the superintendent at the contractors expense .
num australian standards as num steel tubes and tubulars for ordinary service asnzs num iso metric hexagon commercial bolts and screws asnzs num iso metric hexagon nuts including thin nuts slotted nuts and castle nuts as num hotdip galvanized coatings on threaded fasteners as num flat metal washers for general engineering purposes metric series asnzs num cup head bolts with iso metric coarse pitch threads as num timber preservative treated sawn and round as num galvanized railless chainwire security fences and gates as num timber hardwood visually graded for structural purposes as num steel nails metric series as num coated steel wire fencing products for terrestrial aquatic and general use as num timber softwood visually graded for structural purposes as num concrete structures as num paints for steel structures organic zincrich primer as num zinc and zincaluminiumalloy coatings on steel wire as num hot dipped galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles num materials unless specified otherwise all fencing materials and products shall be supplied by the contractor and shall be of the dimensions manufacture quality and structural grade in accordance with the requirements of this specification and drawings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num a untreated timber posts and stays untreated timber posts and stays shall be hardwood timber in accordance with as num and shall be cut from sound timber stripped of all bark and backed off with ends sawn square and dried to equilibrium moisture content .
posts and stays shall be straight and of dimensions not less than shown on the detailed drawings .
b treated timber posts and stays treated timber posts and stays shall be hardwood timber in accordance with as num or pine in accordance with as num and be of sound timber treated to comply with the requirements of as num for hazard level num protection .
treated timber posts and stays shall be of round or sawn rectangular shape and be free of any defect making them unsuitable for the purpose intended .
round posts and stays shall be peeled to remove all bark except that strips of inner bark may remain if not over num mm wide or over num mm long .
all knots shall be trimmed flush with the sides spurs and splinters removed and ends cut square .
the slope of grain in sawn rectangular posts for the full length shall not exceed num in num and knots shall be sound tight well spaced and shall not exceed num mm in size in any face .
treated timber posts and stays shall be straight and of dimensions not less than shown on the detailed drawings .
posts to be driven shall be square ended or shall be blunt pointed prior to treatment to a bevel angle not exceeding num degrees .
c tubular steel posts rails and stays tubular steel posts rails and stays shall be from medium grade steel tube in accordance with as num and hot dipped galvanized in accordance with asnzs num free from distortion and with the galvanizing intact .
posts shall be properly adapted before galvanizing to provide means for attaching the fencing to the posts in a manner that will not damage the posts or fencing material and shall be fitted with watertight galvanized steel tops .
the galvanized coating shall also remain intact and protected from damage at pipe connections .
any damage to the galvanized coating of tubular steel posts rails and stays and other galvanized products specified in this section shall be repaired using an organic zincrich primer complying with as num. d steel posts other than tubular steel posts nontubular steel posts shall be of star or other specified cross section and shall be black varnished or hotdip galvanized in accordance with asnzs num and drilled to suit the spacings of the wires and the lengths shown on the drawings .
e reinforced precast concrete posts precast concrete posts shall be steel reinforced and designed in accordance with as num .
unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings concrete shall be nnum standard strength grade placed compacted and cured in accordance with the requirements of section num .
steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of as num. f droppers timber droppers shall be sawn hardwood timber in accordance with as num or pine in accordance with as num and free from cross grain and large knots and of the length shown on the drawings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num bored hardwood droppers shall be of num mm x num mm nominal size timber .
treated hardwood droppers to as num attached without boring shall be not less than num mm x num mm section .
pine droppers shall be num mm x num mm minimum size timber and be pressure treated with preservative to as num .
metal droppers shall be hot dipped galvanized in accordance with asnzs num and to the lengths shown on the drawings .
g wire all wire products including tie wire shall comply with the requirements of as num galvanized in accordance with as num and be of the gauge and type specified on the drawings .
fabricated wire fencing shall be standard proprietary manufactured item .
the width mesh and gauge shall be as specified or as shown on the drawings .
h gates gates shall be standard proprietary manufactured items with galvanized tubular steel frame in accordance with as num of the type and dimensions specified or shown on the drawings .
hinges catches and other fittings for gates shall be standard proprietary manufactured items fabricated from grade num structural steel and hotdipped galvanized in accordance with the requirements of as num. i miscellaneous materials all ferrous bolts nuts and washers shall be standard proprietary manufactured items complying with the requirements of asnzs num asnzs num asnzs num and as num .
bolts nuts and washers shall be hotdipped galvanized in accordance with the requirements of as num .
ties staples and other minor fittings for fences shall be galvanized standard proprietary manufactured items .
all brackets for steel posts and treated timber posts shall be standard proprietary manufactured items fabricated from grade num structural steel and hotdipped galvanized in accordance with the requirements of as num .
all concrete specified or shown on the drawings shall be strength grade nnum complying with the requirements of section num .
steel nails shall be manufactured in accordance with as num and shall be hotdipped galvanized to num gm coating mass in accordance with as num. j electrical insulation materials all fittings shall be standard proprietary manufactured items of the type and dimensions specified or shown on the drawings .
k certificate of compliance the contractor shall submit for review by the superintendent not less than num days prior to the proposed use of fencing materials gates and connections to existing fencing a signed certificate including relevant test reports demonstrating the compliance of the materials and components required for the construction of each type of fencing gates and connections to existing fencing comply with the requirements of this specification .
the certificate of compliance shall identify the item and record the product certification inspection or test records that verify conformance .
all certification inspection and test records shall be available for review upon request by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num construction fences shall be constructed true to the lines pegged on the ground .
all logs stumps saplings and undergrowth within num m of the fence line and all trees which will interfere with the proper construction of the fence shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor .
any high points which interfere with the placing of wire or wire netting shall be cut down to provide the clearance shown on the detailed drawings and any low spots shall be filled with surplus earth from holes and trimmings .
fences shall be constructed in accordance with the drawings .
all posts shall be set in line so that the tops line up uniformly without sudden dips or irregularities .
unless otherwise specified surplus earth from holes and trimming shall be spread within the road reserve and the area shall be left clean and tidy on completion of the work .
straining of wires shall be done using an approved friction type wire strainer which incorporates a nonscarring wire grip and a tensioning gauge with calibrating springs for measurement of the tension as shown on the drawings or to the manufacturers recommended maximum tensions .
the contractor shall take all precautions necessary to avoid kinking and overstraining of the wire during handling and installation .
a post and wire fences timber and concrete posts shall be set in dug or drilled holes except that posts of treated round timber may be driven provided the method of driving does not damage the post .
posts shall be set solidly and any space left around the posts shall be backfilled and the backfilling compacted .
posts to be driven shall be driven small end down .
other posts shall be placed butt end down .
steel posts shall be set by driving using a method that does not damage the posts or their galvanizing .
at all grade changes where posts are liable to be lifted by strained wires posts shall be at least num m long set at least num mm into the ground and tied down .
tie down posts comprising num mm galvanized star steel posts shall be driven into the ground at an angle of num degrees and the bottom four wires preferably adjacent to a post or dropper shall be tied to it by galvanized tie wire at least num mm diameter .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings all other posts shall be set at least num mm into the ground .
strainer assemblies shall be provided at all ends angles abrupt changes of grade and intersections of cross fences as shown on the drawings .
intermediate strainer assemblies shall be provided on straights at intervals not exceeding num m and spaced to the best advantage in the circumstances .
strainer assemblies at ends and gates shall be single strainer except where provision of double strainer assemblies is specified .
intermediate strainer assemblies shall be single strainer assemblies with both diagonals braced .
corner posts shall be braced in two directions and gate posts shall be braced in one direction .
plain wires shall be reeved through holes drilled in the posts except that where treated round posts are used wires may be attached with staples after straining .
the length of staples shall be num mm for pine posts and num mm for hardwood posts .
barbed wire shall be secured with galvanized tie wire of not less than num mm diameter passed through holes bored in the posts and twisted to the barbed wire on each side of the post or shall be stapled to treated posts with staples .
top and bottom wires shall be firmly attached to droppers by preformed ties or twisted galvanized tie wire of not less than num mm diameter .
intermediate wires shall be similarly attached or shall be threaded through holes bored in the droppers .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b wire netting fences posts and wire shall be erected as for post and wire fences .
the netting shall be tightened between posts and shall be fastened to timber posts and droppers with num mm staples at num mm intervals and to steel posts and droppers with proprietary galvanized clips or num mm galvanized tie wire at num mm intervals .
the netting shall also be fastened to each wire with num mm diameter galvanized tie wire or proprietary galvanized clips at intervals not exceeding num m. c wire mesh fences posts and wire shall be erected as for post and wire fences .
wire mesh shall be attached to posts and droppers by stapling or tying the top and bottom line wires and at least every alternate intermediate wire to each post after straining .
d chain wire fences posts shall be set in concrete footings of the dimensions shown on the drawings with the top of the concrete crowned to shed water .
end corner and gate posts shall be braced as shown on the drawings .
line posts shall be braced as shown on the drawings at not more than num m intervals .
chain wire shall comply with the requirements of as num .
chain wire shall be tightened and securely fastened to posts and line wires on the side as shown on the drawings .
fastening to end corner and gate posts shall be by lacing through each outer mesh with num mm diameter galvanized tie wire .
chain wire shall be fastened to line posts and line wires with num mm diameter galvanized tie wire or clips .
the fastenings shall be spaced at not more than num mm intervals on line posts and at not more than num mm intervals on line wires .
e steel post and welded mesh fences posts shall be set in concrete footings of the dimensions shown in the drawings with the top of the concrete crowned to shed water .
welded mesh panels shall be attached to posts with standard proprietary manufactured galvanized fittings .
f paling and timber post sound attenuation fences posts shall be set in concrete and the fence shall be constructed to the dimensions and locations as shown on the drawings .
palings shall be straight and clean and free from splits and major defects .
palings shall be fixed to each rail as shown on the drawings .
g electrical insulation of fences where specified insulation panels and fittings shall be incorporated in fences in close proximity to overhead power transmission lines in accordance with the drawings .
num gates the contractor shall install gates of the type size and location as specified or shown on the drawings .
gate posts shall be of the dimensions shown on the drawings and be firmly set into the ground to the depth specified or as shown on the drawings .
each post shall be fitted with a strut as shown on the drawings .
tubular metal posts shall be set in concrete as detailed .
at gateways in wire netting fences a timber sill shall be set tightly between the posts and flush with the ground .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num all gates shall be hung with galvanized hinges securely attached to the gate posts and be able to swing freely .
each gate shall be fitted with a galvanized catch for holding them securely closed of a type to suit the gate and adjoining fence .
for wire netting fences gates shall be finished so as to be rabbitproof when closed .
num junctions with existing fences new fences shall be connected to existing cross fences and existing fences which continue the line of the new fences .
posts with braces for every direction of strain shall be placed at the junction with existing fences .
the wire in existing fences shall be strained and securely fastened to the junction posts .
num removal of existing fences where specified or shown on the drawings existing fences including all wires mesh posts rails strainers netting and concrete footings shall be removed and reerected to the pattern existing prior to removal .
fences no longer required shall be removed .
all materials comprising the removed fences shall become the property of the contractor and shall be removed from the site .
all footing post and strainer holes shall be backfilled and compacted in layers of a maximum depth of num mm with surplus earth or topsoil to the relative compaction of the surrounding ground material .
num construction tolerances unless stated otherwise tolerances for the construction of fencing shall be as follows a the vertical tolerance on the height of fencing shall be num mm from the design line b the longitudinal line tolerance for fencing shall be num mm in plan view and c the tolerance on the verticality of fencing shall be num in num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num steel beam guard fence this section crossreferences sections num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements of steel beam guard fence including proprietary guard fence systems and guard fence terminals for strikethrough inapplicable options below supply only installation only supply and installation .
num referenced documents the following documents are referred to in this section reference title as num methods of testing concrete determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete slump test as num iso metric hexagon bolts and screws as num iso metric hexagon nuts as num hotdip galvanized coatings on threaded fasteners asnzs num tolerances for flatrolled steel products as num specification and supply of concrete as num metallic materials tensile testing at ambient temperature asnzs num welding of steel structures asnzs num hotrolled steel flat products as num metal finishing as num timber structure timber properties asnzs num retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes retroreflective devices nonpavement application as num steel wire ropes product specification as num formwork for concrete part num documentation and surface finish asnzs num paints for steel structures part num organic zincrich primer as num liquid membraneforming curing compounds for concrete asnzs num road safety barrier systems as num steel structures asnzs num hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles supplement to agrd part num section vnum provision of concrete paving adjacent to traffic barriers vicroads traffic engineering manual volume num guide posts and delineators rdn num accepted safety barrier products vicroads guidelines standard drawings for roadworks section num details the references to these documents .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num other documents manufacturers recommendations and any applicable vicroads requirements for each proprietary end treatment .
num definitions the following definitions below will apply to this section .
manufacturers recommendations the specification installation manual and drawings for a specific proprietary safety barrier device prepared by or for the manufacturer detailing the components the device and the methods andor procedures for installation .
nested wbeams two or more steel wbeams erected together one inside the other to increase stiffness .
nested wbeams share bolts .
definition of terms the meaning of terms and definitions in this section shall be as defined in asnzs num .
snugtight is the tightness attained by at least two impacts of an impact wrench or by the full effort of a person using a standard podger spanner in accordance with as num .
num guard fence components a identification mark on any steel wbeams posts at both ends and all plastic components of proprietary end treatments unobtrusively and permanently in text not more than num mm high the following information i name of the manufacturer ii batch number or date of manufacture iii strength grade and base metal thickness of the steel wbeams .
b material test certificates the properties of all steel for the works shall be evidenced by test certificates .
hp the contractor shall submit to the superintendent all test certificates related to the supply of steel for the works at least num days prior to commencement of installation .
all tests shall be carried out in accordance with the appropriate australian standard by officers experienced in the test methods described in the contract in a laboratory accredited by the national association of testing authorities nata for those test methods .
all tests shall be endorsed in accordance with the nata registration for that laboratory .
for steel sourced outside of australia all tests shall be carried out in a laboratory accredited by and with endorsement of the relevant national accreditation authority which has mutual recognition arrangements with nata .
where the certification of the steel is incomplete the contractor shall arrange for the adequate testing to be carried out by a nata accredited laboratory to demonstrate compliance of the material at the rate of one test per num lineal metres of material .
for galvanised steel components the contractor shall include a manufacturers certificate of compliance certifying that the zinc coating mass is in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num or for components of proprietary end treatments the manufacturers recommendations and any specified requirements .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c metal components metal components supplied by the contractor shall be new and conform to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
i wbeams the wbeams shall be manufactured from steel which meets the requirements of asnzs num grade hanum .
the mechanical properties of the base metal shall conform to the following requirements when tested in accordance with as num minimum yield strength num mpa minimum tensile strength num mpa minimum elongation in num mm num the base metal shall comply with the following tolerances when measured in accordance with the methods of asnzs num base metal thickness num mm num mm num mm mill tolerance on strip width num mm num mm mill camber tolerance on num mm length num mm maximum ii steel posts and blocks steel posts and blocks shall be manufactured from steel which meets the requirements of asnzs num grade hanum .
the base material thickness shall be num mm num mm .
iii terminal sections terminal sections and stiffener plates shall be manufactured from steel which meets the requirements of asnzs num grade hanum .
d protective treatment unless stated otherwise in the manufacturers recommendations the surfaces of all ferrous metal components including posts blocks beam elements anchor plates connectors and end treatment pieces must after fabrication be treated in accordance with the requirements of as num parts num and num and finished by hotdipped galvanising in accordance with asnzs num .
all galvanised coatings shall be smooth adherent and free from stains gross surface imperfections markings brand names andor inclusions .
appearance is of prime importance and colour shall be uniform .
hotdipped galvanised coating on bolts nuts and washers shall comply with as num .
where the galvanising on guard rail or associated fittings has been damaged the coating shall be repaired by regalvanising or by painting with a minimum of two coats of a zincrich inorganic paint in accordance with asnzs num and one coat of aluminium paint .
where curved wbeam of less than num m curve radius is specified the curving operation shall be carried out off site in a manner that will not result in damage to the galvanising .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num e timber timber posts and blocks shall be supplied to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
timber posts and blocks shall be seasoned timber dried to equilibrium moisture content and sawn from species complying with class num or num durability and stress grading as specified .
all timber shall be straight and sound and free from shakes pipes cores flaws and other imperfections .
the timber shall be sawn parallel to the grain and exposed knots shall be sound tight well spaced and shall not exceed num mm in size on any face .
f wire rope wire rope in anchor assemblies for post and wbeam end treatments shall comply with the requirements of as num and the details shown on the drawings .
wire rope used in proprietary devices must comply with the manufacturers recommendations .
g concrete concrete for guard fence maintenance strips shall comply with the requirements of as num and as specified in vicroads section num for either i portland cementbased concrete nnum strength grade or ii geopolymer binderbased concrete num mpa strength grade .
the use of chemical admixtures shall comply with the requirements of section num .
num material handling and storage the contractor shall ensure that loading transport unloading stacking and handling operations before and after fabrication are carried out in such a way that items are protected from distortion and that galvanised surfaces are protected from damage .
all materials and components shall be stored in such a manner that damage and corrosion are prevented .
generally storage at least num mm above the ground on platforms slabs or other supports under cover will be satisfactory .
rusted or bent or damaged steel shall be rejected .
the contractor shall store components in such a manner that the freshly galvanised surfaces are protected from the attack of white rust which can occur on freshly galvanised articles that are transported or stored under damp or badly ventilated conditions including contact stacking .
if stacks are located behind a serviceable road safety barrier system the clear space between the road safety barrier system and the stack must allow for the dynamic deflection of the system and be at sufficient distance from the ends of the system to allow the proper functioning of the end treatments .
num construction a general construction of guard fence includes supply delivery handling and assembly of component and devices setting out and supply and installation of delineation .
the contractor shall plan and execute the work in a manner that prevents damage to underground and above ground facilities such as utilities services structures pavements vegetation etc .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the contractor shall construct the guard fence to form a smooth line vertically and horizontally when viewed along the line of the installation free of humps sags or other irregularities within tolerances .
any component of a guard fence must not be welded or flame cut in the field under any circumstances .
welding and flame cutting in a workshop may be undertaken only where shown on the drawings or in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
b damage where the galvanising on guard fence components or associated fittings has been damaged the coating shall be repaired by regalvanising or by painting with a minimum of two coats of a zincrich inorganic paint in accordance with asnzs num and one coat of aluminium paint .
c sequence of work where the guard fence is being constructed on a road open to traffic the contractor shall carry out the work so end treatments and transitions can be commissioned at the earliest practicable time desirably on the day of installation .
where this can not be achieved on the day temporary end treatments to the satisfaction of the superintendent shall be provided until the permanent treatment is complete .
d removal of redundant safety barrier systems removal of an existing installed safety barrier system includes i dismantling or demolition of safety barriers transitions and end treatments ii extracting all posts anchors and other inground components and materials iii removing all components and waste materials from the site iv cleaning backfilling and mechanically compacting all excavations and holes formed by the extraction of posts anchors and other inground components and materials and v stacking or disposing of components and waste materials .
following the removal of all redundant posts anchors and other inground components by extraction or excavation the holes shall be cleaned and backfilled .
backfilling and compaction of holes shall proceed in num mm layers using similar materials to existing surrounding layers .
the backfill shall be compacted to not less than the density of the surrounding layers .
num installation hp prior to installation the contractor shall confirm with the superintendent the required location and length of all guard fence .
the guard fence shall be installed at the positions so confirmed and shall be constructed true to line and level .
a posts posts shall be installed to the depth line and spacing shown on the drawings and to the tolerances in clause numd .
posts shall be orientated to the direction of traffic as shown on the drawings .
posts shall be installed by driving provided there is no distortion or damage which may reduce their effectiveness .
the installation must not cause any damage to the pavement beyond num mm from any part of any post including any soil plate attached to the post .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num if site conditions dictate that the posts can not be driven then the posts shall be installed in holes .
the bottom of the holes shall be adequately compacted to achieve the same density as the surrounding soil .
the posts shall be supported to true line and level while the holes are backfilled with clean wellgraded noncementitious subbase or base course granular material and compacted to achieve the same density as the surrounding soil .
all post holes in rock shall have a num mm minimum clearance from the back of the post to the face of the hole .
except for anchorage posts post holes in rock shall be backfilled with granular material .
other post holes shall be backfilled with selected earth free of rock .
the backfilling shall be firmly compacted in layers not exceeding num mm compacted thickness .
where posts are located in areas to be paved with concrete or premixed bituminous material the backfilling of the post holes shall be finished num mm below the underside of such paving and the remaining depth of the holes shall be filled and compacted with material similar to the surrounding material .
the foundation of any post shall be deemed complying when the displacement at ground level does not exceed num mm when a num kn force is applied num mm below the top of the post in any direction .
for any posts failing the test the contractor shall take remedial measures and retest the rectified post plus one other similar post within num m. hp prior to the installation of any wbeam barrier system where non standard post lengths are required or other special measures e.g .
shallow concrete foundations are proposed to be used the contractor shall provide details of the measures proposed and evidence that the effectiveness of the barrier system will be maintained for consideration by the superintendent .
where shallow foundations that require a concrete ground beam are proposed to be constructed the design shall be proof engineered by a department of state growth prequalified consultant .
alternative methods of support are not permitted for end treatments unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
for proprietary systems requiring alternative arrangement the contractor shall consult with and implement the requirements of the licensed product supplier .
the contractor may submit proposals for extending the guard fence to a location where installation of the end treatment is feasible or proposals for a different end treatment .
surplus excavated material remaining after the guard fence has been constructed shall be disposed of off site by the contractor .
b wbeams the wbeam sections shall be lapped so that the exposed ends face away from nearside approaching traffic .
the edges of the wbeam section or backing plate adjacent to posts shall be fixed in contact with the post or post blocks and all bolts shall be fully tightened .
end treatments of the types specified shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the drawings .
posts attached to bridges and culverts shall be bolted to supporting members andor set on mortar pads as shown on the drawings .
all bolts used in guard fence construction other than nuts on wire rope assemblies shall be tightened to a snugtight condition .
all bolts on the traffic side of wbeam installations shall be flush with the wbeam .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c end treatments during installation of wire ropes in the end treatments of wbeam the contractor shall ensure that no twisting of the rope occurs .
when rope assemblies are used the nuts at each end of the rope shall be tightened to a minimum torque of num nm on the assemblies or as per the manufacturers requirements .
the contractor shall maintain tension in the wire ropes in end treatments until the date of completion by keeping the nuts at both ends tightened to num nm or to manufacturers requirements .
d tolerances wbeam guard fence shall be erected to the following tolerances i variation from true plan position of posts num mm ii variation of line of wbeams from specified vertical profile num mm iii variation of wbeams from specified horizontal alignment num mm iv variation of posts from vertical measured at top of the post num mm v orientation of block andor post to wbeam num mm num mm measured at the point of greatest offset between the block or post to the wbeam vi dimension of holes num mm num mm vii top of bolt head relative to wbeam num mm num mm after installation the top of the rail shall be within num mm of the specified level and num mm of the specified line .
variations from specified line and level shall not occur at a rate exceeding num mm in any num m length .
notwithstanding these requirements the line and level of the guard fence shall be adjusted where necessary to provide a smooth and even vertical and horizontal alignment .
for proprietary systems refer to manufacturer requirements .
e offsets to kerb and channel or shoulder where practicable wbeam guard fence should not be installed behind kerb and channel .
where kerb and channel is essential the guard fence should be installed to the offsets shown on standard drawingnumpnum .
f height of guard fence where the face of the guard fence is erected within num to num m behind the back of kerb the mounting height vertical dimension from ground surface to centre of wbeam shall be measured from the lip of kerb .
where the face of the guard fence is erected within num m from edge of carriageway without kerb the mounting height shall also be measured from that edge of carriageway typically the edge line .
for distances beyond num m the mounting height shall be measured from the nominal ground surface at the guard fence location .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num protection of guard fence posts for motorcyclist safety where specified steel rub rail or other proprietary underrun systems shall be attached below the wbeam in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and the following installation shall only be on nominated sections of barrier as shown on the drawings rails are to be placed in line with the face of wbeam rails shall be placed in accordance with the requirements for steel guard fence .
num compliance auditing of barrier system installation hp further to clause num installation and prior to the issue of the certificate of practical completion the contractor shall arrange for a safety barrier compliance audit on all proprietary guard fence end treatments constructed under the contract .
the audit shall be undertaken and a report prepared by the australian licensed supplier of the safety barrier system .
a compliance audit report car signed by the contractors representative and the licensed supplier shall be provided certifying that the products have been installed in accordance with the manufacturers installation manual and this specification .
a car shall be provided for each proprietary guard fence and end treatment installed .
in addition the contractor shall complete and submit to the superintendent a signed copy of the manufacturers installation checklist inspection and test plan as per the manufacturers product and installation manual .
num delineators the contractor shall supply and fasten delineators to the top of the wbeam comprising flexible plastic mounting brackets fitted with num cmnum of class numa retroreflective material as defined in asnzs num .
delineators shall be installed at num m spacing and shall not be placed on flared sections .
the contractor shall arrange delineators so that vehicles approaching from either direction at night will only see red delineators on the left side of oneway and twoway roadways white delineators on the right side of twoway roadways and yellow delineators on the right side of oneway roadways .
delineators shall not be installed on guard fence when the barrier offset is greater than num m from the traffic lane .
white guide posts with delineators shall be installed in accordance with vicroads traffic engineering manual volume num .
where guard fence delineators are required to be installed as part of the works they shall be installed in accordance with vicroads traffic engineering manual volume num .
num maintenance strip for guard fence strikethrough if not applicable the contractor shall provide a concrete maintenance strip beneath the guard fence and terminals in unpaved areas of median or outer verge applications as shown on the drawings .
the concrete maintenance strip shall be placed parallel to the barrier such that it extends a minimum of num mm clear of the rear of the post and num mm clear from the face of wbeam .
it shall be constructed with minimum num crossfall away from the road and shall be flush with the adjacent ground level so the finished level does not impede road runoff .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the concrete maintenance strip shall be placed between and around the posts to not affect the performance of the guard fence .
all bedding material used for cast in place concrete construction works shall be in accordance with section num for class num crushed rock or section num for class num crushed concrete .
the concrete maintenance strip shall consist of num mm depth of nnum strength grade portland cementbased concrete or num mpa geopolymer binderbased concrete conforming to the requirements of clause numg on num mm of compacted class num crushed rock .
the edges of the infill area shall be boarded up prior to placing concrete to ensure smooth edges are produced .
the edge board shall be placed parallel with the steel beam guard fence .
the surface of the maintenance strip shall be finished with a wooden float to produce a lightly textured surface .
where the maintenance strip is adjacent to kerb or pavement separation from the kerb or pavement by the use of a cork expansion joint or approved alternative shall be produced .
full depth expansion joints shall be provided perpendicular to the line of the steel beam guard fence num mm each side of every post .
the contractor shall topsoil and grass all disturbed areas as necessary to ensure that the concrete maintenance strip is flush with the adjacent ground surface level .
num interaction of guard fence with existing assets the contractor shall install the guard fence to provide for its dynamic deflection that does not interfere with any existing roadside furniture .
the contractor shall remove any existing guard fence located between existing assets such as gantry legs variable speed signs and bridge piers .
the contractor shall allow for the interaction between all roadside furniture including slip base light poles and the guard fence by providing for the dynamic deflection zone or providing reduced post spacing as per the drawings .
the contractor shall integrate the guard fence with any existing lengths of safety barriers protecting ends of bridge parapets as shown on the drawings and in accordance with clause num .
the contractor shall remove and dispose of existing guide posts that conflict with a new guard fence including any in front of a new guard fence located within a num m offset from the traffic lane and any behind a new guard fence greater than num m offset from the traffic lane as well as bollards or other roadside furniture affected by the works or where shown on the drawings or instructed by the superintendent .
num modification to the guard fence at the interface with wrsb the contractor shall be responsible for any alteration andor relocation of any existing wrsb including the removal and disposal of existing redundant wrsb dismantling and reinstating existing wrsb including terminals and extension of existing wrsb including the provision of a concrete maintenance strip where required and as shown on the drawings .
the contractor shall terminate the guard fence at the interface with the wrsb ensuring sufficient overlapping of systems as detailed on the drawings .
any variations to the interface of the guard fence with the wrsb shall be reviewed for acceptance by the superintendent prior to installation of the guard fence .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num any modifications to the wrsb shall be in accordance with section num and the relevant standard drawings .
the contractor shall be responsible for the supply of all materials and labour necessary to undertake the modification works as specified above and as shown on the drawings .
num minimum extent of guard fence at roadside hazards the minimum lengths of guard fence provided at any median or outer verge hazard shall be in accordance with the requirements of the relevant standard drawings .
where short sections of guard fence comprise back to back g.r.e.a.ts the terminals shall be separated by a minimum of numm of wbeam .
median or outer verge hazards shall be considered to be any rigid object or nondriveable terrain within the design clear zone including bridge piers sign gantries variable speed signs sections of existing wrsb including terminals roadside vegetation culvert endwalls nondriveable table drains and nondriveable batter slopes .
num associated pavement shoulder widening where specified the contractor shall widen the existing shoulder on the median or outer verge applications adjacent to locations where guard fence is to be installed as shown on the typical cross section drawings or specification .
the contractor shall provide additional pavement between the edge of existing pavement and the guard fence .
the contractor shall adopt the nominated pavement design .
where a nominated pavement design has not been specified the contractor shall construct the widening with a pavement that matches the existing .
the edge of shoulder shall be sawcut to provide a neat straight edge against which the additional pavement can be placed .
num placing compacting and finishing concrete concrete shall be transported handled and placed so as to prevent segregation loss or leakage of materials .
fresh concrete shall not be placed against concrete which has taken its initial set except at properly formed construction joints .
concrete shall be thoroughly compacted by means of continuous tamping and internal vibration and shall be worked around any embedments and anchorages and into corners of formwork or excavations to produce a dense concrete free from voids honeycombing segregation or surface defects .
unformed surfaces shall be hand tamped to ensure a smooth surface and screeded to achieve the specified level dimensions falls and tolerances .
surfaces shall be finished uniform in appearance with a class num surface finish in accordance with as num .
any concrete repairs shall be carried out using a method and materials approved by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num curing of concrete the curing of exposed concrete surfaces shall commence immediately after finishing operations are progressively completed and shall continue uninterrupted for a period of not less than num days after placing the concrete .
concrete shall be cured either by water curing wet hessian polyethylene sheeting which is adequately sealed against evaporative moisture losses curing compound or a combination of these .
freshly finished exposed concrete surfaces shall be effectively protected from rain or damage from other sources until hard set has occurred .
when used curing compounds shall comply with as num .
the curing compound shall be applied in two coats using a fine spray at the rate stated on the certificate of compliance .
the curing membrane shall be maintained intact for not less than the specified period of curing .
any damage to the curing membrane during the period of curing shall be repaired immediately at the original rate of application .
where used geopolymer concrete shall be cured in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num conformance testing for concrete strength and consistency sampling and testing of the strength of concrete shall be carried out in accordance with clause num of as num .
the frequency of sampling and testing shall provide at least one sample to be tested for each num mnum or part thereof of concrete placed on anyone day at the point of discharge .
where less than num mnum is provided for any oneday then one sample shall be tested .
the consistency of the concrete shall be determined by a slump test of each concrete strength sample in accordance with as num and clause num of as num .
the concrete represented by the samples shall be deemed to comply with the nominated concrete slump if the measured slump is within the limits given in table num of clause num of as num .
num existing signs and markings all existing signs that are temporarily removed or relocated during the execution of the works shall be reinstated to their original location as soon as practicable to ensure that adequate information is provided to road users .
in all cases the contractor shall provide continuity of regulatory and warning signs .
the contractor shall reinstate all signs to a standard not less than the preexisting condition and to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
the contractor shall reinstate any existing painted edge lines including audible edge lines and reinstate or replace any missing raised reflective pavement markers rrpms along the length of the works including rrpms damaged by the installation process for the guard fence .
num median crossings where a median crossing is removed the contractor shall reinstate the median with a treatment consistent with the surrounding area .
any redundant median crossing signs within the limit of the works shall be removed and delivered to a storage area nominated by the superintendent .
median crossings within the limit of the works shall be retained by the contractor .
where detailed on the drawings new median crossing points shall be constructed in accordance with the pavement details specified to provide for adequate access for emergency vehicles and shall be integrated with the guard fence installation .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num existing vegetation the contractor shall ensure that the existing vegetation within the limit of works is not affected by the works .
areas where no works are required shall not be disturbed .
any damage to existing vegetation shall be rectified immediately to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
num grassing of disturbed areas a general all disturbed areas shall be topsoiled and grassed .
all areas are to be cultivated to a minimum num mm depth and moistened prior to the application of grass seed and fertiliser .
grass seed shall be applied at a rate of not less than num kgha .
fertilizer shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
hp a joint inspection of all grassed areas shall be carried out between the contractor and superintendent three months after sowing has taken place .
areas with less than num cover shall be resown by the contractor .
any remedial works required are to be performed within two weeks of the date of inspection .
b maintenance of grassed areas the contractor shall be responsible for the maintenance of grassed areas including mowing for the duration of the defects liability period for the whole of the works .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num guide posts num general this specification sets out the requirements for the supply and installation of guide posts .
refer to vicroads road design note rdn num for a list of accepted guide posts .
posts complying with as num will also be accepted .
num definitions delineator small retro reflective panel or sheeting attached to guide posts to provide a consistent pattern of delineation of the edges of road carriageways to aid road users during night time driving .
guide post posts used to mark the edge of the road carriageway and give road users an indication of the approaching alignment and geometry of the road .
rigid guide post a guide post which fractures or remains intact and horizontal when impacted .
semiflexible guide post a guide post which fails by bending when impacted and can be reinstated to vertical position with maintenance intervention .
flexible guide post a guide post which deflects when impacted and then returns to a vertical position without maintenance intervention .
num product requirements all guide posts including delineators installed in a section of road shall be uniform material and design .
a general requirements guide posts shall be between num mm and num mm across the face visible by traffic .
the tops of guideposts shall be flat the bottom ends made to suit the method of installation as recommended by the manufacturer .
guide posts shall be straight smooth structurally sound and of a shape that allows delineators to be permanently and securely attached .
the above ground section of each guide post shall be free of sharp edges and burrs and discoloration or other defects that may affect its appearance andor serviceability .
the supplier shall state the type of material used in manufacture of the guide posts as well as recommended methods of installation anchoring depth cleaning removal and disposal .
test certification shall be submitted to the superintendent addressing post strength flexibility impact performance durability heat resistance fire retardant ability corrosion resistance and cold resistance .
the supplier shall provide a performance guarantee statement clearly indicating the nature of the guarantee and the service life expectancy .
where a product is a vicroads approved guide post product the above shall not be required .
all types of guideposts shall respond in a safe manner when struck and not present a further danger in their damaged condition .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b delineators the contractor shall fix retro reflective type delineators to guide posts on both sides of the carriageway to expose to approaching traffic a red delineator on the left and a white delineator on the right .
delineators shall be either i circular num mm diameter type a corner cube retro reflectors conforming with type a delineator in as num or ii class numa retro reflective sheeting having a total minimum reflective output equivalent to num cmnum as defined in asnzs num .
the nominal dimension of retro reflective material shall be num mm x num mm .
delineators made from retro reflective sheeting shall be installed such that the sheeting manufacturers preferred orientation for optimum performance is followed .
delineators shall be placed centrally between the edges of posts with the top of the delineator num mm below the top edge .
delineators shall be attached to posts following completion of final protective coatings by a vandalproof and weatherproof means so they can be replaced if necessary without damaging the post .
c markings to enable traceability of the manufacturer each post shall be legibly and indelibly marked with the manufacturers name date of manufacture and warranty period with lettering no greater than num mm high .
the markings shall be placed at the bottom of the guide post just above recommended ground level installation depth .
guide posts shall be clearly marked to show the recommended ground level installation depth .
markings shall be installed on one side of the guide post only and remain visible for the full life expectancy of the guide post .
num performance requirements the finished surface of guide posts shall be uniform and free from discontinuities areas of discoloration blisters runs and other surface defects which affect appearance and serviceability .
guide post surfaces shall be durable gloss or semigloss opaque white capable of being repeatedly cleaned .
all materials used shall retain num of the original colour appearance and physical properties and be resistant to ultraviolet radiation for at least ten num years when exposed to all weather conditions experienced intasmania .
guide posts shall be designed to resist bending twisting and displacement due to wind .
they must be effective in resistance to vertical displacement of num mm for the life of the guidepost with the exception of any displacement associated with impact or physical force .
flexible guide posts shall return to within num mm of the original vertical position following impact or physical force application for the life of the guide post .
num installation installation of guide posts includes setting out excavation supply placement backfilling erection driving removal and disposal of guide posts .
guide posts shall be installed in accordance with the requirements ofas num as shown on the drawings or as specified by the superintendent .
guide posts shall be placed at a uniform distance from the road pavement edge with the widest face presenting to oncoming traffic .
posts shall be set into the ground so that the posts are vertical and the tops present a uniform profile .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num guide posts shall be installed such that the exposed length above ground is nominally num mm and minimum anchoring depths recommended by the manufacturer to achieve the specified performance requirements under service conditions .
allowance shall be made in the height of guide posts above the ground for the effects of superelevation and other road geometry in order to keep guide posts within the range of the beam of vehicle headlights .
guideposts shall be installed as per the manufacturers recommendation .
where guide posts are to be set in the ground they shall be erected in excavated holes which are subsequently backfilled and compacted to a density that is not less than that of the adjacent undisturbed ground .
guide posts shall be installed such that they effectively resist removal by persons other than personnel using recommended removal tools .
where guide posts are to be installed directly onto concrete asphalt of any other hard wearing surface the contractor shall submit to the superintendent the details of the proposed installation method .
a wire rope safety barrier installations where new installations of wire rope safety barrier wrsb are proposed on the edge of shoulder and will conflict with guide post installation locations wrsb posts shall be converted into guide posts in accordance with the above product requirements .
posts shall be spaced in accordance with the drawings or the requirements of traffic engineering manual volume num .
the contractor shall submit to the superintendent the details of the proposed installation .
b underground services underground service locations shall be determined prior to installation of posts .
c tolerances maximum installation tolerances are as follows i within num degrees of true vertical position ii within num mm across the face visible by traffic iii within num mm of the uniform profile height nominally num mm iv within num mm longitudinally of the design spacing requirement and num mm transversely of the plan position with reference to the design line for the road or as per the requirements of traffic engineering manual volume num. d removal and disposal of existing guideposts existing guide posts where required are to be removed as directed by the superintendant .
all holes left after removal shall be backfilled and compacted to a density that is not less than that of the adjacent undisturbed ground or the same characteristics of the shoulder material from where they were removed .
all existing guide posts removed by the contractor shall be disposed of offsite .
existing guideposts manufactured from recyclable materials shall be recycled .
num accident site markers accident site markers shall be in accordance with policy guidelines for their use .
accident site markers are normally installed and maintained by the local government authority .
fatality site markers shall be a black guidepost with a white reflective cross .
serious injury markers shall be a red guidepost with a white reflective dash .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num areas subject to snow and fog table num lists the roads that are subject to snow and fog .
the maximum spacing of guide posts in these areas shall be num m. snow markers shall be also be provided in areas subject to snow on the links or part thereof as listed in table num .
snow markers shall be provided at the fog spacing .
snow markers shall be international standard orange asnum colour num rebounding posts .
older style snow markers on posts consisting of a black band nummm in width surrounding the post with the top of the band nummm below the top of the post shall progressively be replaced .
alternative types of snow markers shall not be intermixed .
maximum spacing of guideposts in areas subject to snow andor fog shall be numm .
table num roads to have snow markers and fog guide post spacing numbers represent linkschainages road snow fog anthony main road num to num arthur highway num num bass highway num num num batman highway num bell bay main road num blessington main road num num num boyer secondary road num num bridport main road num cradle mountain dev .
road num num to num num num num cradle mt .
tourist road num num num num to num num num num num num east derwent highway num east tamar highway num num num num num num elephant pass main road num num esk main road num evandale main road num ferry main road num frankford main road num glen huon main road num num gordon river main road num num num num huon highway num num num illawarra main road num num kings meadows main road num lake dobson tourist road num to num lake secondary road num to num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num lake leake main road num num lake st. clair tourist road num leighlands secondary road num lilydale main road num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num road snow fog lollara main road num lyell highway num to num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num lymington main road num marlborough secondary road num meander valley secondary road num num num num num midland highway num num num num num num num num num num num mt .
barrow tourist road num murchison highway num num to num nicholls rivulet main road num num pipers river secondary road num poatina main road num to num to num num num num ranelagh secondary road num scotts secondary road num spring hill main road num tasman highway num to num num num num num num num num num num num num num waratah main road num num num tonum west tamar highway num num num num num youl main road num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num fixing raised pavement markers num description this section covers the fixing of both reflective and nonreflective raised pavement markers to asphalt concrete or sealed pavements using epoxy adhesive or hot melt bitumen adhesive .
num tolerances on position markers shall be affixed to the pavement at the positions shown on the drawings or specified or directed by the superintendent within the following limits unless otherwise specified .
a markers in line with broken line segments transverse position within num mm of the centreline of the segments .
longitudinal position within num m of the specified position .
b markers in a longitudinal group transverse position of the centre of each marker within num mm of the specified position and within num mm of a line joining the centres of the end markers of the group .
longitudinal position of the end markers of the group within num m of the specified position .
spacing of markers within the group within num mm of the specified spacing .
c markers adjacent to unbroken line clearance to edge of line within num mm of that specified .
longitudinal mismatch between markers in transverse pairs at barrier line not more than num mm .
longitudinal position of markers within num m or num of the specified spacing whichever is the less .
d orientation of reflective markers lower edge of the reflective face at num to num to the centreline of the roadway or any adjacent line .
num materials the contractor shall supply all materials required to complete the work covered by this section unless otherwise specified .
a markers markers shall comply with the relevant requirements of as num part num .
only markers approved for use by the department of state growth shall be used and all raised nonreflective pavement markers shall be of the ultra hard plastic type unless otherwise directed .
glass faced raised reflective pavement markers shall be used on all national roads and state freeways unless specified otherwise .
b adhesive epoxy adhesive shall be standard set or rapid set adhesive complying with the relevant requirements of as num .
only adhesives approved for use by the department of state growth shall be used .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num mixing epoxy adhesive adhesive components shall be batched so that the mixed adhesive contains not less than num nor more than num by volume of either component .
before starting work each day or when changing to a different batch of adhesive a handmixed colour standard shall be prepared for reference during the day .
when machine mixing is used the mixing equipment shall use positive displacement pumps which proportion the two components in the specified range .
at the beginning of each day and at any other time ordered by the superintendent the contractor shall check the proportions in the presence of the superintendent .
adhesive which has remained in the mixing head for longer than num seconds for rapid set adhesive or num seconds for standard set adhesive shall be discharged to waste .
when handmixing is used not more than num g of each component shall be mixed at any time .
the components shall be mixed on a flat surface and the mixed adhesive shall be used within num minutes of the time the two components are brought together .
only standard set adhesive shall be mixed by hand unless the superintendent consents otherwise .
num preparing hot melt adhesive hot melt bitumen adhesive shall not be used on days of total fire ban without the written approval of the tasmanian fire service .
two num kilogram dry powder extinguishers and one knapsack sprayer shall be carried at all times .
the hot melt bitumen adhesive shall be heated in accordance with the manufacturers specification in a heater designed specifically for the purpose .
it shall be regularly stirred in the heater during the laying operation to maintain uniformity of the component proportions .
num pavement preparation the contractor shall sweep or air blast each marker site as necessary to remove loose material before placing markers .
markers shall only be placed at locations where the pavement is free from dirt oil grease paint or any other material which would adversely affect the bond of the adhesive to the pavement unless otherwise specified .
unless specified otherwise the contractor shall clean the pavement to remove oil or grease at every marker site by sand blasting chipping or burning of bitumen as appropriate to ensure that the surface is clean and sound .
num placing markers markers shall not be placed in any of the following circumstances when the pavement is wet when the relative humidity is greater than num when the ambient temperature or the temperature of the road surface is less than numc for standard set adhesive or numc for rapid set or hot melt adhesive .
epoxy adhesive shall be placed on the base of the marker in such quantity and manner as to completely cover the base of the marker and extrude slightly all round when the marker is placed on the road .
the marker shall be then positioned correctly on the pavement and pressure shall be applied until the adhesive is uniformly extruded from each edge of the base of the marker indicating that the full base area is supported by adhesive .
the thickness of adhesive remaining under the marker shall be approximately num mm .
the orientation and position of the marker should then be visually checked and if necessary immediately corrected .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num hot melt bitumen adhesive shall be placed on the road in the correct position and the marker quickly placed correctly orientated and pressed into the adhesive .
adhesive of either type on the exposed surfaces of the marker shall be removed using soft rags moistened with kerosene petrol or mineral turpentine .
any adhesive on the pavement which might obscure the reflective faces or aspect of the marker shall be removed using a squareended spatula or similar .
where a marker is not positioned correctly within num seconds for hot melt bitumen adhesive num minutes for rapid set machine mix adhesive num minutes for standard set machine mix or num minutes for standard set hand mix from the time mixing commences it shall be discarded and a new marker placed .
similarly any marker dislodged by traffic after these times up to the end of the maintenance period shall be removed and replaced with a new marker .
on concrete and asphalt pavements wherever possible markers shall be placed clear of longitudinal or transverse joints and on all pavements markers shall be placed clear of any surface cracks or positions from which markers have been removed and the surface is damaged .
num protection from traffic markers shall be protected from traffic after placing for periods not less than those shown in table num below unless the superintendent directs or consents otherwise .
table num ambient temperature c standard set adhesive hours min rapid set adhesive minutes min hot melt adhesive minutes min num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num wire rope safety barrier wrsb this section crossreferences sections num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for the supply of materials and installation of wire rope safety barrier wrsb systems and associated works .
num standards a australian standards australian standards are referenced in an abbreviated form e.g .
as num .
as num methods of testing concrete as num specification and supply of concrete asnzs num wiring rules as num formwork for concrete as num liquid membraneforming curing compounds for concrete asnzs num road safety barrier systems b other documents proprietary manufacturers specification and drawings for the proprietary wrsb system and associated national or international standards .
nchrp num national cooperative highway research program report num aashto manual for assessing safety hardware mashnum num vicroads traffic engineering manual volume num vicroads road design note rdn numc the use of wire rope safety barriers wrsb vicroads road design note rdn numg accepted safety barrier products section num details the reference to these documents .
num wrsb system the wrsb shall be a four wire rope proprietary system which satisfies the requirements of the current version of vicroads road design note rdn num including a conformance with the recommended procedures for the safety performance evaluation of highway features national cooperative highway research program nchrp report num with the matrix of test conditions as follows i minimum test level num for the length of need and transition as shown in table num and ii minimum test level num for all terminals as shown in table num. b conformance with the requirements of asnzs num. c details of the particular wrsb systems longitudinal barrier and terminals have been submitted to vicroads and accepted for use in accordance with the current version of vicroads road design note num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num materials a wrsb materials materials for the wrsb shall be manufactured in accordance with the specification for the proprietary wrsb system and satisfy the requirements of the system for a minimum design life of num years .
the proprietary wrsb systems shall have the same composition mechanical properties and geometry as those used in the verification and acceptance tests in its country of origin .
the contractor shall nominate supply and install one type of proprietary wrsb system throughout the works .
b concrete i portland cementbased concrete portland cementbased concrete shall be nnum nnum or nnum standard strength grade as specified for the application and complying with the requirements of as num and as stated in table num. ii geopolymer binderbased concrete geopolymer binderbased concrete shall comply with the requirements of section num and manufactured to comply with the minimum num day compressive strength requirements for each strength grade ranging from num mpa to num mpa as stated in table num .
the use of chemical admixtures shall comply with the requirements of section num .
table num portland cement concrete strength grade geopolymer binder concrete strength grade minimum compressive strength at num days mpa nnum num num nnum num num nnum num num num certificates of compliance of materials components and processes the contractor shall submit for review by the superintendent not less than num days prior to the proposed use of materials and components a signed statement including relevant test reports demonstrating the compliance of the materials and components with the specification for the proprietary wrsb system and this specification .
hp the installation of the wrsb shall not proceed until the signed statement and certificates of compliance have been accepted by the superintendent .
the contractors statement shall also be supported with certificates of compliance certifying that the zinc coating mass of galvanised steel components the powder coating and welding procedures for relevant components of the proprietary wrsb systems are in accordance with the manufacturers specification and the associated national or international standards and the specification .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the contractors statement and supporting documentation shall identify all relevant national or international standards with which the various materials components or fabrication and welding processes must comply .
num material handling and storage all materials and components shall be handled and stored such that damage that may affect performance is avoided particularly to threaded components .
care shall be taken to avoid damage to galvanised and powder coating systems .
any damage that occurs shall be made good in accordance with the national or international standard with which the various materials or components must comply the specification and to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
wire ropes shall be supplied on reels and shall not be twisted or kinked .
the contractor shall provide for each of the materials and components a copy of the manufacturers information as specified below a manufacturers name b product reference c certificate of date of manufacture .
all posts shall be permanently and clearly marked with the manufacturers identification mark which shall be clearly visible at the completion of the installation .
num installation of wrsb a general the contractor shall install the wrsb in accordance with the drawings and the manufacturers requirements .
b post foundations and anchor blocks i where no geotechnical investigation is undertaken the proprietary wrsb suppliers nominated default anchor and post footing shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers product manual and vicroads road design note rdn num. ii a geotechnical investigation shall be undertaken to determine the soil properties and to ensure the accuracy of the installation and performance of the barrier where num the contractor proposes to use an approved alternative anchor or post foundation as identified within the manufacturers product manual and vicroads road design note rdn num .
num where site constraints restrict the use of the default or an approved alternative anchor or post foundation .
in which case the contractor shall provide the geotechnical information to the proprietary wrsb supplier and obtain a written statement from the supplier that the anchor block size and post foundation size are appropriate for the existing natural or constructed ground conditions and the installation meets the operational requirements .
the geotechnical investigation shall ensure that the completed in situ concrete post foundation system meets the requirements of the proprietary wrsb system and will not crack lift or displace during impact by a vehicle equivalent to the design vehicle during the design life of the barrier .
the contractor shall confirm with the supplier the geotechnical information required but shall include as a minimum soil bearing pressure soil type average allowable soil stress .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the contractor shall include sufficient time for the geotechnical investigation in its program .
hp anchor blocks and post foundations shall not be constructed until the design and manufacturers acceptance has been reviewed by the superintendent .
iii general construction and concrete requirements hp anchor blocks and post foundation shall not be cast until inspected by the superintendent .
anchor block foundation and post foundation holes shall be free of loose material debris and water prior to the placement of concrete .
further to any installation guidelines for construction of anchor blocks for a proprietary wrsb system the contractor shall form anchor block holes by excavating the hole to the correct dimension shape level and alignment specified by the proprietary system .
overexcavation of the anchor block excavation shall not be reformed with form work or soil but shall be cleaned out and filled with concrete forming the concrete anchor block .
in situ concrete post foundations shall be constructed using nnum strength grade concrete or num mpa geopolymer binderbased concrete conforming to the requirements of clause numb .
notwithstanding the specific proprietary wrsb system requirements the anchor blocks shall be constructed using nnum strength grade concrete or num mpa geopolymer binder based concrete conforming to the requirements of clause numb .
all anchor frames posts sockets and reinforcing rings shall be positioned to the line and levels as specified in the drawings and shall be secured against displacement during placing of the concrete .
no construction joints shall be provided within the anchor block .
the finished surface of all anchor blocks and footings shall be shaped such that water can not pool on the surface .
c wire rope and posts the contractor shall install the wire rope and posts to the line level and height as shown on the drawings the specification manufacturers specification and to the tolerances specified in clause num .
posts shall be spaced in accordance with the manufacturers specification unless otherwise required by the design requirements of vicroads road design note rdn num .
posts shall be installed with their correct profile in the direction of travel .
intermediate anchors shall be spaced in accordance with the lesser of the manufacturers specification or section num of vicroads road design note rdn num and installed as per the manufacturers specification and drawings .
the vertical alignment of the wire ropes shall be smooth and uniform without sudden changes in gradient and generally consistent with the vertical alignment of the edge of the traffic lanes .
the length of the post socket or overall length of the post may be adjusted in accordance with the tolerances specified by the manufacturer to achieve the specified vertical alignment .
any such adjustment shall be as per the manufacturers specification and obtained written statement of advice which shall be submitted by the contractor for review by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num hp the wrsb shall not be installed until the set out alignment of the posts has been reviewed and accepted by the superintendent .
the contractor shall allow the superintendent a minimum of one working day to inspect the pegged alignment and a further minimum period of five working days to provide its acceptance including details of any required changes in alignment length or number of installations or terminals .
in the event that the horizontal andor vertical geometry of the alignment do not satisfy the manufacturers requirements or the specification the contractor shall immediately notify the superintendent advising details of the deficient areas along with the proposed dispositions .
any adjustments accepted by the superintendent shall then be made to the alignment or the level of the median or outer verge to ensure that the installation complies with the requirements of the proprietary wrsb system and the specification .
d location of posts adjacent to batter hinge points wrsb posts constructed with the manufacturers default post footing design shall be located at the greater of a minimum num m offset from the batter hinge point and the manufacturers specification subject to dynamic deflection requirements being met .
the batter hinge point is defined as per vicroads standard drawing sd num .
where the minimum offset to the batter hinge point is to be reduced the depth of footing is to be adjusted as per the manufacturers specification and the contractor shall obtain a written statement of advice from the manufacturer based on geotechnical testing .
this shall be submitted by the contractor for review by the superintendent .
side load testing as per clause numf shall also be undertaken at num degrees to the wrsb in all directions at locations nominated by the superintendent .
e tensioning of the wire rope each wire rope shall be tensioned in accordance with the relationship between rope tension and ambient temperature applicable to the proprietary wrsb system as per the manufacturers specification .
the tension shall be measured using a tension meter supported with a current calibration certificate .
prior to commissioning the wrsb system the tension in each wire rope shall be checked and retensioned if required to ensure compliance with the ambient temperaturerope tension relationship .
the contractor shall prepare and submit a tensioning report for review by the superintendent within seven days of the tensioning works being carried out .
f loading test of post foundations side load testing of posts shall be undertaken at locations nominated by the superintendent prior to the installation of the wire rope to provide evidence that the foundations satisfy the specification requirements and will not crack lift or displace during impact by a vehicle equivalent to the design vehicle during the design life of the barrier .
the superintendent may request side load testing be undertaken at the discretion of the superintendent where nonstandard post foundations are to be used i.e .
not the manufacturers nominated default foundation in the event that the soil type can not be verified ground conditions are such that the required depth of footing can not be installed in certain geological conditions i.e .
a rock cut section where the post foundation may be reduced in length or where soft clay or medium to loose sand profiles have been identified and the standard foundation dimensions may be insufficient where posts are required to be located at the minimum offset to batter hinge points refer clause numd .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num side load testing of posts shall be carried out by applying a force of num kn approximately num tonne to the post num mm above ground level at an angle of num degrees to the wrsb .
the top of the footing shall not move more than num mm .
if the footing withstands the force with a movement of less than num mm at ground level then the footing shall be considered acceptable .
the test shall be carried out by placing a post into the completed concrete footing and using a lever hoist or equivalent and calibrated load cell anchored to a truck .
at the completion of the load testing the contractor shall remove the test posts and rectify any disturbed or damaged post foundations .
the result of all tests shall be recorded digitally photograph and logged against location .
for any footings failing the test the contractor shall seek advice from the superintendent based on relevant advice from the manufacturer take remedial measures and retest the rectified post plus one other similar post at no cost to the principal .
g wrsb over box culverts and concrete pipes where wrsb has been designed to straddle a box culvert or a concrete pipe crossing as shown on the drawings or as stated in this specification the post spacing shall be located centrally about the box culvert or concrete pipe .
adjacent post spacing at box culverts or concrete pipe crossings may be locally reduced to meet this requirement .
num construction tolerances tolerances for construction of the wrsb system shall be in accordance with the lesser of the manufacturers specification or as follows a vertical tolerance on the height of the wrsb shall be num mm from the design line b longitudinal line tolerance for the wrsb system shall be num mm in plan view c tolerance on post spacing shall be num mm .
wrsb height shall be measured from the road pavement when it is located within num m of the edge of pavement .
for distances beyond num m the wrsb height shall be measured from the ground surface at its location .
num compliance auditing of barrier system installation hp further to clause num installation of wrsb and prior to the issue of the certificate of practical completion the contractor shall arrange for a safety barrier compliance audit on all wrsb installations constructed under the contract .
the audit shall be undertaken and a report prepared by the australian licensed supplier of the safety barrier system .
a certificate of compliance coc signed by the contractors representative and the licensed supplier shall be provided certifying that the product systems including terminals have been installed in accordance with the manufacturers installation manual and this specification .
a coc shall be provided for each length of wrsb installed including terminals .
in addition the contractor shall complete and submit to the superintendent a signed copy of the manufacturers installation checklist inspection and test plan as per the manufacturers product and installation manual .
num delineators the contractor shall supply and fasten delineators to the wrsb system comprising post caps fitted with num x num mm class numa retroreflective material as defined in asnzs num or placed on the front top of the post above the wire ropes .
delineators shall be installed at approximately num to num m spacing .
delineators shall not be placed on flared sections .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the contractor shall arrange delineators so that vehicles approaching from either direction at night will only see red delineators on the left side of oneway and twoway roadways white delineators on the right side of twoway roadways and yellow delineators on the right side of oneway roadways .
delineators shall not be installed on wrsb posts when the wrsb offset is greater than num m from the traffic lane .
white guide posts with delineators shall be installed in accordance with the vicroads traffic engineering manual volume num .
where guard fence delineators are required to be installed as part of the works they shall be installed in accordance with the vicroads traffic engineering manual volume num .
num stray current effects on wrsb all wires within a wrsb system shall be tested for induced currents and voltages relative to all other adjacent wires and the ground using calibrated equipment in accordance with asnzs num wiring rules by a qualified electrical contractor .
tests shall be undertaken at each location where two sections of wrsb overlap at anchorage points .
where an induced current or voltage is recorded or high voltage powerlines are within num m of the barrier the wrsb system shall be earthed to remove current or voltage running through the wires .
all wires in the wrsb and overlapping sections of wrsb shall be connected to earth using a flexible system detailed in a submission for acceptance by the superintendent .
the earthing shall occur at the location of overlapping wrsb and at a maximum of num m intervals along the length of each affected section of wrsb .
prior to putting the wrsb system into service the earthing shall be checked to ensure that any further stray current effects have been eliminated .
num interaction of wrsb with existing assets the contractor shall install the wrsb to provide for its dynamic deflection that does not interfere with any existing roadside furniture .
the contractor shall remove any guard fence located between existing assets such as gantry legs variable speed signs and bridge piers and the wrsb as shown on the drawings .
the contractor shall allow for the interaction between the wrsb and all roadside furniture including slip base light poles by providing for the maximum barrier deflection as per vicroads road design note rdn num or providing reduced post spacing therefore reducing the wrsb dynamic deflection as per vicroads road design note rdn num and the manufacturers specification .
the contractor shall integrate the wrsb with any existing lengths of safety barriers protecting ends of bridge parapets as shown on the drawings and in accordance with clause num .
the contractor shall not connect new wrsb to existing wrsb unless it is the same system comprising the same components .
the contractor shall remove and dispose of existing guide posts that conflict with a new wrsb including any in front of a new wrsb located within a num m offset from the traffic lane and any behind a new wrsb greater than num m offset from the traffic lane as well as bollards or other roadside furniture affected by the works or where shown on the drawings or instructed by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num modification to the wrsb at the interface with guard fence the contractor shall be responsible for any alteration andor relocation of any existing guard fence including the removal and disposal of existing redundant guard fence dismantling and reinstating existing guard fence including terminals and extension of existing guard fence including the provision of a concrete maintenance strip where required and as shown on the drawings .
the contractor shall terminate the wrsb at the interface with the guard fence ensuring sufficient overlapping of systems as detailed on the drawings .
any variations to the interface of the wrsb with the guard fence shall be reviewed for acceptance by the superintendent prior to installation of the wrsb .
any modifications to the guard fence shall be in accordance with section num and the relevant standard drawings .
the contractor shall be responsible for the supply of all materials and labour necessary to undertake the modification works as specified above and as shown on the drawings .
num minimum extent of wrsb at roadside hazards the minimum lengths and post spacing of wrsb provided at any median or outer verge hazard shall be in accordance with the requirements of vicroads road design note rdn num vicroads road design note rdn num and standard drawing sd num .
median or outer verge hazards shall be considered to be any rigid object or nondriveable terrain within the design clear zone including but not limited to bridge piers sign gantries variable speed signs sections of existing guard fence including terminals roadside vegetation culvert endwalls nondriveable table drains and nondriveable batter slopes .
num associated pavement shoulder widening the contractor shall widen the existing shoulder on the median or outer verge applications adjacent to locations where wrsb is to be installed or as shown on the typical cross section drawings or specification .
the contractor shall provide additional pavement between the edge of existing pavement and the wrsb .
the contractor shall adopt the nominated pavement design .
where a nominated pavement design has not been specified the contractor shall construct the widening with a pavement that matches the existing .
the edge of shoulder shall be sawcut to provide a neat straight edge against which the additional pavement can be placed .
num maintenance strip for wrsb not used .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num placing compacting and finishing concrete concrete shall be transported handled and placed to prevent segregation loss or leakage of materials .
fresh concrete shall not be placed against concrete which has taken its initial set except at properly formed construction joints .
concrete shall be thoroughly compacted by means of continuous tamping and internal vibration and shall be worked around any embedments and anchorages and into corners of formwork or excavations to produce a dense concrete free from voids honeycombing segregation or surface defects .
unformed surfaces shall be hand tamped to ensure a smooth surface and screeded to achieve the specified level dimensions falls and tolerances .
surfaces shall be finished uniform in appearance with a class num surface finish in accordance with as num .
any concrete repairs shall be carried out using a method and materials accepted by the superintendent .
num curing of concrete the curing of exposed concrete surfaces shall commence immediately after finishing operations are progressively completed and shall continue uninterrupted for a period of not less than seven days after placing the concrete .
concrete shall be cured either by water curing wet hessian polyethylene sheeting which is adequately sealed against evaporative moisture losses curing compound or a combination of these .
freshly finished exposed concrete surfaces shall be effectively protected from rain or damage from other sources until hard set has occurred .
curing compounds shall comply with as num .
the curing compound shall be applied in two coats using a fine spray at the rate stated on the certificate of compliance .
the curing membrane shall be maintained intact for not less than the specified period of curing .
any damage to the curing membrane during the period of curing shall be repaired immediately at the original rate of application .
where used geopolymer concrete shall be cured in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num conformance testing for concrete strength and consistency the minimum compressive strength requirements for each strength grade shall be as shown in table num .
sampling and testing of the strength of concrete shall be carried out in accordance with clause num of as num .
the frequency of sampling and testing shall provide at least one sample to be tested for each num mnum or part thereof of each strength grade placed on any one day at the point of discharge .
where less than num mnum is provided for any one day then one sample of each strength grade shall be tested .
the consistency of the concrete shall be determined by a slump test of each concrete strength sample in accordance with as num and clause num of as num .
the concrete represented by the samples shall be deemed to comply with the nominated concrete slump if the measured slump is within the limits given in table num of clause num of as num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num existing signs and markings all existing signs that are temporarily removed or relocated during the execution of the works shall be reinstated to their original location as soon as practical to ensure that adequate information is provided to road users .
in all cases the contractor shall provide continuity of regulatory and warning signs .
the contractor shall reinstate all signs to a standard not less than the preexisting condition and to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
the contractor shall reinstate any existing painted edge lines and reinstate or replace any missing raised reflective pavement markers rrpms along the length of the works including rrpms damaged by the installation process for the wrsb .
num supply of additional materials the contractor shall supply additional posts and associated fittings as specified .
these posts and fittings shall be delivered to a storage area nominated by the superintendent and shall include all appropriate components as required by the proprietary wrsb system to repair damage which occurs beyond the expiration of the defects liability period .
the contractor shall provide details of the posts and associated fittings as required by the proprietary wrsb system .
the contractor shall make due allowance for the supply and delivery of all required components to be paid under the relevant provisional quantity items .
num accident damage to wrsb in the event of any damage to the wrsb caused by errant vehicles prior to the date of practical completion and during the defects liability period the contractor shall make the area immediately safe for traffic and shall be responsible for repairs including all associated traffic management measures .
repairs shall be undertaken within five working days of an impact or of a request by the superintendent .
the contractor shall be responsible for the supply of all wrsb materials including any concrete necessary to undertake the repair works to be paid under the relevant provisional quantity items .
during the contract period the contractor shall record the number of vehicle impacts where damage has occurred to the wrsb so that the department of state growth can maintain a maintenance history of the wrsb installations .
num median crossings where a median crossing is removed the contractor shall reinstate the median with a treatment consistent with the surrounding area .
any redundant median crossing signs within the limit of the works shall be removed and delivered to a storage area nominated by the superintendent .
median crossings within the limit of the works shall be retained by the contractor .
where detailed on the drawings new median crossing points shall be constructed in accordance with the pavement details specified to provide for adequate access for emergency vehicles and shall be integrated with the wrsb installation .
num existing vegetation the contractor shall ensure that the existing vegetation within the limit of works is not affected by the works .
areas where no works are required shall not be disturbed .
any damage to existing vegetation shall be rectified immediately to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num grassing of disturbed areas a general all disturbed areas shall be topsoiled and grassed .
all areas are to be cultivated to a minimum num mm depth and moistened prior to the application of grass seed and fertiliser .
grass seed shall be applied at a rate of not less than num kgha .
fertilizer shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
hp a joint inspection of all grassed areas shall be carried out between the contractor and superintendent three months after sowing has taken place .
areas with less than num cover shall be resown by the contractor .
any remedial works required are to be performed within two weeks of the date of inspection .
b maintenance of grassed areas the contractor shall be responsible for the maintenance of grassed areas including mowing for the duration of the defects liability period for the whole of the works .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num block paving this section crossreferences section num .
if section num is relevant it should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the requirements for paving driveways parking areas medians verges footpaths and traffic islands using manufactured paving blocks .
num materials unless otherwise specified the contractor shall supply all materials necessary to construct the paving including paving blocks bedding crushed rock or gravel bedding sand jointing sand and concrete or timber edging .
paving blocks shall meet the requirements specified in clause num .
bedding and jointing sand shall consist of clean hard durable naturally occurring grains free from clay dust soft or flaky particles shale salt alkali organic matter soil or other deleterious substances .
bedding and jointing sand shall be maintained at a uniform moisture content .
bedding sand shall comply with the grading requirements shown in table num .
table num as sieve num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm passing num num num num num num num num jointing sand shall be dry free flowing and shall all pass the num mm sieve with num passing the num mm sieve .
bedding sand shall not be used for joint filling .
num conformity with drawings all surfaces shall be finished in conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and cross sections shown on the drawings or specified within the following limits a paving shall be shaped to match the level of existing fixtures e.g .
pit covers edgings and driveways to within num mm .
elsewhere the deviation of the finished work from line or level shall not exceed num mm at any point and the rate of change of deviation from line or level shall not exceed num mm in num m or num mm between adjacent blocks .
except on curves or in shaped areas the deviation of the finished work from a num m straightedge shall not exceed num mm at any point .
b unless otherwise specified all paving shall be shaped to shed surface water from the entire paved area in the direction of natural slope or towards constructed surface drains .
the slope at any point on the paving except on a ridge shall be not less than num. c where median or other surfacing is to be constructed between edge sections of substantially the same level the paving shall be crowned to produce a crossfall towards the edges not exceeding num and not less than num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num setting out strikethrough a or b below the work shall be set out in accordance with the drawings by a the contractor .
b initially by the superintendent .
the alignment and level pegs will be indicated to the contractor on the site by the superintendent prior to the commencement of work .
num provision for traffic the contractor shall make provision for traffic in accordance with section num as provided for in this specification .
deliveries of material to the site shall be made in such a manner as to minimise interference to traffic and material shall not be placed on any carriageway or footpath .
if a traffic lane closure is required the contractor shall submit details of the proposed signing to the superintendent for review .
num temporary works and protection of property before obstructing any waterway channel culvert or pipe the contractor shall make provision for temporary diversion and submit the proposal to the superintendent for review .
the contractor shall make provision for the safe discharge of drainage and storm water at all times during the construction of the works .
the contractor shall take every precaution necessary to protect property including fences buildings poles hedges shrubs gardens and the like on or adjacent to the works .
num trimming and bedding the areas on which block paving is to be placed shall be trimmed by the contractor to an even and stable surface to allow a layer of bedding material not less than the minimum specified thickness to be placed .
lower bedding shall consist of graded crushed rock or natural gravel watered as necessary and compacted to form a hard dense surface .
upper bedding shall consist of bedding sand complying with the requirements of clause num placed in accordance with the following requirements a sand shall be spread loose in a uniform layer of num mm nominal thickness and shall be screeded in a loose condition to achieve a layer of uniform thickness to the specified design level following compaction of the paving .
b the spread sand shall be carefully maintained in a loose condition and protected against precompaction both prior to and following screeding .
sand shall be lightly screeded in a loose condition to the predetermined depth just ahead of the laying of the paving units .
under no circumstances shall the sand be screeded in advance of the laying face to an extent to which paving will not be completed on that day .
num edge treatment where it is specified that paving shall match concrete edgings any protrusions on the line of the edging shall be removed to allow paving blocks to be placed abutting a straight edge .
chamfered blocks shall be placed adjacent to all concrete edgings with the lower edge of the chamfer set at the level of the top of the edging .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num where concrete edging does not exist and is not specified the contractor shall supply and construct a timber edge strip to match the finished level of paving .
unless otherwise specified the edge strip shall be constructed from rough sawn num mm x num mm pressure treated standard grade radiata pine using the longest lengths that are practicable in each situation .
the strip shall be firmly bedded and supported by num mm x num mm hardwood or pressure treated radiata pine stakes num mm long placed at each end of a timber strip with intermediate stakes at no more than num m intervals .
the stakes shall be placed on the opposite side of the strip to the paving driven to a level num mm below the top of the timber edging and secured to the strip by two num mm galvanized nails .
following installation of the edge strip the ground surface not to be paved adjacent to the strip shall be reinstated or filled with soil to match the finished level of the edge strip .
part width paving blocks at the edge of the paved area with or without concrete edgings shall be sawcut along the line of the edge .
num provision for permanent signs where shown on the drawings or specified sign post sleeves supplied by the department of state growth shall be placed by the contractor to provide for erection of permanent signs in the areas to be paved .
sign post sleeves will be not greater than num mm long and they shall be placed vertically with the top of the sleeve num mm below the finished level of the paving and shall be installed before paving is commenced .
any sand or debris which falls into the sleeve shall be removed .
num laying paving blocks unless otherwise specified paving shall be laid in a stretcher bond pattern commencing at the longest straight edge with the long sides of the pavers parallel to that edge .
paving blocks shall be placed with gaps nominally num to num mm wide between adjacent blocks such that all joints are correctly aligned .
in each row all whole blocks shall be laid first .
closure blocks shall be cut and fitted subsequently .
such closure blocks shall consist of not less than num of a whole block .
spaces less than num of a full block shall be filled with a mortar consisting of four parts sand and one part cement and coloured to match the colour of the paving blocks .
except where it is necessary to correct any minor variations occurring in the laying pattern the paving blocks shall not be hammered into position .
where adjustment of position is necessary care shall be taken to avoid premature compaction of the sand bedding .
any foot or barrow traffic shall use boards overlying and raised above the paving to prevent disturbance of blocks prior to compaction .
no other construction traffic shall be allowed on the paving at this stage of construction .
num compaction and joint filling as soon as practicable after laying the paving blocks the paving joints shall be filled with joint filling sand and the paving shall be compacted .
joint filling sand shall be spread over the paving and broomed into the joints and not less than two passes of a plate compactor shall be used with compaction and brooming continuing until lipping has been eliminated between blocks and the joints completely filled with sand .
any blocks that are cracked or broken during compaction shall be immediately removed and replaced .
all paving shall be fully compacted on the day of laying provided that compaction shall not proceed closer than num m from any face where paving will be continued .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num clean up at the completion of work all unused materials and trimmed material shall be removed from the site and the paving shall be swept clean .
num schedule of details a typeshape of block b colour of block c size of block d thickness of block mm e thickness of bedding upper bedding mm lower bedding mm department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num beaching this section crossreferences sections num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the requirements for the supply and placement of rock stone or manufactured block beaching for the protection of batter slopes drainage channels and culvert endwalls as shown on the drawings .
six types of beaching are covered by this section type num ungrouted rock beaching type num grouted rock beaching type num grouted flat stone beaching type num butted paving block beaching type num melbourne water waterway beaching type num armour stone .
num conformity with drawings the finished surface of the beaching shall conform to the levels lines and grades as shown on the drawings or as specified .
num materials the contractor shall supply all materials necessary including rock or paving blocks bedding filter materials geotextile concrete mortar reinforcement and drainage pipes .
prior to the commencement of work the contractor shall nominate the source of the proposed materials supply specified test results and provide a representative sample for approval by the superintendent .
materials used for rock beaching shall be resistant to weathering action of air wind and water and shall be free from staining laminations cracks and other structural defects which may reduce its mechanical strength .
all rock materials used for beaching shall comply with the material requirements for sound rock as specified in section num and the los angeles value lav requirements of table num .
the rock shall have a minimum apparent particle density of num tmnum when tested in accordance with the requirements of the current australian standard method for sampling and testing of aggregatesparticle density and water absorption of coarse aggregateweighinginwater method as listed in section num .
in addition the rock beaching shall have a minimum wet strength of num kn and a wetdry strength variation not exceeding num when tested in accordance with the requirements of the current australian standard methods for sampling and testing aggregates wetdry strength variation as listed in section num. . department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num a beaching material i type num ungrouted rock beaching rock for type num beaching shall consist of field or quarry rock .
all rocks shall have a mass of between num and num kg and at least num by number shall be over num kg .
rocks shall be of such size that the layer of beaching is not less than num mm thick .
ii type num grouted rock beaching rock for type num beaching shall consist of field or quarry rock .
the rocks shall be uniform in colour .
all rocks shall have a mass of between num kg and num kg and at least num by number shall be over num kg .
rocks shall be of such size that the layer of beaching is not less than num mm thick .
iii type num grouted flat stone beaching type num beaching shall consist of dense flat stone .
beaching stone shall be uniform in size shape and colour .
each piece shall be not less than num mm thick and have a face area not less than num mnum .
at least num of the pieces by number shall have an area of more than num mnum .
iv type num butted paving rock beaching paving blocks shall be of the type face size thickness and colour specified .
all masonry units used for type num beaching shall be solid units and shall comply with the requirements for masonry units in asnzs num .
masonry units shall be sampled to asnzs num and tested in accordance with asnzs num and shall have a minimum unconfined compressive strength for masonry units in asnzs num. v type num melbourne water waterway beaching rock for type num beaching shall consist of field or quarry rock preferably of a typecolour that is indicative of the local area .
primarily the material will be angular in shape and of even grading including num by weight of rock fines that creates an interlocked effect when constructed .
the nominal rock sizethickness dnum is to be specified by the designer and signed off by melbourne water .
unless otherwise specified the minimum dnum shall be a num mm rock sizing with a depth of num x dnum num mm .
all beaching on melbourne water assets shall be structurally stable and scour proof and as per melbourne water requirements .
final melbourne water rock beaching is to support agreed revegetation .
prior to the commencement of work the contractor shall provide a record of melbourne water design acceptance to the superintendent for approval .
vi type num armour stone armour stone shall comply with the requirements of type num beaching unless specified and all armour stone shall have a mass of between and kg and at least num by number shall be over kg .
rocks shall be of such size that the layer of beaching is not less than mm thick .
armour stone used on melbourne water assets shall include rock fines to create an interlocked effect when constructed .
prior to the commencement of work on a melbourne water waterway the contractor shall provide a record of melbourne water design acceptance to the superintendent for approval .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b bedding type num beaching shall not routinely require a granular bedding however a very robust needle punched nonwoven geotextile mass num gmnum shall be laid over the trimmed surface where rock beaching is to be placed .
geotextiles used shall comply with and be placed in accordance with section num .
the geotextile shall be buried to a depth of num mm at the edges of beaching and placed under and around the excavation for the toe wall and for any other perimeter walls provided .
the geotextile shall be laid evenly with no kinks or folds and joints shall be formed by overlapping the geotextile by not less than num mm and not more than num mm .
type num beaching shall not require bedding unless specified or shown on the drawings .
bedding for type num beaching shall consist of at least num mm depth of mortar comprising one part portland cement and nine parts sand .
bedding for type num beaching shall consist of a num mm minimum layer of bedding sand or stabilised sand with a slow setting binder .
type num beaching shall be developed in conjunction with melbourne water .
the rock used for the granular filter layer is to be well graded and where a granular bedding is required limited to num mm in size .
the thickness of the granular filter will depend on site and hydraulic conditions but shall not be less than num mm .
sites composed of sandy dispersive soils may require the use of a geotextile filter layer beneath the granular filterembedment layer .
armour stone shall not require bedding unless specified or shown on the drawings .
num preparation of underlying surface areas on which beaching is to be placed shall be compacted and trimmed as required to provide a finished surface level of beaching in accordance with the drawings .
any scours or hollows in the surface shall be filled with compacted class num crushed rock .
trimmed material shall be removed from the site .
for treatment of socurs and hollows on or near melbourne water assets contact melbourne water for the necessary treatment .
num beaching placement a general wherever practicable the placement of beaching materials shall be by mechanical means .
for beaching materials with a mass greater than or equal to num kg placement by mechanical means is mandatory .
prior to commencement of any work where placement of rock beaching is proposed a detailed job safety assessment shall be undertaken by a suitably qualified and experienced professional and a suitable safe work method statement developed to cover all necessary elements .
the completed job safety assessment and the safe work method statement shall be submitted to the superintendent for review .
the documentation submitted must demonstrate compliance with work health and safety regulations num in particular part num hazardous manual tasks part num falls and chapter num construction work .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num beaching materials shall be firmly bedded on the prepared embankment andor bedding if required and laid in courses commencing from the bottom of any slope .
ungrouted beaching when placed shall form a tight interlocking grid which shall prevent the removal of individual rocks .
the general surface of the finished beaching shall not vary from a num metre straight edge laid across the surface of the beaching by more than num mm for type num beaching num mm for type num beaching num mm for type num beaching num mm for type num beaching nummm for type num beaching unless otherwise specified by melbourne water authority finished surface levels of rock beaching placed in open drains shall be flush with adjacent soil levels to allow mowing and maintenance .
rock beaching shall not protrude more than num mm above the surrounding ground levels .
the finished rock surface shall be stable to allow public access and shall comply with the safe design requirements of section num of the work health and safety act num. b type num beaching gaps between rocks shall be as narrow as practicable and not exceed num mm on average .
voids shall be filled to at least midheight of the rocks with topsoil .
the level of the topsoil shall be increased where planting is required within type num rock beaching .
the topsoil depth shall be increased to finish flush with the general rock surface and adjacent ground level .
c type num beaching width of joints may vary between num mm and num mm with an average not exceeding num mm .
level difference between edges of adjacent rocks shall not exceed num mm .
the joint pattern shall be random and the joints kept free from debris before grouting .
d type num beaching beaching material shall be thoroughly cleaned and saturated with water before being bedded on fresh mortar as specified in clause numb .
the joint pattern shall be random and the joints kept free from debris prior to grouting .
width of joints may vary between num mm and num mm with an average not exceeding num mm .
level difference between edges of adjacent stones shall not exceed num mm .
e type num beaching the blocks shall be placed on the specified bedding sand and laid in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
edge blocks shall be neatly cut to establish straight edges .
dry sand shall be broomed into the joints on completion and lightly watered .
the sand used in this mixture shall all pass a num mm as sieve and num shall pass a num mm as sieve .
type num beaching rocks shall be placed to allow for the formation of a tightly interlocked rock mass in which the larger rocks are not free to move .
all voids are to be sealed with smaller graded rock for stability and sufficient for water to flow over the top and not within or underneath the beaching .
all leading and edge rocks shall finish flush with the surrounding ground level .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the following photos are typical examples of melbourne water accepted rock beaching and armour stone showing well graded rock including the proportion of fines .
photo num melbourne water accepted type num rock beaching photo num melbourne water accepted armour stone department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num grouting grouting with mortar shall be carried out when the air temperature is above numc and work shall be kept moist for three days after grouting .
joint mortar shall consist of one part portland cement and three parts sand by volume and be thoroughly mixed with water to produce grout of suitable consistency .
propriety cementitious mortars with equivalent performance may be used if approved by the superintendent .
grouted rock beaching type num and grouted flat stone beaching type num shall be initially placed on a bed of mortar which infiltrates joints and final grouting shall ensure that mortar is firmly tamped into joints to fill the joints to num mm below the general top of beaching level .
the joints shall be neatly finished by filling with mortar .
the final level of the mortar shall not be within num mm of the finished rock surface .
care shall be taken to keep the exposed rock face clean .
brooming of mortar across the face of the rocks will not be permitted .
num perimeter and toe walls perimeter and toe walls shall be constructed where shown on the drawings .
for type num beaching toe walls num mm wide by num mm deep shall be constructed .
they shall be lined with geotextile fabric and filled with hand packed rock the larger voids between rocks being filled with smaller stones .
where type num beaching is used in streams similar walls num mm wide by num mm deep shall also be constructed across the upstream end of the beaching .
for types num num and num beaching concrete perimeter walls shall be constructed around exposed edges of the beaching .
concrete used for this purpose shall be nnum strength grade complying with section num .
toe walls shall be num mm wide by num mm deep at the front face and reinforced with lnumtm trench mesh top and bottom .
the upper surface of the toe wall shall slope upwards at either the slope of the rock beaching or the adjacent verge as shown on the drawings .
side walls and other perimeter walls shall be num mm wide by num mm deep .
the top of the walls shall be continuous with the beaching .
for type num beaching perimeter and toe edge rocks will depend on site and hydraulic conditions and shall be constructed in conjunction with melbourne water .
perimeter and toe edge rocks shall be trenched into in situ ground before bedding placement .
such rocks shall have a minimum embedment depth of num mm and shall finish flush with the surrounding ground .
perimeter and toe edge rocks may require a granular bedding and an underlying geotextile filter layer if warranted by the site and hydraulic conditions .
all rocks shall be carefully placed into position rather than dumped directly so as to avoid segregation of the rock sizes .
num drainage a where specified or shown on the drawings a num mm diameter pvc pipe shall be laid down the batter in a trench beneath the bedding to discharge immediately above the top of the toe wall .
the pipe shall be securely bedded within the backfilled compacted crushed rock or natural gravel trench .
b weepholes consisting of num mm diameter pvc pipes shall be placed through the beaching at num m centres immediately above the top of the concrete toe wall and cut off flush with the face of beaching .
weepholes and other drainage lines shall not directly discharge onto areas of public access or shared user pathways .
num cleaning on completion of the work the beaching shall be cleaned to remove all foreign materials and discolouration from the beaching surface .
any joint mortar adhering to the surrounding rock surfaces shall be removed .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num sign installation this section crossreferences sections num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num scope this section covers the installation of signs and sign supports that comply with the vicroads supplement to as num australian standard as num manual of uniform traffic control devices and as num road signs specifications the vicroads traffic engineering manual volume num vicroads supplements to australian standards .
cantilever sign structures and sign gantries are outside of the scope of this document .
num supply of materials and components all materials shall be supplied by the contractor .
num transport handling and storage of signs the contractor shall collect signs and sign components from the specified storage location and transport them to the specified sign location .
signs shall be transported handled stored in a manner that prevents damage to and deterioration of sign components .
if any damage or deterioration should occur to sign components the contractor shall repair or replace the affected item .
repairs shall restore the sign to the original condition using proprietary materials obtained from the sign manufacturer or alternative materials compatible with the original .
num conformity with drawings the sign installation shall be as described in the schedule and as shown on the contract drawings .
if the contractor proposes to use an alternative method of installation the contractor shall submit full details to the superintendent for approval not later than four weeks before the commencement of sign installation .
num tolerances a foundations the finished surface of concrete foundations shall be between num mm and num mm above the finished surface at the base of the sign and shall be shaped to ensure free drainage of water away from the base of the post .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b posts i posts shall be straight ii posts shall be vertical with a maximum deviation of num in num iii post tops shall be num mm num below the top edge of the sign c signs i signs shall be mounted level with a maximum deviation of num in num. ii signs shall be mounted symmetrically on their posts unless the drawings indicate that an offset is required or if directed by the superintendent .
iii where the sign comprises two or more signs above each other the individual sign faces shall be mounted with the adjacent edges touching unless otherwise shown on the sign drawings .
iv sign faces shall present an even surface free from twists cracks indentations or any other faults after erection .
num posts and foundations hp the required positions of all posts and signs shall be as directed by the superintendent who shall confirm the positions before the erection of posts commences .
post details shall be as shown on the standard drawings and in accordance with the vicroads traffic engineering manual volume num .
refer to vicroads road design note rdn num for a list of vicroads accepted frangible post systems .
if the contractor proposes the use of an alternative post and sign installation full details of the proposals shall be supplied to the superintendent for review not later than four weeks before installation .
a steel and timber posts the contractor shall conform to the requirements of clause num and the sign and post schedule .
where posts are to be mounted in sockets the post shall be securely fixed into the socket by an approved vandalproof method .
signs to be mounted on two or more posts shall have posts positioned such that the sign face is rotated away from the approaching traffic to avoid direct reflection .
posts shall be positioned such that the sign is rotated away from the cross section by an amount equal to one tenth of the width of the sign approximately num .
posts specified as frangible hardwood shall be set at a level such that the centre of the lower hole of each post is num mm above the finished surface at the base of the post .
b coatings for sign supports steel posts shall be hotdip galvanized in accordance with the australian standard for hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles .
sign supports shall be unpainted unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
any paints shall be in accordance with section num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c foundations all posts shall be set in concrete foundations to the depths shown in the sign and post schedule and with the following hole diameters foundation hole diameter post size and type mm diameter mm num mm and num mm nominal bore steel num num mm to num mm nominal bore steel num nummm x num mm frangible hardwood num concrete used in foundations shall be num mpa complying with the requirements of section num. d posts in sockets if a sign is located in a paved area or in a location where the sign may be struck by a vehicle e.g .
at the end of an urban median or where it may be necessary to remove the sign to accommodate the swept path of overdimensional vehicles the post should be inserted into a socket cast into concrete foundation .
suitable socket sizes for posts are as follows socket size post size mm socket size mm num mm nominal bore tube num mm nominal bore tube num mm nominal bore tube num mm nominal bore tube the depth of the socket should be the same as the depth in ground nominated in table num of the vicroads supplement to as num .
the socket should protrude num mm above an earth surface or num mm above a paved surface .
the sign post must penetrate a minimum num mm into the socket .
the sign post should be securely fixed into the socket by an approved vandalproof method .
e backfilling of post holes i num and num mm nominal bore steel posts posts holes shall be backfilled with concrete with a nominal strength of num mpa .
ii num mm x num mm frangible hardwood timber posts frangible hardwood posts shall be erected in accordance with the drawings postholes for frangible hardwood posts shall be filled with a mixture of gravel and cement num by weight .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num f vicroads approved sign support systems other vicroads approved proprietary supports systems may be used and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers specifications .
num installation of signs installation of signs shall be in accordance with the sign and post schedule .
fittings shall be appropriate to the size and type of sign and shall ensure that the sign face is securely connected to the post .
a signs shall be attached to the posts or structures using the type and number of fittings as specified in the schedule or as follows size of sign number of fittings per post signs up to num mm in depth one signs num to num mm in depth two signs num to num mm in depth three one extra fitting shall be provided per post for each num mm increment or part thereof above num mm .
b for braced signs the sign shall be attached to the post at every intersection point between the sign bracing member and the post .
c where a sign assembly consists of two or more signs the signs shall be mounted in accordance with the drawings .
d signs shall be positioned in accordance with the following tolerances i num mm of the height specified in the sign and post schedule measured from the bottom of the sign or sign assembly to the lip of the kerb or edge of shoulder nearest the sign ii num mm of the pegged sign location or specified location .
e when a sign is to be mounted on frangible posts on a cut batter having a slope steeper than or equal to num the mounting height at the shorter post may be reduced providing that i the uphill corner of the sign is a minimum of num mm above the ground ii the sign at the longer post is num mm minimum above the ground .
f if required on the drawings sign faces shall be mounted on existing roadside poles lighting columns traffic signal pedestals .
where a sign is to be mounted with stainless steel straps the brackets shall be attached to the pole using stainless steel straps of num mm minimum width and a minimum tensile strength num kn .
small signs with an area of not exceeding num m shall be attached to steel or concrete electricity distribution poles tramway poles lighting columns and signal pedestals or mast arms by banding or other proprietary fittings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num signs exceeding num m in area may be attached to existing poles other than electricity distribution poles provided that the pole has sufficient strength to support the additional loading due to the sign and that special jointuse supports are used .
if the contractor proposes to mount a sign on an existing pole the strength of the pole and any other effects of mounting the sign in this way such as fatigue and durability shall be checked by an experienced structural engineer .
evidence of the structural checking shall be submitted to the superintendent for review .
the contractor shall obtain permission for use of structures which are not department of state growth property .
the maximum signboard areas which may be attached to jointuse structures are standard num mm od signal pedestal num m special num mm od signal pedestals num m joint use traffic signallighting column or traffic signal mast arm num m less the area of any traffic signal target boards facing in the same direction .
minimum lateral and vertical clearances adjacent and under the sign shall be maintained .
g where the drawings indicate that a sign is to face oncoming traffic it shall be mounted on posts which have been rotated in accordance with the requirements of clause numa with the exception of signs mounted on structures over traffic lanes .
h where signs are to be removed or relocated as specified in the schedule the contractor shall dismantle and transport the signs posts and fittings to the specified new location or as directed by the superintendent .
post holes shall be backfilled and compacted to the finished surface .
relocated signs shall be erected in their new position as specified .
i after erection of each sign all stiffening bars are to be removed .
j single post mounting for large signs shall be provided if required on the drawings and the schedule .
single post mountings shall be designed in accordance with the vicroads traffic engineering manual volume num .
such supports are not to be made as breakaway supports .
k installation of proprietary signs approved by the department of state growth shall be in accordance with the suppliers recommendations as modified by the department of state growth conditions of approval .
num masking of signs where indicated in the schedule the contractor shall mask the nominated signs by placing a porous cloth or similar covering that conceals the sign text under both wet and dry conditions and does not void the sign material warranty .
the masking material shall be held in position by wire mesh over the sign .
adhesive material shall only be applied to the masking material and not be applied to either the front or rear face of the signboard .
signs marked m in the sign and post schedule shall be masked .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the size of the masking material and its method of attachment shall be such that the sign is effectively and securely covered wholly or partly covered as required covered at all times and under all conditions .
num references vicroads traffic engineering manual volume num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num gabions and rock mattresses this section crossreferences sections num num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the requirements for the supply of materials assembly installation and filling of rock filled gabions and rock mattresses .
this section also covers specific requirements for gabion retaining structures and specific requirements for the use of gabions and rock mattresses in waterways and coastal waters .
num definitions gabion a container manufactured from hexagonal mesh wire netting or square welded mesh partitioned into maximum num mnum cells interconnected with other units and filled with rock .
gabions may be used for landscaping erosion control noise attenuation walls facing panels for reinforced soil structures and retaining structures .
gabion fill material and rock mattress fill material rock used to fill gabions and rock mattresses .
gabion retaining structure a mass retaining structure constructed from gabions num m or greater in height and steeper than numhnumv or which would result in a traffic or pedestrian hazard or damage to neighbouring property upon failure .
prefilled gabion a gabion assembled and filled with gabion fill material and then lifted and transported prior to installation .
rock mattress a container manufactured from hexagonal mesh wire netting partitioned into maximum num mnum cells with a maximum height of num mm and filled with rock used for landscaping and erosion control .
num gabions a hexagonal mesh wire netting shall have the following properties i wire and selvedge wire shall have a minimum tensile strength of num mpa and a minimum diameter of num mm and num mm respectively ii wire and selvedge wire shall be coated with a minimum of num gmnum zincnum aluminium alloy and a minimum num mm of grey coloured extruded pvc prior to netting manufacture iii netting shall be manufactured by winding two wires around each other through three num rotations to form a tight helical twist with a nominal mesh size of num mm x num mm .
gabions manufactured from hexagonal mesh wire netting shall be partitioned into maximum num mnum cells and selvedge wires shall be provided on all edges .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b square welded mesh shall have the following properties i wire shall have a minimum tensile strength of num mpa and a minimum diameter of num mm ii welded mesh shall be manufactured with a minimum weld shear strength of num kn and a maximum mesh size of num mm x num mm iii welded mesh shall be coated with a minimum of num gmnum zincnum aluminium alloy after mesh manufacture .
gabions manufactured from square welded mesh shall be partitioned into maximum num mnum cells and shall not be used in noise attenuation walls facing panels for reinforced soil structures and retaining structures .
c fasteners shall have the following properties i wire shall have a minimum tensile strength of num mpa and a minimum diameter of num mm ii wire shall be stainless steel wire .
fasteners shall be able to be folded around four selvedge wires with a minimum overlap of num mm .
d braces shall have the following properties i wire shall have a minimum tensile strength of num mpa and a minimum diameter of num mm ii wire shall be coated with a minimum of num gmnum zincnum aluminium alloy and a minimum num mm of grey coloured extruded pvc prior to brace forming .
braces shall be formed by folding one wire to form a u shape with strands of nominal length num mm and a span of nominal length num mm returns of nominal length num mm shall also be provided at the open end of the brace .
e certificate of compliance hp prior to the commencement of work the contractor shall supply a certificate of compliance from the manufacturer confirming that the gabions fasteners and braces comply with this specification for approval by the superintendent .
num rock mattresses a hexagonal mesh wire netting shall have the following properties i wire and selvedge wire shall have a minimum tensile strength of num mpa and a minimum diameter of num mm and num mm respectively ii wire and selvedge wire shall be coated with a minimum of num gmnum zincnum aluminium alloy and a minimum num mm of grey coloured extruded pvc prior to netting manufacture iii netting shall be manufactured by winding two wires around each other through three num rotations to form a tight helical twist with a nominal mesh size of num mm x num mm .
rock mattresses manufactured from hexagonal mesh wire netting shall be partitioned into maximum num mnum cells and selvedge wires shall be provided on all edges .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num b fasteners shall have the following properties i wire shall have a minimum tensile strength of num mpa and a minimum diameter of num mm ii wire shall be stainless steel wire .
fasteners shall be able to be folded around four selvedge wires with a minimum overlap of num mm .
c certificate of compliance hp prior to the commencement of work the contractor shall supply a certificate of compliance from the manufacturer confirming that the gabions and fasteners comply with this specification for approval by the superintendent .
num gabion fill material and rock mattress fill material a general gabion fill material and rock mattress fill material shall consist of rock with not less than two broken or angular faces .
the rock shall be resistant to weathering action of air wind and water and shall be free from staining laminations cracks and other structural defects which may reduce its mechanical strength .
all rock used for gabion fill material and rock mattress fill material shall comply with the material requirements for sound rock as specified in section num and the los angeles value lav requirements of table num .
the rock shall have a minimum apparent particle density of num tmnum when tested in accordance with as num .
in addition the rock shall have a minimum wet strength of num kn and a wetdry strength variation not exceeding num when tested in accordance with as num .
rock from a quarry or nonquarry site shall not be used until the source has been investigated and accredited in accordance with vicroads code of practice for source rock investigations as listed in section num .
hp prior to the commencement of work the contractor shall nominate the proposed source of rock and supply the specified test results for approval by the superintendent .
b dimensions the dimensions of gabion fill material and rock mattress fill material shall comply with the relevant requirements of table num .
table num dimensions of gabion fill material and rock mattress fill material material minimum dimension mm maximum dimension mm gabion fill material num num rock mattress fill material num twothirds the thickness of the rock mattress or num mm whichever is the lesser .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c testing the contractor shall sample and test gabion fill material and rock mattress fill material at a frequency of at least one test per num tonnes or part thereof to ensure that the material consistently complies with the dimensions shown in table num .
samples shall be obtained from stockpiles in accordance with as num .
tests shall be undertaken by passing the samples through rigid screens with round holes with a diameter of the relevant dimension .
num gabion assembly installation and filling a foundation preparation areas upon which gabions are to be installed shall be prepared and test rolled as specified in section num and section num .
any unstable areas detected by test rolling shall be rectified as specified in section num .
the contractor shall request the superintendent to be present during all test rolling .
b assembly gabions shall be laid out on a hard flat surface and stretched to remove all kinks and bends .
individual gabions shall be assembled by raising the sides and partitions and connecting selvedge wires at all abutting edges with fasteners at maximum num mm intervals .
gabions may be cut into two segments and spliced by a minimum length of num mm to form nonstandard dimensions .
fasteners shall be installed at both edges of the splice at maximum num mm horizontal and vertical intervals .
c installation gabions shall be installed in the positions shown on the drawings and each gabion shall be connected to all adjacent gabions by connecting all abutting edges with fasteners at maximum num mm intervals .
temporary supports permanent supports consisting of galvanized star pickets or galvanized steel structural sections or tensioning shall be used as required to ensure the sides of the installed gabions do not vary by more than num mm from a num metre straight edge laid across the surface prior to during and after filling with gabion fill material .
d filling gabions shall be filled with gabion fill material by mechanical means aided by hand sorting to ensure that exposed surfaces are free from excessive bulges and depressions .
gabions shall be one third filled and braces installed at evenly distributed nominal num mm horizontal centres .
gabions shall then be two thirds filled and additional braces installed at evenly distributed nominal num mm horizontal centres .
gabions shall then be fully filled the selvedge wires on the lids connected to selvedge wires at all abutting edges with fasteners at maximum num mm intervals and any temporary supports or tensioning removed .
where bulges and depressions greater than num mm are present after filling the gabions shall be refilled .
square welded mesh that is buckled by impacts during filling shall be replaced .
e prefilled gabions hp the use of prefilled gabions is not permitted without the prior written approval of the superintendent .
the contractor shall submit a procedure for filling lifting and transporting prefilled gabions for approval by the superintendent .
the procedure shall demonstrate that the prefilled gabions will not vary by more than num mm from a num metre straight edge laid across the surface after installation .
where required by the superintendent a test prefilled gabion shall be filled lifted transported and lifted again to confirm the suitability of the procedure .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num prefilled gabions shall be installed in the positions shown on the drawings and each prefilled gabion shall be connected to all adjacent prefilled gabions by connecting accessible abutting edges only with fasteners at maximum num mm intervals .
the exposed sides of the prefilled gabions after installation shall not vary by more than num mm from a num metre straight edge laid across the surface after installation .
where bulges and depressions greater than num mm are present after installation the prefilled gabions shall be replaced .
num rock mattress assembly installation and filling a foundation preparation areas upon which rock mattresses are to be installed shall be prepared and test rolled as specified in section num and section num .
any unstable areas detected by test rolling shall be rectified as specified in section num .
the contractor shall request the superintendent to be present during all test rolling .
a separationfiltration geotextile layer shall be placed on the prepared surface .
the geotextile shall comply with the requirements of section num and shall have a classification of very robust an overlap of num mm and shall be a nonwoven type geotextile .
the geotextile shall be placed as specified in section num and shall be buried to a depth of num mm at the edges of the areas upon which rock mattresses are to be installed .
b assembly rock mattresses shall be laid out on a hard flat surface and stretched to remove all kinks and bends .
individual rock mattresses shall be assembled by raising the sides ends and partitions and connecting selvedge wires at all abutting edges with fasteners at maximum num mm intervals .
rock mattresses may be cut into two segments and spliced by a minimum length of num mm to form nonstandard dimensions .
fasteners shall be installed at both edges of the splice at maximum num mm horizontal and vertical intervals .
c installation rock mattresses shall be installed in the positions shown on the drawings .
rock mattresses installed on slopes shall be arranged with the longest dimension of the rock mattress in the direction of the slope .
each rock mattress shall be connected to all adjacent rock mattresses by connecting selvedge wires at all abutting edges with fasteners at maximum num mm intervals .
permanent anchors consisting of galvanized star pickets shall be installed on a minimum num m by num m centre grid .
the galvanized star pickets shall be driven into the foundation to a minimum depth of num mm and shall be connected to the base of the rock mattress with a fastener .
d filling rock mattresses shall be filled with rock mattress fill material by mechanical means aided by hand sorting to ensure that exposed surfaces are free from excessive bulges and depressions .
rock mattresses shall be fully filled and the lids connected to all abutting edges with fasteners at maximum num mm intervals .
the lids of the rock mattresses shall not vary by more than num mm from a num metre straight edge laid across the surface .
where bulges and depressions greater than num mm are present after filling the rock mattresses shall be refilled .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num gabion retaining structures a general gabions manufactured from square welded mesh and rock mattresses shall not be used in gabion retaining structures .
b design gabion retaining structures shall be designed in accordance with as num and the following requirements i the design life shall be num years ii the gabions shall lean backward into the retained material and the base of the gabions shall have a slope of numhnumv iii the gabion fill material design source rock unit weight shall be num knmnum unless demonstrated otherwise by nominating the source rock and supplying apparent particle density test results in accordance with clause numa iv the gabion fill material design porosity shall be num for design for bearing failure and global failure ultimate limit states and shall be num for design for sliding rotation and structural failure ultimate limit states unless demonstrated otherwise by determining the porosity using a sacrificial test gabion v the type a structural material permeable fill material or no fines concrete design effective cohesion shall be num kpa the design effective friction angle shall be num and the design unit weight shall be num knmnum .
strikethrough the remainder of this clause if not required in addition for gabion retaining structures with a retained height of num m or more i the gabion fill material design source rock unit weight shall be determined by nominating the source rock and supplying test results demonstrating the minimum apparent particle density ii the gabion fill design porosity shall be determined by preparing a sacrificial test gabion and measuring the mass of gabion fill material in the test gabion in tonnes to the nearest num tonne and the volume of the test gabion in mnum to the nearest num mnum .
the gabion fill design porosity shall then be determined using num mass of gabion fill material in test gabion t apparent particle density tmnum volume of test gabion mnum iii the design shall be proofengineered by a proof engineer who shall be prequalified at level pe in accordance with the vicroads prequalification scheme .
c foundation preparation in addition to the requirements of clause numa the prepared surface shall have a slope of numhnumv .
d installation in addition to the requirements of clause numc temporary supports permanent supports or tensioning shall be used as required to ensure the top of the first layer of gabions has a slope of numhnumv prior to filling with gabion fill material .
for subsequent layers of gabions the placement of a screed layer of gabion fill of nominal dimension num mm on the underlying layer may also be used as required to ensure the top of the gabions has a slope of numhnumv prior to filling with gabion fill material .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num strikethrough the remainder of this clause if not required in addition for gabion retaining structures with a retained height of num m or more i in addition to the requirements of clause numd internal braces shall be installed at evenly distributed nominal num mm horizontal centres ii gabions shall be installed in a stretcher bond pattern so that the ends of the gabions are staggered vertically from the ends of the gabions in the layers above and below iii the contractor shall request the superintendent to be present during the installation of gabions to ensure the top of the gabions have a slope of numhnumv prior to filling with gabion fill material .
e material placed behind gabion retaining structures prior to placing material behind gabion retaining structures i a separationfiltration geotextile layer shall be placed on the rear of the gabion retaining structure .
the geotextile shall comply with the requirements of section num and shall have a classification of very robust an overlap of num mm and shall be a nonwoven type geotextile ii a subsurface drainage pipe shall be placed at the base of the rear of the gabion retaining structure .
the subsurface drainage pipe shall comply with the requirements of section num and shall be a category num pipe shall have a minimum diameter of num mm shall have a perforation size of num mm and shall be fitted with a knitted seamless sleeve .
material placed behind gabion retaining structures shall consist of i type a structural material consisting of num mm class num crushed rock which shall comply with the requirements of section num and shall have a minimum permeability of num x num ms .
type a structural material shall be placed and compacted as specified in section num clause num and testing and acceptance of compaction and moisture content shall be undertaken as specified in section num clause num scale a compaction requirements section num clause numc and section num ii permeable fill material consisting of grade anum anum anum bnum bnum bnum or bnum granular filter material which shall comply with the requirements of section num .
permeable fill material shall be placed and compacted as specified in section num clause num iii no fines concrete which shall comply with the requirements of section num .
permeable fill material shall be placed as specified in section num clause num .
num gabions and rock mattresses in waterways hp gabions and rock mattresses shall not be installed below the num annual recurrence interval flood level of waterways with a permanent flow of water without the prior approval of the superintendent .
the contractor shall submit a proposal for protecting gabions and rock mattresses from damage from debris impact and written consent from the relevant catchment management authority for approval by the superintendent .
num gabions and rock mattresses in coastal waters gabions and rock mattresses shall not be installed below the highest astronomical tide level of tidal waterways or coastal waters or within the splash zone of coastal waters .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num landscape works this section crossreferences sections num or num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for works associated with the vegetation of the site .
this includes but is not limited to material supply site preparation mulching planting grassing irrigation and landscape maintenance as specified and shown on relevant drawings planting details and schedules .
num definitions a caliper the stem or trunk diameter of a tree at a nominated point .
caliper is measured at num mm above ground for sizing of nursery plants .
b individual tree planting any tree planting of single trees each surrounded by a mulch ring andor grass cover .
c planting area any continuous area where multiple plants are established using stock from containers such as pots tubes and cells or by direct sowing other than grassed areas .
d propagule a propagule is any plant part capable of producing a new plant e.g .
seeds cuttings bulbs corms rhizomes etc .
e tube stock or cell stock plants grown in small less than num litre containers .
f weed any plant which is not desired .
subcategories include i noxious weed .
any plant that is a declared weed under as defined in the weed management act num in respect of the project area .
ii species or individual plants specified to be removed .
iii weeds of planting beds and around individual trees include any plant not specified in the planting schedule or is not indigenous to the site .
this includes all local environmental weeds and noxious weeds .
iv weeds of mowngrass areas include all species listed in i above broadleaf species except broadleaf species specified for sowing and other weeds where specifically listed .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num submissions and records the specified inspections samples records and certificates shall be made available or submitted to the superintendent for acceptance prior to the commencement of associated work .
accepted samples shall become the agreed minimum standard and approved source of supply .
the contractor shall be responsible for programming all inspections and review of samples and allow num working days notice to the superintendent .
samples records and certificates shall be provided to the superintendent at least num working days prior to bulk delivery .
the contractor shall provide the following before commencement of the relevant landscape work strikethrough inapplicable items below inspections plant stock for all plant species samples mulch imported topsoil .
records evidence of origin of indigenous provenance plant material analysis certificates for grass seed details of suppliers soil tests on topsoil copies of fertiliser labels .
num supply of materials all materials shall be supplied by the contractor unless otherwise noted .
if any materials are supplied by the department of state growth a joint inspection of the materials shall be made by the contractor and the superintendent following delivery of the materials to the site .
the materials if satisfactory shall thereafter become the responsibility of the contractor .
a general supply of plant stock all plants shall be of the type height container size and trunk caliper specified in the plant schedules specification and planting plans .
these are minimum requirements .
no substitution of plants shall be allowed without the written agreement of the superintendent .
table num plant stock supply properties property requirement general requirements all plants shall be hardened off for a minimum num weeks in conditions matching prevailing conditions on the works site .
species integrity and labelling plants shall be true to type and clearly labelled with at least one label per species per delivery batch .
container supply sizes tubes shall be at least num litres in volume .
cells shall be at least num litres in volume .
other sizes shall be as specified .
root ball occupancy roots shall be adequate to fill the container .
samples shall demonstrate that num of soil volume remains intact when the unsupported rootball is shaken .
table continued next page department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num plant stock supply properties continued property requirement root ball integrity plants shall display a large well developed and healthy fibrous root system with repeated and sequential division with no evidence of root curl restriction or damage .
the root ball shall not be pot bound and shall generally have roots penetrating to the edge of the pot .
except for monocots with fibrous root systems plants with girdling spiralling or jrooting present in root systems will not be acceptable .
uniformity of plant growth the size shall be in proportion to the container size and species .
tube stock and cell stock shall not have shoot height greater than num times the depth of the container .
caliper trees shall be self supporting .
health and vigour plants shall show vigorous tip growth and foliage size texture and colour consistent with that shown in healthy specimens of the species .
plants shall have undamaged limbs and trunk .
free of pests and diseases plants shall be free from pests and diseases at time of delivery with visible attack from previously eliminated pests and disease restricted to num of foliage such that long term success of the plant is not affected .
weed free plants shall be provided in containers free of weeds .
b supply of indigenous plant stock a species listed on the planting schedule shall be classed as an indigenous plant if the plant is likely to have occurred within num km of the project site prenum .
the contractor shall source seed or other propagules for indigenous plant stock from within or as close to the project area as practicable and from areas with similar soil type same parent material and rainfall to minus num mm ari .
seed shall be collected in accordance with florabank guidelines and codes of practice httpwww.florabank.org.au .
further to these guidelines seed shall not be collected more than num km from the project site without prior agreement with the superintendent .
grasses and wetland species may be sourced up to num km from the project site in areas with the same soil type and similar or lower annual rainfall .
where a distinct form of a species occurs naturally in the local area that form shall be used .
the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary native flora collection permits from the department of primary industry parks water and environment .
the contractor shall submit documentation of origin of indigenous provenance plant material which shall include the following details for each seed lot species name storage code collection locality latitudelongitude or amg approximate number of parent plants sampled approximate number of plants in that local population .
all seed lots of the same species collected at different localities shall be supplied as a separate seed lots .
the provenance shall be tracked through propagation to planting for possible future seed collection purposes .
the format of the seed collection records shall be a spreadsheet compatible with microsoft excel .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c supply of pesticides herbicides applied as a spray shall include sufficient coloured dye to identify application areas for at least num days .
d supply of site topsoil site topsoil shall be used wherever possible in preference to imported topsoil .
topsoil is defined as the weathered surface layer of soils that includes organic matter .
the contractor shall be responsible for ensuring the growing medium supports normal healthy growth of the specified planting .
the contractor shall determine when soil testing is required and shall undertake soil tests to establish what soil amendments and macro and micro nutrients are required to be added to the topsoil .
the contractor shall notify the superintendent of any topsoil characteristic which may reduce the performance of any plant species or grass mix .
e supply of imported topsoil in the event that site topsoil is not available or is not adequate to achieve the specified depth of topsoil the contractor shall supply imported topsoil to achieve the total specified depth of topsoil .
imported topsoil shall comply with the following properties table num imported topsoil blend supply properties property requirement general requirements imported topsoil shall be suitable for supporting healthy plant growth of the specified and scheduled species .
texture the texture shall either match the site topsoil texture or provide a light to medium friable sandy loam with a clay content num capable of handling when moist but lacking cohesion so that it will fall apart easily .
extraneous material and contaminants the topsoil shall be free of sods of subsoil rubbish petrol and oil contaminants lime etc and meet the requirements for clean fill in epa victoria publication numclassification of wastes as fill material and shall have contaminant levels less than the concentration listed in table num of that document .
stones shall be num by dry weight with stone size not exceeding num mm .
dry bulk density kgmnum bulk density shall be num .
soil nutrients adequate levels to support normal plant growth for the scheduled species .
organic matter by mass decomposed matter shall be num by mass and undecomposed matter shall be num by mass .
weed content and pathogens soil shall meet as num num .
no noxious weeds noxious seed or phytophthora cinnamomi .
table continued next page department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num imported topsoil blend supply properties continued property requirement wettability mmmin soil shall meet as num num soil ph num num phosphorous content mgkg olsen method num electrical conductivity dsm soil shall meet as num num dispersibility category soil shall meet as num num nitrogen drawdown ndinum soil shall meet as num num permeability soil shall meet as num num toxicity soil shall meet as num f supply of fertilisers fertilisers for newly grassed areas shall be npk num with trace elements .
fertilisers for planting areas and advanced trees shall be slow release with a num month release period and suitable for the establishment of plant types sizes and species specified in the plant schedules .
g supply of gypsum gypsum calcium sulphate shall comply with all relevant requirements under tasmanian law .
only manufactured gypsum shall be used .
gypsum derived from recycled plaster board shall not be used .
sodium shall not exceed num by mass .
h supply of wood mulch chipped or shredded all wood mulch shall be supplied delivered handled and applied in accordance with as num. i imported wood mulch wood mulch shall comply with the following properties table num shredded or chipped wood mulch general supply properties property requirement general requirements mulch shall meet as num table num for composted or pasteurised mulch .
mulch type shall have fibrous properties which interlock the particles so that installed mulch is not blown away by wind .
purity mulch shall be free of soil and weeds plant pathogens vermin and toxins .
plywood composite timber product and painted timber shall not exceed a combined maximum of num by weight total .
mulch shall be free of treated pine exposed sharp metal plastic and other litter .
sizing meet as num table numa in planting areas adjacent to either roads posted at num kmh pedestrian or cycle paths or recreational open space num of particle size shall be no wider than num mm and no longer than num mm .
no particles longer than num mm .
in planting areas adjacent to roads posted at num kmh num of particle size shall be no wider than num mm and no longer than num mm .
no particles longer than num mm .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num ii site mulch site mulch available from the chipping of onsite indigenous or nonweed vegetation shall be used where possible .
any species that could have weed potential by seed or vegetative fragments shall not be recycled in the landscape works .
mulch shall satisfy the purity and sizing requirements shown in table num. i supply of weed control mat and erosion control mat the contractor shall supply and install jute or approved equivalent biodegradable fire retardant weed and erosion control mat as indicated on the drawings or as specified .
weed control mat shall be minimum num grams per square metre and erosion control mat shall be num grams per square metre .
the surface of the mat shall permit water infiltration .
j supply of tree guards stakes and marker stakes tree guards shall be either opaque plastic and of sufficient gauge and uv inhibitor to ensure a minimum two year life or minimum num litre cartons of sufficient construction to ensure a minimum num month life .
tree guard stakes and marker stakes shall be sufficiently robust to be driven into the ground securely support the tree guards and ensure a minimum two year life .
k supply of grass seed grass seed shall comply with the following properties table num grass seed properties property requirement species and proportion type a stabilisation mix for redundant roads surface drains and prepared embankment batters sterile ryecorn num by count ryegrass var victorian num by count ryecorn var concorde num by count chewing fescue num by count hard fescue num by count sheep fescue num by count white clover var huia num by count sub clover var trikkala num by count browntop bent num by count red creeping fescue num by count type b traffic island and medians ryegrass var victorian num by count chewing fescue num by count ryegrass var fine leaf num by count hard fescue num by count sheep fescue num by count white clover var huia num by count sub clover var trikkala num by count red creeping fescue num by count minimum seed purity num and shall not contain noxious weed seed minimum germination rate num at date of supply department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num the quality and specified properties of all seed shall be analysed and certified by either a nata national association of testing authorities or ista international seed testing authority laboratory .
labelling of all seed shall comply with the australian seed federation national code of practice for seed labelling and marketing .
l supply of sterile grass seed sterile ryecorn secale cereale seed shall be used for the stabilisation of areas to be subsequently sown or planted and for stabilisation of temporary batters and stockpiles .
num pest and weed control a pest and weed management procedures the contractor shall develop and implement site specific pest and weed management procedures to control pest and weed populations .
the procedures shall consider pest animals plants fungi and other pathogens that may impede plant establishment .
weed management procedures shall include removal of weeds from their existing locations before during and after site clearing topsoil stripping and landscape works .
weed management procedures shall minimise the spread of weeds in topsoil to other locations within and outside the site .
in addition to sections num and num or num pest and weed management procedures shall include control of soil borne pathogens including but not limited to phytophthora cinnamomi armillaria sp .
and soil borne weeds .
b general requirements pesticides shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
where offlabel use of pesticides is considered desirable to achieve pest control requirements the contractor shall be responsible for the investigation and procurement of offlabel permits .
the contractor shall advise the superintendent of any proposed offlabel pesticide use prior to pesticide application .
weed and pest control personnel shall be qualified and experienced in the use of pesticides control of weeds prevention of pesticide drift and identification of target and non target species found on site and included in the planting schedules .
the contractor shall prevent runoff into waterways of pesticides not registered for use in waterways .
if nontarget areas or plants are damaged during weed control works then the contractor shall be responsible for the reinstatement of those areas to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
records of herbicide use shall be made available to the superintendent upon request .
c preplanting weed control preplanting weed control shall be undertaken to ensure that planting areas and new grassed areas are free of visible weeds prior to the commencement of planting and grassing .
weed control shall be programmed and implemented to deplete the potential weed seed bank within the topsoil to be used in planting beds .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num setting out of landscape softworks the contractor shall set out the location and shape of planting areas in accordance with the landscape drawings .
the contractor shall comply with the plant density requirements and planting offsets as shown in the plant schedules .
individual plants shall be located in accordance with the drawings such that the mature form of the plant will be in accordance with austroads road design guidelines including clear zone and sight distance requirements .
num site preparation further to the requirements of section num the contractor shall provide the soil preparation described in table num .
all elements of soil preparation proceed in order from left to right .
table num soil preparation requirements situation initial ripping of subsoil prior to topsoil placement minimum topsoil depth cross ripping cultivation planting areas in disturbed areas flatter than numhnumv min num mm deep at max num mm spacing .
leave all batters with roughened subsoil to assist with keying of topsoil .
num mm min num mm deep planting areas in disturbed areas steeper than numhnumv min num mm deep at max num mm spacing between parallel to and num from contour .
leave all batters with roughened subsoil to assist with keying of topsoil .
num mm planting areas in undisturbed areas min num mm deep at max num mm spacing min num mm deep grassing in disturbed areas min num mm deep num mm max spacing num mm except num mm in swales min num mm deep num mm max spacing grassing in undisturbed areas min num mm deep individual tree planting including advanced trees within grassed areas .
the area of treatment is num mnum per tree .
min num mm deep at num mm max spacing num mm in disturbed grassed areas min num mm deep max num mm spacing notes disturbed areas include any area of cut batter fill batter site of excavation including borrow pit site of dumping including fill mound drains swales or area driven over by machinery resulting in soil compaction .
disturbed areas also include any areas where topsoil is effectively absent or areas of soil with dry bulk density exceeding the maximum shown in table num .
undisturbed areas are those areas with the pre construction soil profile retained intact without compaction or soil loss .
initial ripping in granitic soils should be parallel to the contour .
topsoil on grassed verge areas shall be left firm .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num a soil additives including gypsum soil additives including any material used to modify the chemical properties of the soil shall be applied by the contractor prior to physical ripping and cultivation and in accordance with results and recommendations from site topsoil analysis tests .
the contractor shall supply and install gypsum to the subsoil where subsoils are dispersive as num num .
the contractor shall apply sufficient gypsum to ensure soils are not dispersive incorporating gypsum during ripping to a minimum depth of num mm .
the contractor shall adjust the soil ph if the soil including subsoil to a depth of num mm is not in the range of num .
where salinity requirements for existing unmoved site subsoil or topsoil do not meet the acceptable range in as num num the contractor shall notify the superintendent .
b ripping the contractor shall undertake any ripping specified .
ripping shall occur when soil is at or approaching the plastic limit of dryness .
ripping shall be postponed when the soil is at or wetter than field capacity .
narrow tines shall be used in rocky ground and winged tines in other ground types .
rock and rubbish brought to the surface shall be removed and disposed .
the contractor shall inform the superintendent of sites where the presence of rock prevents the specified minimum ripping depth being achieved and implement alternative techniques such as a standard tine to maximise planting bed ground preparation depth .
ripping shall not occur within the extent of existing vegetation areas marked for protection or within the dripline of existing woody plants .
in the vicinity of woody plants to be retained with greater than num mm trunk diameter at breast height num times the height of the tree measured horizontally from the tree trunk shall be considered and marked as an area to be protected .
for trees less than num mm diameter the area to be protected shall be the area within the dripline .
any planting to be carried out within these protected areas shall be done using hand cultivation techniques to minimise damage to existing tree roots zones .
where existing planting beds are to be extended the unplanted areas shall be ripped as described above .
hp the contractor shall make available each ripped planting area individual tree planting and grassing area prior to mulching planting or grassing .
the contractor shall not proceed until the superintendent acknowledges requirements for ripping have been met .
in areas where ripping is not practicable the contractor shall submit alternative methods to achieve an equivalent result to the superintendent for review .
c topsoil application following subsoil preparation topsoil shall be spread on planting areas and grassed areas .
topsoil shall not be compacted .
weedy site topsoil shall not be spread to other locations on the site .
weedy topsoil shall be handled in accordance with the contractors weed management procedures .
d cultivation cultivation shall be undertaken to break soil down to a tilth with num of the volume composed of clods less than num mm in diameter .
cultivation equipment that might create a hard pan beneath the depth of cultivation such as rotary hoes and other powered cultivators shall not be used .
in the event of saturated ground conditions cultivation shall be delayed until the ground has dried out to a suitable condition .
where ripping and topsoiling is sufficient to allow easy manual excavation of soil to a depth of num mm or more cultivation may be omitted .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num cultivation shall not occur within the extent of existing vegetation areas marked for protection or the dripline of existing woody plants .
hand cultivation shall be used within root zones of trees to be retained .
e topsoil finished surface levels after cultivation and trimming the contractor may lightly compress topsoil for stability on slopes .
vibrating plates shall not be used .
the contractor shall ensure dry bulk density does not exceed the following tablenum maximum dry bulk density of soils for planting and grassing soil texture as determined by as num maximum dry bulk density for topsoils clay soils num gcmnum num gcmnum on slopes steeper than num loams num gcmnum sandy soils num gcmnum the finished level of grassed areas shall be i not higher than num mm below weepholes or dampproof courses in adjacent walls ii level with the bottom of fence plinths iii level with adjacent pavements kerbs pits and other structures .
the finished level of garden bed mulch andor topsoil shall be tapered so that the finished mulch andor topsoil levels meet flush with the adjacent surfaces .
the contractor shall ensure these conditions are maintained and there is no compaction of prepared soils before planting .
hp the contractor shall make available each ripped topsoiled and cultivated planting area individual tree planting and grassing area prior to mulching planting or grassing .
the contractor shall not proceed until the superintendent acknowledges requirements for topsoiling and cultivation have been met .
in areas where topsoiling or cultivation is not practicable the contractor shall submit alternative methods to achieve an equivalent result to the superintendent for review .
f removal of unwanted matter the contractor shall remove unwanted matter .
unwanted matter includes the following table num unwanted matter mown grass areas planting areas any weeds plastic metal glass or material toxic to plants surface stone rock building rubble greater than num mm in diameter clay lumps sticks and exposed tree roots greater than num mm diameter any weeds plastic metal glass or material toxic to plants any visible surface stone rock building rubble greater than num mm in diameter clay lumps sticks and exposed tree roots greater than num mm diameter department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num g existing planting areas existing planting areas shall exclude areas of naturally occurring remnant vegetation .
prior to undertaking site preparation or planting within existing plantations all dead severely damaged num intact canopy and fallen trees and shrubs shall be removed from the plantation .
woody weeds with any seed or vegetative material capable of regeneration are to be removed and disposed ofoffsite .
any severely pest affected vegetation that can not be successfully treated using pesticides or any other treatment shall be removed and disposed of offsite .
all remaining vegetation within the plantation is to be retained and protected from direct and indirect damage from ground preparation weeding mulching and infill planting .
remaining vegetation in the existing plantation shall be assessed for damaged dead or diseased limbs and branches .
all such limbs and branches on existing vegetation with a diameter greater than num mm in urban areas and num mm in rural areas are to be removed .
all pruning works including deadwooding canopy uplifting and weight reduction shall comply with the requirements of as num .
the contractor shall obtain all necessary permits and obtain approval from the superintendent prior to the pruning or removal of local native vegetation .
num mulching a wood mulch shredded or chipped the contractor shall install wood mulch to all planting areas unless otherwise specified .
mulch shall extend at least num metre beyond plant centres at the outer edges of all planting areas .
if space does not permit this in median separator or splitterisland planting mulching shall extend to the back of kerb .
the contractor shall install num metre diameter mulch rings around all individual tree plantings .
mulch depths in all situations shall be a minimum num mm and maximum num mm .
mulch shall be raked to a even neat appearance and kept clear of plant stems to avoid collar rot .
b weed control mat and erosion control mat the contractor shall install weed control mat for planting areas steeper than num and in planting areas prone to flooding or within num m of waterways swales wetlands and sedimentation ponds or elsewhere as specified .
weed control mat and erosion control mat shall be laid and anchored in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num planting a planting the contractor shall carry out planting so as to ensure healthy vigorous growth of plants .
in the event the specified plant is unlikely to be suited to the asconstructed growing conditions the superintendent shall be notified .
holes in heavy soils or on batters shall be prepared so as to ensure adequate drainage .
holes shall not be left smooth sided in basalt or plastic soils .
drill or auger hole diggers shall only be permitted where soils have been cultivated .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num planting holes shall be backfilled with friable topsoil free of debris rocks and clods greater than num mm in diameter .
b fertilising the contractor shall fertilise advanced trees and where specified andor identified by the contractors soil analyses other planting areas with fertiliser in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
c initial watering the contractor shall saturate each plant within num hours after planting .
cells and tubes shall be irrigated with a minimum num litres of water per plant .
other container sizes shall be irrigated with a volume of water greater than the container size .
under no circumstances shall any plant be planted into a dry planting hole soil moisture at wilting point or drier .
if the soil is dry the planting hole shall be saturated with water prior to planting .
num grassing a seeded grassing the contractor shall seed grass to all areas indicated to be grassed on the drawings and all areas disturbed by the contractor which will not be a planting area or managed as remnant indigenous vegetation .
grass seed shall be sown at minimum num kgha if drilled or num kgha if broadcast distributed evenly to achieve an even and dense grass cover .
germination rate shall be minimum num cover within num weeks and num cover within num months of sowing .
if germination has not been achieved in any grassed area within num weeks except during december to march then the areas shall be reseeded with the specified grass seed mix .
b fertilising the contractor shall apply fertiliser evenly over the prepared surface in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
c first mow the contractor shall carry out the first cut when at least num of the grassing area to be cut has grown to minimum num mm and maximum num mm height .
mow to a minimum height of num mm .
less than num the height of the grass shall be removed in the first cut .
num landscape maintenance a scope of maintenance landscape maintenance tasks shall begin prior to practical completion as specified in clause numd and shall continue until the completion of the defects liability period for the whole of the works or the defects liability period of the landscape works whichever is the latter .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num maintenance of the landscape work shall include the following tasks ireplanting iiweed control iiiwatering ivmowingslashing vreseeding of seeded grass areas vipest and disease control vii remulching viii pruning ixmaintaining the site in a neat and tidy condition xrepair and removal of tree guards and stakes xirepairs to erosion affected areas xii stockpile areas .
b maintenance program and joint inspections the contractor shall prepare and submit a maintenance program showing sufficient information to enable the landscape maintenance works to be evaluated and shall show as a minimum the following inspection visits during the period of maintenance maintenance works during the period of maintenance including an outline of replacement planting regime and proposed pest and weed management activities .
quarterly joint inspections shall be undertaken each year by the contractor and the superintendent after commencement of the defects liability period .
any remedial work shall be performed within three weeks of the date of inspection .
grassing and planting may be delayed until suitable conditions prevail subject to the agreement of the superintendent .
c plant performance requirements shrub and groundcover planting bed areas shall achieve the following performance requirements table num performance requirements for shrub and groundcover planting areas num months after practical completion num months after practical completion minimum num ground closure minimum num ground closure all plants showing healthy growth all plants showing healthy growth performance indicating probable num ground closure at num months after practical completion performance indicating probable num ground closure at num months after practical completion planting that does not meet the above performance requirements shall be remulched and replanted annually to num of the original planting density for the area of planting area gaps .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num tree planting areas shall achieve the following performance requirements table num performance requirements for tree planting previous num months rainfall minimum growth rate tubescells minimum growth rate advanced trees more than num mm num mm per annum num mm per annum num num mm num mm per annum num mm per annum less than num mm num mm per annum num mm per annum tree planting that does not meet the above performance requirements shall be replaced annually to achieve num of the original specified planting numbers .
planting that does not meet the performance requirements because of soil conditions the site shall be reprepared and replanted at the contractors expense .
d maintenance tasks the contractor shall maintain the works as follows in accordance with the requirements of this specification the drawings and plant schedules .
i noxious weeds and weeds to be removed eradication of noxious weeds and weeds to be removed over the whole site shall commence from the date of possession of site .
the weed eradication targets shall be achieved within six months of possession of site and then shall be maintained .
the contractor shall eradicate all state prohibited weeds all regionally prohibited weeds all regionally controlled weeds the following weeds of national significance wons specify the following priority weeds identified in the local catchment management authority weed action plan specify ii mown grass weed control weeds within grass areas are to be managed from cultivation of new grass areas .
mown grass shall be maintained to control broad leaf herbaceous and woody weed populations .
weed control shall be implemented to control broadleaf weeds that exceed num cover in urban areas or num over in rural areas .
weed control shall occur prior to the weed plant reaching flowering .
areas of native broadleaf cover among mown grass shall be brought to the attention of the superintendent prior to spraying .
the superintendent will direct whether these areas shall be treated .
bare ground that results from weed control activities shall be cultivated and regrassed to establish a minimum num grass cover .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num iii weed control in planting areas and individual tree plantings weeds within planting areas and around tree plantings are to be managed from when cultivation of the planting site is complete .
all planting areas shall be managed by the contractor to maintain a minimum of num weed free surface with no weeds taller or broader than num mm at all times and all weeds are to be removed prior to the production of viable seed .
weeds within individual tree plantings are to be managed for a radius of not less than num metres at each planting location .
iv pest animals and diseases the control of pests and diseases shall begin before the first planting .
the contractor shall maintain all plants free of insect infestation and plant disease so that healthy vigorous plant growth is sustained .
minor infestations of native pests and diseases on indigenous plants not threatening survival or healthy growth need not be controlled .
the contractor shall provide protection to plants from vertebrate grazing animals .
all planting killed by grazing animals shall be replaced .
if more than num of planting in a planting area shows signs of damage by grazing animals the contractor shall take immediate action to prevent further grazing damage .
as a minimum the contractor shall immediately install tree guards or suitable protective fencing securely around all plants subject to vertebrate grazing .
where chemical repellents are to be used to prevent grazing the repellent shall be applied until the growing tip of the plant is beyond the grazing height of the pest animal subject to the approval of the superintendent .
v replanting maintenance for replanting shall begin as soon as planting has begun in a planting area .
plants which die or do not achieve the specified growth performance shall be replaced and replanted at the contractors expense .
the contractor shall program and allow for the propagation and supply of plants for any replanting during the current or next available planting season .
a full pass of replanting shall occur at least once in each year of the defects liability period .
replanting shall be undertaken either in autumn during the months of april or may or spring during the months of september or october .
replanting outside of these times can be undertaken with approval from the superintendent .
vi watering the contractor shall water all plants as necessary to ensure continued healthy and vigorous growth from time of planting .
vii grass mowing specification writer to strikethrough one of the following and delete this comment mowing of all grass areas shall commence from possession of site .
mowing of all grass areas shall commence from the earlier of sowing or road opening to traffic .
in addition to areas grassed by the contractor the contractor shall maintain all other grassed areas within the limits of work in accordance with routine maintenance specification rmnum grass mowing section num of standard specification for roadworks and bridgeworks .
areas with less than num grass cover for each grassed area within three months after sowing shall be resown by the contractor .
the contractor shall ensure that num cover is maintained throughout the duration of the maintenance period .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num viii remulching maintenance of areas mulched shall begin from the first planting .
areas mulched with shredded wood mulch that do not have full foliage cover at ground level shall be maintained at a minimum consolidated depth of num mm by the contractor .
remulching is not required where shrub or groundcover canopies have fully connected foliage .
ix pruning pruning maintenance shall begin from the first planting .
the contractor shall prune trees and shrubs to remove damaged limbs and branches with a diameter above num mm .
tree branches likely to form a dominant u or v shaped crotch shall be pruned to a single leader .
all pruning and removal of living or dead stems greater than num mm diameter shall be in accordance with as num pruning of amenity trees .
x maintaining the site in a neat and tidy condition at any time the site is accessible to the public the contractor shall keep the site in a neat and tidy condition free of litter debris or extraneous materials not associated with the works .
litter that may be carried from the site by wind or water shall be controlled collected and removed by the contractor from possession of site .
xi maintenance of tree guards and stakes maintenance of tree guards and stakes shall begin from installation .
tree guards shall be maintained by the contractor to ensure healthy vigorous plant growth is not inhibited .
tree guards shall be removed when the plant reaches num mm in height .
tree guards shall be removed prior to final completion of the contract unless otherwise directed by the superintendent .
marker stakes shall be removed when the plant reaches the height of the stake .
xii repairs to erosion treated and affected areas maintenance and repairs to erosion treated and affected areas shall begin from the earlier of installation of treatment or erosion occurring .
the contractor shall maintain all areas of erosion protection treatments from the earlier of installation of treatment or erosion occurring and shall repair all damage or erosion which arises .
such areas shall be reprepared and reprotected as necessary to minimize erosion occurring and to establish a stable condition .
xiii intervention standards in addition to the above requirements the contractor shall maintain the landscaping works in accordance with the intervention and rectification standards specified in section num for surface drains and verges grass mowing edge trimming grass and weed control tree and shrub management noxious weed control litter control .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num pavement markings this section crossreferences sections num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent part num.a general part num.b pavement markings for new works part num.c pavement markings for maintenance works part num.d painted pavement markings part num.e long life pavement markings department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num part num.a general num.anum general this section covers the requirements for materials and application of pavement markings including a supply and application of pavement marking paint and glass beads longitudinal lines intersection markings and other markings on the road surface for all new installations and maintenance of pavement markings b supply and application of thermoplastic or coldapplied plastic material and glass beads and pliant polymer tape for all new installations and maintenance of pavement markings c fixing of both reflective and nonreflective raised pavement markers to asphalt concrete or sealed pavements using epoxy adhesive or hot melt bitumen adhesive .
num.anum definitions pavement marking the term used to define all linemarking roadmarking and raised pavement markers .
linemarking the term used to define all longitudinal lines such as centre lane edge turn and continuity lines .
roadmarking the term used to define all transverse lines and markings applied by hand such as stopgive way lines pedestrian lines arrows and legends .
maintenance of pavement markings refers to the refreshing or replacement of an already existing pavement marking .
new pavement markings refers to applying pavement markings to a new surface where no pavement marking exists i.e .
after reseals asphalt resurfacing newly constructed pavements and modifications to existing pavement markings .
initial coat the term used to define initial coat of painted markings placed prior to the final coat .
final coat the term used to define the final application of paint .
raised pavement marker a device placed on a pavement which may be a non reflective marker a device to provide a degree of delineation during daylight owing to the contrasting colour reflection and profile with respect to the pavement surface .
also a device which reflects ambient light during the daytime and to a limited degree when illuminated at night .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num reflective marker a device which produces an effective point source of light at normal highway viewing distances by reflecting incident light in directions close to the direction from which it came .
also a device to provide a degree of delineation during daylight owing to the contrasting colour reflection and profile with respect to the pavement surface .
temporary reflective marker a temporary device performing the same function as a reflective marker but with an intended life of not more than two weeks under average traffic conditions .
retroreflectivity a property of some materials such as solid glass beads to reflect incident light in directions close to the direction from which it came .
retroreflectivity is the value of reflected light measured in millicandellaluxsquare metre and is used as a measure of light reflected by pavement markings .
retroreflectometer a device used to measure retroreflectivity .
for the purpose of this contract the geometry of the retroreflectometer shall be based on num m observation geometry .
urban area an area in which a a speed limit of num kilometres per hour or less applies and is not a speed limit which applies only because of a temporary reason such as roadworks or a street event or b there are buildings on land next to the road or where the street lighting poles are not more than num m apart for i a distance of at least num m or ii if the length of the road is less than num m over the full length of the road .
rural area an area that is not an urban area .
num.anum standards the dimensions and colour of pavement markings shall conform to the following standards a vicroads traffic engineering manual volume num as listed in section num b state roads standard drawings for pavement markings paint and long life material shall be white except for no stopping markings which shall be yellow or as otherwise specified or required in state roads standard drawings for pavement markings .
num.anum inclusion and deletion of job items a the superintendent may delete any work subject to notice of deletion being given one month prior to the proposed programmed date .
the contractor will be notified in writing of such deletion and the contract sum adjusted by the price tendered in the schedules for the job items deleted .
b no additional payment will be made as a result of the deletion of any work or job item .
however where the deletion of job items results in a contract sum reduction of more than num per cent of the original contract sum the deletion of job items in excess of this amount will be treated as a variation under clause num of the general conditions of contract .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c the superintendent may request the contractor to undertake additional pavement marking works at sites not listed in the schedules .
these works will be treated as a variation under clause num of the general conditions of contract .
num.anum materials pavement marking materials shall conform to the following standards .
a raised pavement markers i raised pavement markers shall comply with the relevant requirements of as num part num as listed in section num. ii temporary raised reflective pavement markers shall comply with the relevant requirements of as num as listed in section num and shall be at least num mm in width and to a height of num mm with reflective material on both sides and include protective covers for the reflective material .
b adhesive hot melt bitumen adhesive shall comply with section num hot melt bitumen adhesive for raised pavement marker installation .
other types of adhesive materials shall only be used with the approval of the superintendent .
c linemarking and roadmarking paint all paints shall be approved under the australian paint approval scheme apas .
paint shall comply with the requirements of as num for solventborne paint or asnzs num for waterborne paint as listed in section num. d glass beads i glass beads shall be used on all applications of material and for all pavement markings and shall conform to the requirements in asnzs num and the australian paint approval scheme apas specification num as listed in section num. ii intermix glass beads for use in long life material applications shall conform to asnzs num and the australian paint approval scheme apas specification num. iii the amount of heavy metals in the beads shall not be greater than that specified in specification num. iv pristine glass beads type bhr type bhr glass beads shall comply with the properties of type b as num dropon glass beads with an additional high performance retroreflectivity requirement requiring the delivery of a minimum num mcdlux.m when tested in accordance with a modified appendix m of as num described below .
section mnum apparatus clause a dry film thickness of paint will be num m section mnum procedure clause b weigh num num grams of glass beads section mnum procedure clause e wet film thickness of paint will be num m num m .
e thermoplastic pavement marking material thermoplastic pavement marking material used under this contract shall comply with the requirements of clause num.anum and shall provide a functional service life of a least six years allowing for fair wear and tear .
department of state growth vicroads october num section num page num of num department of state growth august num section num page num of num f coldapplied plastic pavement marking material coldapplied plastic pavement marking material used under this contract shall be a poly methyl methacrylate resin based pavement marking material conforming with the colour luminance and bead content requirements of clause num.anum and shall provide a functional service life of at least six years allowing for fair wear and tear .
g pliant polymer pavement marking tape pliant polymer pavement marking tape intended for use under this contract shall be approved by the superintendent .
num.anum site preparation site preparation shall be the sole responsibility of the contractor as part of the works including a the removal of existing unsound obsolete or redundant pavement markings b the removal of any foreign materials and debris within reasonable limits .
num.anum placing raised pavement markers markers shall be placed in accordance with the manufacturers specification for pavement markers and the adhesives used shall be in accordance with clause num.anumb .
adhesive on the exposed surfaces of the marker shall be removed .
where a new or replacement marker is not positioned correctly it shall be removed and a new marker placed .
markers shall be protected from traffic after placing and any marker dislodged by traffic shall be removed and replaced with a new marker .
on concrete and asphalt pavements wherever possible markers shall be placed clear of longitudinal or transverse joints and on all pavements markers shall be placed clear of any surface cracks or positions from which markers have been removed and the surface is damaged .
num.anum removal of pavement markings where required the contractor shall remove existing pavement markings to the standard approved by the superintendent and appropriate to the marking being removed .
any pavement damage caused by the installation or removal of pavement markings included in the works shall be the contractors responsibility .
rectification of any pavement damage to line and level shall be completed on the same day in accordance with the superintendents requirements .
on sections of road on which the contractor has been directed to replace or remove raised pavement markers the contractor shall also repair damage to the pavement caused by the loss of pavement markers .
num.anum layout of markings the contractor shall be responsible for the layout of and spotting out for markings in accordance with the department of state growth standard drawings for pavement markings .
num.anum tolerances on pavement markings the contractor shall comply with the tolerances as shown in table num.anum when installing pavement markings .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num.anum tolerances on pavement markings markings tolerance a pavement markings num distance between the centreline of the marking and the centreline of the set out mark num mm distance between the centreline of the completed marking and the centreline of the previous marking num mm width of completed painted markings num mm of the specified dimensions width of completed markings for long life materials num mm to num mm length of completed stripes and blocks num to num of the specified length gap between double lines num mm to num mm of the required num mm gap num b raised pavement markers i markers in line with broken segments transverse position num mm of the centreline of segments longitudinal position num m of the specified position ii markers in a longitudinal group transverse position num mm of specified position and num mm of a line joining the centres of the end markers longitudinal position num m spacing of markers within the group num mm of specified spacing iii markers adjacent to an unbroken line clearance to edge line num mm of the specified dimensions longitudinal mismatch between markers in transverse pairs num mm longitudinal position lesser of num m or num iv orientation of reflective markers lower edge of the reflective face at num to num to centreline of roadway or adjacent line c thermoplastic profiled lines i tolerances on dimension line width num mm num mm line height num mm num mm extrusion breadth num mm num mm extrusion spacing num mm extrusion shape num mm at any point from rectangular shape ii tolerances on position distance between the centreline of the marking and the centreline of the setout num mm length of the completed lines num to num of the specified length longitudinal position of individual extrusions num mm of any previously applied profiled lining num apparent line of the markings is a smooth continuous alignment when viewed in the direction of the line .
num maintenance of pavement markings if the gap between the existing lines is num mm or less the gap shall not be reduced by the maintenance application .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num.anum protection of work the contractor shall be responsible for protecting the work by an appropriate means until the work can be trafficked without the glass beads being disturbed from their embedded position or the paint being picked up andor spread by passing traffic .
if paint pickup or glass bead disturbance does occur the superintendent may direct that the marking be reapplied and paint or long life material spread by traffic be removed .
num.anum acceptance of work pavement marking shall comply with the specified requirements as detailed in the following clauses a num.anum materials b num.anum tolerances on pavement marking c num.anum acceptance of retroreflectivity d num.anum acceptance of colour e num.dnum minimum requirements for painted markings f num.enum minimum requirements for long life markings where a particular item fails to satisfy any of the above requirements a the contractor shall rectify the failed sections within num weeks of testing at the contractors expense b subject to approval by the superintendent reduced payment for outoftolerance markings may be made in accordance with clause .
hp where removal of unsuitable pavement marking is required the method of removal shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent before removal works commence .
num.anum acceptance of retroreflectivity the contractor shall measure the level of retroreflectivity using the procedure set out in the current revision of vicroads test method rcnum determination of retroreflectivity of pavement markings as listed in section num .
acceptance of the retroreflectivity of any line or road marking will be based on a lot basis .
the average of the six test site site retroreflectivity values srv shall be calculated for each lot .
each lot shall achieve an average minimum level of retroreflectivity as specified in table num.anum acceptance of retroreflectivity .
table num.anum acceptance of retroreflectivity initial measurement additional measurement testing period num num num weeks num num months minimum level of retroreflectivity on sprayed seal surfaces num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum minimum level of retroreflectivity on asphalt and all other surfaces num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum num measured after application of the secondfinal coat of material .
measurements shall be forwarded to the superintendent no later than five days from when the measurements were taken .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num.anum acceptance of colour white markings the colour match test for white materials shall be based on luminance factor and conducted in accordance with as num using field method num of as num appendix hnum as listed in section num .
all markings shall have a colour difference detected as whiter than natural colour system ncs swatch s numn at all times during the defects liability period .
yellow markings the colour match test for nonwhite yellow materials shall be conducted in accordance with as num using field method num of as num appendix hnum using the reference swatch sample ncs s numynumr .
all yellow markings shall be an approximate match to natural colour system ncs swatch s numynumr at all times during the defects liability period .
measurements shall be forwarded to the superintendent upon request no later than five days from when the measurements were taken .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num part num.b pavement markings for new works strikethrough this part b for maintenance contracts num.bnum general this section covers the requirements for new pavement markings .
num.bnum scope of work the scope of work includes the supply of all materials and placement of pavement markings in accordance with this specification .
for new pavement marking the following works shall be undertaken as part of the works a immediately prior to resurfacing removal of any existing reflective and non reflective markers b placement of temporary reflective pavement markers including removal of protective covers after surfacing works c initial placement of pavement markings including reinstatement of any adjoining pavement markings blackened but not necessarily covered by the surfacing activity comprising reinstatement andor placement of initial coat of painted pavement markings reinstatement andor placement of other long life pavement markings reinstatement andor placement of raised pavement markers and removal of temporary raised reflective pavement markers d final coat of all painted pavement markings e reinstatement andor placement of profiled lines after the final coat of paint .
num.bnum limit of work for new pavement markings the limit of pavement marking works shall be the same as the limit of the new surfacing or as shown in section schedule of drawings .
num.bnum program for new pavement markings the contractor shall undertake pavement marking works in accordance with the following requirements .
a after surfacing works the initial coat of paint long life pavement markings other than profiled linemarking and raised pavement markers reflective and nonreflective on newly surfaced pavements shall be installed in accordance with the following timeframes aadt num and national highway within num hours of opening to traffic aadt num and num within num days of opening to traffic aadt num within num days of opening to traffic b all new painted pavement markings shall receive two applications of paint .
the secondfinal application shall be applied between num weeks after the initial application .
c the contractor shall apply profiled linemarking between num weeks after the final coat .
d for new works constructed clear of traffic all pavement markings shall be completed prior to opening of traffic .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num.bnum position of markings all markings are to be set out in accordance with the dimensions and spacings as required by the appropriate standard in clause num.anum .
hp paintingapplication of material shall not commence until the superintendent has inspected the set out and given consent to proceed unless an exemption has been granted in writing by the superintendent .
a new pavement markings shall be positioned in accordance with the following requirements i set out by the contractor in conformance with the appropriate standard required by clause num.anum ii applied within the tolerances listed in table num.anum .
b temporary reflective markers temporary reflective markers for new works shall be placed at the following minimum spacings on all longitudinal lane lines except that on any curve less than num m in radius the spacing shall not be more than num metre centres aadt num and national highway num metre centres aadt num and num num metre centres aadt num num metre centres num.bnum records and reporting a job completion report for new markings the contractor shall complete and forward to the superintendent a job completion report pavement markings .
b retroreflectivity report the contractor shall complete and forward to the superintendent a retroreflectivity report in a form approved by the superintendent showing the level of retroreflectivity determined for each test lot in accordance with the requirements of clause num.anum .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num part num.c pavement markings for maintenance works strikethrough this part c for new pavement markings num.cnum general this section covers the requirements for maintenance of pavement markings .
num.cnum scope of work the scope of work includes the supply of all materials and placement of pavement markings in accordance with this specification .
maintenance works shall entail preparing the site in accordance with clause num.anum and refreshing the existing pavement markings with the same material as the existing markings in accordance with this specification .
existing markings which are in longlife i.e .
thermoplastic coldapplied plastic pliant polymer roadmarking tape or other long durability nonpaint product shall not be maintained in paint unless prior approval has been given by the superintendent .
missing or badly worn long life markings shall be reported to the superintendent who may direct the contractor to maintain the markings in paint .
num.cnum limit of work for the maintenance of existing pavement markings the works shall include all existing tapers bell mouths at intersecting roads pavement widening and traffic lanes .
the limits of work at typical intersections are shown in section schedule of drawings .
num.cnum exclusion of roadworks for works involving the maintenance of pavement markings the contractor will not be responsible for maintaining pavement markings unless otherwise directed by the superintendent where it is evident that roadworks are taking place or will shortly take place which will interfere with the installation of the markings or which will damage the completed markings .
the contractor shall record the location of any road lengths not maintained and notify the superintendent .
the contractor shall state the reason as to why the location is not maintained prior to the pavement marking work being undertaken .
long life pavement markings that could result in thicknesses greater than nummm shall not be applied and shall be brought to the attention of the superintendant .
num.cnum program a for the maintenance of pavement markings the contractor shall submit the following programs as specified for review by the superintendent as part of the works .
i within two weeks of the date of award of contract a pavement marking program for the whole of the works that complies with section road inventory information .
this program shall be reviewed and updated at least annually .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num ii based on the list of jobs requested by the superintendent the contractor shall submit a monthly detailed program of planned pavement marking jobs at least five working days in advance of the following month .
the detailed program shall be in bar chart form or other suitable form approved by the superintendent including specific jobs to be undertaken with a time scale shown in days .
the program shall be in sufficient detail to identify dates covering the following activities date of linemarking date of roadmarking dates of placement of raised pavement markers date of retroreflectivity testing .
iii the contractor shall submit a weekly program confirming the crew locations for work that will be undertaken in the following week .
all pavement markings on individual job items shall be completed in the programmed month as specified in section road inventory information .
failure to meet this requirement may result in a reduced payment on that item in accordance with clause .
iv the works and the requirements for the works undertaken between the months of june and july shall be agreed between the contractor and the superintendent .
num.cnum inspection and replacement requirements for maintenance of raised pavement markers for maintenance of raised pavement markers the superintendent will conduct a routine program of inspections of the condition of raised pavement markers .
from the routine program of inspections requests for replacement of raised pavement markers will be made .
for the purpose of replacing raised pavement markers the contractor may program this based on a minimum run of num markers on urban road sections and m and a class roads and a minimum run of num markers on other road sections .
valuation of these works will be based on rates submitted in the schedules .
the contractor shall replace these markers within one month of the issue of a request from the superintendent .
num.cnum records and reporting a job completion report for maintenance of pavement markings the contractor shall complete and forward to the superintendent a job completion report pavement markings using the proforma included as attachment a to this section num for each job item in the schedules .
the contractor shall hold all records on electronic media in a form approved by the superintendent .
one electronic and one hard copy of each months completed work shall be forwarded to the superintendent together with the statement for payment under the contract .
b retroreflectivity report for both new work and maintenance of pavement markings the contractor shall complete and forward to the superintendent a retroreflectivity report in a form approved by the superintendent showing the level of retroreflectivity determined for each test lot in accordance with the requirements of clause num.anum .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num part num.d painted pavement markings num.dnum general linemarking shall be applied by a self propelled machine and stencils shall be used with all roadmarking .
all work must be undertaken by a contractor eligible for accreditation under the painting contractors certification programme pccp .
this programme is administered by the csiro .
completed markings shall be uniform in appearance from all angles of observation texture width and thickness and the surface shall be free from streaks overlaps unbeaded areas tyre marks stencil breaks or other defects .
edges and cutoffs should be neat and sharp and there shall be no visible runoff overspray dribbles splash or spillage on to the surrounding area or on to parked or passing vehicles .
the contractor shall be responsible for the cost of removal of paint from such vehicles .
glass beads shall be applied to the paint to produce a uniform coverage and be properly embedded and bonded over the whole painted surface .
glass beads shall be applied to all markings .
the contractor shall be responsible for any spillage on to the surrounding area and cost of any remedial action required .
num.dnum minimum requirements the minimum requirements of paint and glass beads shall be as shown in table num.dnum .
the contractor shall allow for any extra material required when placing on coarse chip seals .
this includes the retained quantity of glass beads to counter the phenomenon of reduced retroreflectivity due to road surface texture and directional visibility limitations .
table num.dnum minimum requirements paint and glass beads paint num glass beads num linemarking new markings initial application only num mm dft on sprayed seals num mm dft on asphalt and all other surfaces type dhr num remarking including second application on new markings num mm dft on sprayed seals num mm dft on asphalt and all other surfaces type dhr num roadmarking all marking num mm dft on sprayed seals num mm dft on asphalt and all other surfaces type bhr num the minimum dry paint film thickness dftspecified above shall be the end product thickness measured on a num mm x num mm sheet metal test plate without beads .
consideration shall be given to the texture of the road surface and the method of application used to achieve the requirements of this section .
num a minimum of num gmnum shall be retained in the painted marking for all glass beads .
num an alternative glass bead application rate shall be num gmnum of dhr with a separate drop of num gmnum of bhr provided that num minimum of the dhr beads is retained at the num to num month testing undertaken table num.anum .
retention of the dhr beads shall be demonstrated by photographs at each test site .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num part num.e long life pavement markings num.enum general long life pavement marking materials shall be prepared and used in accordance with the manufacturers specification .
all linemarking shall be applied using a selfpropelled rideon machine marking unless otherwise recommended by the marking manufacturer and approved by the superintendent .
glass beads shall be applied to all long life markings .
glass beads shall be sprinkled or sprayed on to the long life material while it is in a fluid state immediately after it has been applied to the pavement to ensure that the beads are embedded by a nominal num .
the surface beads shall be distributed to give a uniform coverage over the whole surface of the long life material .
completed markings shall be uniform in appearance texture width and thickness and the surface shall be free from blisters air bubbles tears lumps streaks overlaps unbeaded areas tyre marks or other defects .
edges and cutoffs shall be neat and sharp and there shall be no visible runoff overspray dribbles splash or spillage on to the surrounding area or on to parked or passing vehicles .
the contractor shall be responsible for the removal of pavement marking material from such vehicles .
num.enum minimum requirements the minimum requirements of long life materials and glass beads shall be as shown in table num.enum .
the contractor shall allow for any extra material required when placing on coarse chip seals .
this includes the retained quantity of glass beads to counter the phenomenon of reduced retroreflectivity due to road surface texture and directional visibility limitations .
table num.enum minimum requirements long life and glass beads material applied minimum thickness glass bead and other requirements thermoplastic sprayed markings num mm minimum thickness on longitudinal lines containing intermix beads and with a minimum of num gmnum of type dhr or type bhrnum dropon glass beads retained on the marking surface extruded line markings num num mm minimum thickness on longitudinal lines containing intermix beads and a minimum of num gmnum of type dhr or type bhr dropon glass beads retained on the marking surface extruded road markings num num mm minimum thickness on intersections containing intermix beads and a minimum of num gmnum of type dhr or type bhr dropon glass beads retained on the marking surface preformed markings num mm with a minimum skidding resistance value of num bpn british pendulum number and retroreflective properties agreed with the superintendant profiled lines num num mm minimum thickness with a minimum of num gmnum of type dhr or type bhr dropon glass beads retained on the marking surface table num.enum continued next page department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num.enum minimum requirements long life and glass beads continued material applied minimum thickness glass bead and other requirements coldapplied plastic sprayed line markings num num mm minimum thickness for longitudinal line markings only with a minimum of num gmnum of type dhr or type bhr glass beads retained in and on the marking surface sprayed road markings num num mm minimum thickness for all road markings containing intermix beads and a minimum of num gmnum of type dhr or type bhr dropon glass beads retained on the marking surface trowelled screeded or extruded markings num num mm minimum thickness of markings containing intermix beads and a minimum of num gmnum of type dhr or type bhr dropon glass beads retained on the marking surface pliant polymer tape as approved by the superintendent num the minimum thickness specified shall be the height above the upper road surface level or above the existing marking as appropriate .
num the minimum thickness specified shall be the height of the material between the glass beads on a metal test plate .
all other thicknesses shall be as measured on a metal test plate including glass beads .
num pristine dropon type b glass beads type bhr as per clause num.anum .
num.enum additional requirements for profiled lines the contractor shall provide measurements of rib height length width and spacing of profiled lines at a minimum of num evenly spaced readings per kilometre or part there of .
for lengths of less than num metres a minimum of num evenly spaced readings per num metres shall be provided .
the contractor shall carry out remedial work to rectify defective sections of profiled lines where they a were not installed to specified dimensions or distorted in shape or lost shape such that the height of individual extrusions is less than num mm above the top of adjacent road surface aggregate particles over more than num per cent of the profiled edge lining job item or b have shattered or no longer adhere to the road surface over more than num per cent of the profiled edge lines job item or c have shattered or no longer adhere to the road surface over a continuous length exceeding num m. department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num attachment a to section num page num of num job completion report pavement markings contract no .
job no .
road name map reference from from map type to map reference to lane kilometres carriageway kilometres responsible region other regions municipalityies connect equipment no .
state growth use only mabc no .
state growth use only road category comments pavement marking maintenance paint maintenance treatment material date of marking vicroads state growth use only next schedule date next program date rpm including rrpm maintenance treatment material date of marking state growth use only next schedule date next program date long life rrpm special and other special treatments including part treatments and other rpm treatments treatment material date of marking state growth use only next schedule date next program date department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num attachment a to section num page num of num job completion report pavement markings contract no .
performance reporting treatment performance criteria date of testing state growth use only next schedule date state growth use only next program date painted markings tolerances on pavement markings retroreflectivity daylight visibility colour skid resistance raised pavement marker tolerances on pavement markings retroreflectivity daylight visibility colour long life markings tolerances on pavement markings retroreflectivity daylight visibility colour skid resistance the contractor shall include in the job completion report the actual status of the item compared to the specified requirement for that item including tolerances on pavement markings retroreflectivity daylight visibility colour and skid resistance .
i certify the above details as correct .
print name signed department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num attachment a to section num page num of num job completion report pavement markings contract no .
painted marking detail pattern material unit of measure quantity standard stripe num mm km semi barrier num mm km double barrier num mm km edgeline num mm km single solid lane line num mm km edgeline num mm km single solid lane line num mm km single solid centreline num mm km continuity line num mm km turn lines num mm m lane lines num mm m chevron diagonal bars or pedestrian crossing stripes num mm m straight ahead arrow num mnum including num angle arrow each turn arrow num mnum each combination turnstraight arrow each double turn arrow num mnum each combination straightdouble turn arrow num mnum each u turn num mnum each pedestrian lines num mm m stop lines num mm m statcon holding bars num mm wide num linegap per block statcon stop line num mm m statcon give way num mm wide num linegap per block statcon centreline num mm wide usually num m long m freeway exit ramp block num m wide usually num m long m statcon roundabout blocks num mm wide num linegap per block special legends keep clear including num mm long clearance bars each small bicycle symbol each large bicycle symbol each rail x each transit lane tl each bus lane each other department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num attachment a to section num page num of num job completion report pavement markings contract no .
raised pavement marker detail marker type material unit of measure quantity raised retroreflective pavement marker white mono or bidirectional each raised retroreflective pavement marker white mono or bidirectional glass faced each raised retroreflective pavement marker yellow red or green mono or bidirectional each raised nonreflective pavement marker ceramic each raised nonreflective pavement marker ultra hard plastic alloy each long life markings detail pattern material st sprayed thermoplastic et extruded thermoplastic sct screeded thermoplastic ca cold applied plastic unit of measure quantity standard stripe nummm km semi barrier num mm km double barrier num mm km edgeline num mm km single solid lane line or centreline num mm km continuity line num mm km edgeline num mm km single solid lane line num mm km single solid centreline num mm km continuity line num mm km profiled lines km turn lines num mm m lane lines num mm m chevron diagonal bars or pedestrian crossing stripes num mm m straight ahead arrow num mnum including num angle arrow each turn arrow num mnum each combination turnstraight arrow each double turn arrow num mnum each combination straightdouble turn arrow num mnum each department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num attachment a to section num page num of num job completion report pavement markings contract no .
long life markings detail continued pattern material st sprayed thermoplastic et extruded thermoplastic sct screeded thermoplastic ca cold applied plastic unit of measure quantity u turn num mnum each pedestrian lines num mm m stop lines num mm m statcon holding bars num mm wide num linegap per block statcon stop line num mm m statcon give way num mm wide num linegap per block statcon centreline num mm wide usually num m long m statcon roundabout blocks num mm wide num linegap per block keep clear including num mm long clearance bars each small bicycle symbol each large bicycle symbol each rail x each transit lane tl each bus lane each other traffic signal site job item no .
principal road name intersecting road other intersecting road map reference from map type responsible region other regions municipalityies connect equipment no .
state growth use only mabc no .
state growth use only road category comments department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num attachment a to section num page num of num job completion report pavement markings contract no .
pavement marking maintenance paint maintenance treatment material date of marking state growth use only next schedule date next program date rpm including rrpm maintenance treatment material date of marking state growth use only next schedule date next program date long life rrpm special and other special treatments including part treatments and other rpm treatments treatment material date of marking vicroads use only next schedule date next program date i certify the above details as correct .
print name signed department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num section num traffic signal installation num general a scope this section covers the requirements for the installation and remodel of traffic signals for the purpose of this specification traffic signals shall include i intersection traffic signals ii pedestrian operated traffic signals iii pedestrian zebra crossings iv emergency vehicle access signals v ramp metering signals .
b general requirements the contractor shall be responsible for the supply installation and commissioning of the traffic signal project as shown on the drawings or as specified .
num definitions specialist terms used within this section are defined in as num road and traffic engineering glossary of terms .
the following term is also used in this section remodel the full or partial rebuilding of an existing traffic signal site for the purpose of upgrading site equipment andor adding to deleting from or modifying the existing traffic signals .
num abbreviations the following abbreviations are used in this section acma australian communications and media authority as australian standard dc direct current dusc a modem device used for connecting rural controllers to the scats system via a dialup connection numa traffic signal pedestal numm in length numb traffic signal pedestal numm in length numc traffic signal pedestal num m in length type num push button post numm in length hp hold point juma joint use mast arm jup joint use pole ma mast arm led light emitting diode qh quartz halogen tps thermoplastic sheathed department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num num site plan the scope of works equipment requirements and placement of equipment shall be as shown on the drawings .
abbreviation and symbols used on traffic signal plans are detailed in table num below .
table num abbreviations and symbols for traffic signal plans department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num num referenced and related specifications standards and drawings unless otherwise approved by the transport commission the layout and positioning of traffic signal poles and aspects shall conform to the requirements of a as num manual of uniform traffic control devices part num traffic signals b austroads guide to traffic management part num traffic control and communication devices .
the fabrication and supply of all components for traffic signal works shall conform to all relevant department of state growth specifications and australian standards .
all traffic signal equipment shall conform to the general requirements of a tcs series specifications b tc series specifications c as num manual of uniform traffic control devices d asnzs num wiring rules e tasnetworks service and installation rules .
the individual requirements of the tasnetworks shall apply for matters relating to the provision of mains power .
the relevant requirements of the australian communications and media authority acma and relevant communications network operators shall apply to the provision of all communications facilities .
all traffic signal works shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate traffic control tc series standard drawings .
standard drawings referred to in this section are listed in table num below .
table num list of standard drawings drawing number title tcnum traffic signal post types numa numb numc num tcnum traffic signal mounting brackets tcnum typical layout flashing pedestrian crossing tcnum typical numm mast arm installation numm outreach tcnum num way terminal assembly tcnum lantern and mounting bracket orientation tcnum traffic signal mounting arrangements tcnum lantern orientation and mounting heights for nummm lanterns on standard posts tcnum lantern mounting details tcnum post installation details for signs tcnum pedestal location under or through verandahs .
table continued next page department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num table num list of standard drawings continued drawing number title tcnum traffic signal visor types and dimensions tcnum terminal assembly for use with ma jup and juma tcnum foundation for pedestals tcnum bored pile foundation for ma jup and juma tcnum spread footing foundation for ma jup and juma tcnum traffic signal controller foundation details tcnum num core for intersections cable connections tcnum multicore cable connections for pedestrian operated signals tcnum assembly and installation of consumer mains and connection tcnum traffic signal underground ducting tcnum underground conduit warning sign tcnum site identification encoder for traffic signal controllers tcnum suitable arrangement dual num core terminations for complex intersection tcnum suitable arrangement dual num core terminations for diamond interchange tcnum cable pit access cover and frame nummm diameter tcnum cable pit installation details tcnum loop pattern and installation details symmetripole tcnum detector pit installation details tcnum rag bolt assembly mnum commercial and high strength grade nummm x nummm pcd tcnum rag bolt assembly for cabinet mnum nummm x nummm x nummm tcnum standard cabinet label side mounted tcnum pedestrian label tcnum electrical communication trenches tcnum general arrangement at point of supply a num way terminal assembly is used in tasmania .
note all standard drawings specifications and guidelines are available for downloading from the department of state growth website at httpwww.transport.tas.gov.auroadcontractorspecifications department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num num equipment to be supplied by the department of state growth the department of state growth will supply or arrange for the supply of the following items a the traffic signal controller and associated vehicle detector units b communication devices such as modems dusc units .
the department of state growth reserves the right to add to delete from or modify the list of items to be supplied by the department for any specific project .
the contractor shall be responsible for the care transport and handling of all department of state growth supplied materials issued to the contractor .
num equipment to be supplied by the contractor other than those items listed in clause num the contractor shall be responsible for the supply of all equipment items and peripherals required for the completion of the works .
where applicable all equipment proposed for use shall hold current department of state growth type approval certification or product acceptance .
all equipment materials and fittings supplied by the contractor are to be new .
the contractor is to ensure that all equipment used is compatible with all other equipment in the installation .
num project commencement a preconstruction the contractor shall be responsible for locating and proving all underground and overhead services which may be affected by the works and for coordinating the activities of the service authorities in the locating of services and carrying out of any alterations to services .
any consultation with and authorisation required from other authorities under relevant utility regulations and codes shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
b preinstallation meeting the contractor shall arrange a preinstallation meeting consisting of representatives of the contractor department of state growth traffic signals maintenance service authorities municipalities and others as appropriate .
the contractor shall ensure that the agenda for the meeting includes those matters that need to be resolved for the project to proceed expeditiously .
at the meeting the contractor shall mark or utilise gps capability the position of pedestals poles controller bases pits and conduits in accordance with the drawings in the presence of and with the approval of the superintendent .
where trees poles obstructions services or other site conditions prevent or adversely affect sight lines or obstruct the location as specified the contractor shall determine an alternate location for the affected aspect of the works in discussion with parties as appropriate .
department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num the marked location of each item as above shall be agreed by the appropriate parties prior to excavation of foundations and shall constitute agreement of the location only and shall in no way relieve the contractor from his responsibilities under the contract .
on satisfactory completion of the preinstallation meeting the contractor will be issued a copy of the preinstallation report by the appropriate party .
num conduits the contractor shall install all conduits in accordance with asnzsnum .
all electrical conduit installation works for traffic signals must be carried out by or under the direct supervision of a licensed electrician and in accordance with the requirements of worksafe tasmania .
all communication conduit installation works are to be carried out under the on site supervision of a licensed electrician .
a plan showing the asconstructed conduit locations and depths shall be provided to the superintendent and a copy left in the controller cabinet .
num pits all cable pit installation works for traffic signals must be carried out by or under the direct supervision of a licensed electrician and in accordance with the requirements of worksafe tasmania .
all communication pit installation works are to be carried out under the on site supervision of a licensed electrician .
num foundations foundations shall be located in accordance with the drawings and as approved at the preinstallation meeting .
when locating foundations the contractor shall ensure that all the required clearances of the installed hardware are achieved .
no part of the signal hardware is to be closer than num mm behind the face of the nearest kerb line or closest vehicle path if no kerb is present .
in accordance with standard drawing tcnum the minimum clearance of num m shall be achieved between the lowest part of a lantern installed on an outreach and the roadway directly beneath it .
foundations and footings shall be as specified in the standard drawings for the specific item of equipment they are to support as listed in table num below .
department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num table num standard foundation types foundation type used for standard drawing pedestal numa numb numc type num tcnum bored pile ma juma jup tcnum spread footing ma juma jup tcnum rag bolt assembly all poles tcnum controller traffic signal controller tcnum rag bolt assembly traffic signal controller tcnum the standard foundation for an ma juma and jup shall be a bored pile .
where the installation of a bored pile foundation is not feasible and the contractor proposes to install a spread footing or adopt an alternative design the contractor shall obtain the prior approval of the superintendent .
pedestal type shall be clearly identified and labelled on approved traffic signal plans .
where the contractor proposes an alternative footing design to those shown on the standard drawings the contractor shall provide sufficient evidence and proof engineering to the superintendent to confirm that the proposed footing arrangement is fit for purpose .
wherever possible when foundations for pedestals and poles are cast into concrete structures two rag bolt assemblies shall be installed similar to the arrangement shown in standard drawing tcnum .
hp all conduit pit and foundation works shall be inspected by the superintendent prior to the contractor covering the works .
num supply and placement of concrete in foundations a general the contractor shall be responsible for the procurement of all concrete in accordance with the requirements of as num. b placement of concrete where concrete is placed in a bore hole it shall be compacted with immersion type high frequency vibrators .
concrete shall be placed through a tremie tube and shall not be dropped from a height greater than num m. concrete which is being discharged from a tremie shall be guided away from the reinforcement so that segregation is not caused by the flow of concrete impinging on the reinforcement .
alternative methods for placing concrete in the bored hole from those specified in this clause may be used subject to a review by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num c project testing all grade num mpa concrete shall be sampled and tested in accordance with as num and as num .
each sample of concrete shall be tested for compressive strength and slump .
the contractor shall develop and implement a site sampling procedure for concrete quality assurance .
all concrete samples shall be taken at the point of discharge prior to placement .
each sample of concrete for standard compression tests shall comprise a minimum number of num cylinders .
a minimum of num cylinder per sample shall be tested at num days and a minimum of num cylinders per sample shall be tested at num days .
d testing and acceptance of concrete on the basis of num day compressive strength a minimum of num cylinders per sample shall be tested at num days after casting .
the specification requirements will be met if the compressive strength of each sample as determined from the average value of the test cylinders is not less than the specified minimum num day compressive strength and provided that the compressive strength of any cylinder in each sample is not less than num of the specified minimum num day compressive strength .
should the strength of any sample fail to meet the specified minimum num day compressive strength the concrete represented by that sample will be rejected .
the contractor shall then develop a procedure to achieve the specification requirements and provide for the superintendents review and approval .
num traffic signal hardware a standing of pedestals and poles pedestals and poles shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements i pedestals and poles shall be fastened to the rag bolt assembly cast into the foundations as detailed on standard drawing tcnum with the nuts tightened to num nm of torque ii pedestals and poles shall be installed such that they are vertical when fully loaded iii pedestals shall not be stood within num hours of casting of the foundations iv jup ma and juma poles shall not be stood within num days of the casting of the foundations v poles shall be installed such that the access door is on the face furthest from the traffic flow .
b lanterns lanterns shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements i all traffic signal lanterns installed on any new or major remodel installation where all lanterns are being replaced shall be led type ii for minor remodels incandescent lanterns are permitted however the mixing of led with incandescent or qh lanterns is not permitted .
c installation of hardware hardware shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements i all lanterns shall be mounted vertically using standard straps securely fixed to mounting brackets or lugs ii upper mounting brackets shall be oriented and fixed to the top of pedestals in accordance with standard drawing tcnum department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num iii twoway and fourway lower mounting brackets shall be fixed as required to provide suitable mounting points for the installation of lanterns iv the top and bottom of each lantern must be firmly attached to ensure that it will not rotate v each lantern shall be attached so as to provide an unobstructed line of sight to the traffic which it controls and such that the potential to be hit by vehicles is minimised vi external cables and conduits shall be fixed to pedestals poles or supports using suitable plastic cable ties vii cable connections to lanterns shall be of sufficient length to hang below the cable entry point on the lantern but not hang below the lower mounting strap as shown on standard drawing tcnum viii cable connections to lanterns shall be made with continuous lengths of cable no joins shall be allowed this will typically require the cables supplied with lanterns to be replaced with longer cables when installed on mast arm outreaches ix junction boxes key switches and all other electrical hardware shall comply with the relevant australian standards .
d lantern mounting heights lantern mounting heights shall be in accordance with the following requirements i mounting heights for lanterns on numa numb and numc pedestals shall be as specified on standard drawing tcnum ii lanterns installed on the vertical section of an ma jup and juma shall be mounted on lugs so as to give the same mounting heights for the respective lantern positions as specified on standard drawing tcnum iii lanterns on the outreach of an ma or juma shall be mounted in accordance with standard drawing tcnum iv num and num aspect lanterns shall be installed to achieve the mounting height of an aspect of the same colour as if it were part of a num aspect lantern v num aspect bicycle lanterns shall be mounted at the same height as pedestrian lanterns vi aspects fitted with white or lunar white lenses shall be mounted at the same height as a green aspect vii lanterns mounted on poles not belonging to department of state growth shall be mounted at the same heights as specified on standard drawing tcnum viii internally illuminated signs shall be mounted at a height to provide a clearance of not less than num m from the finished surface level ix flashing yellow signals used at pedestrian crossings shall be mounted at the height specified on standard drawing tcnum .
e lantern alignment the alignment of lanterns shall be in accordance with the following requirements i vehicle lanterns shall be aligned so as to provide optimum visibility for approaching traffic considering road alignment speed visibility and other site characteristics department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num ii generally lanterns shall be aimed at a point on the centre of the approach at a distance before the stop line as shown in table num below table num lantern alignment distances lantern distance primary num secondary num tertiary num iii pedestrian lanterns shall be aimed at the midpoint of the cross walk on the opposite side of the carriageway to which it applies .
f target boards visors and louvres all target boards shall be metal type .
target boards shall be fitted to all lanterns in accordance with standard drawing tcnum noting the tasmanian standard includes a white border .
visors for led lanterns shall be fitted as specified in table num below .
table num visors for led lanterns lantern location visor type cutaway ma or juma outreach num both sides lh primary num both sides rh primary num both sides secondary and tertiary num short none pedestrian and bicycle num none note refer to standard drawing tcnum for details of the visor types .
louvres shall not be installed on led lanterns unless otherwise specified .
all louvres fitted to visors shall be attached using pop rivets .
vertical louvres shall be installed where shown on the drawings or otherwise specified .
g installation of pedestrian push buttons pedestrian push buttons shall be installed in accordance with following requirements i pedestrian push button assemblies shall be mounted clear of any access openings and such that the centre of the button is num m above finished surface level as shown on standard drawing tcnum ii pedestrian push button assemblies shall be mounted within proximity of ramps preferably in ramp wings to enable reachable access iii the face of the button shall be facing the path of the walk way iv the tactile arrow indicator shall be oriented to indicate the walk direction to which the button relates with the arrow pointing up to indicate a straight ahead walk direction department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num v where a single button is mounted in a median a double headed arrow plate shall be used with the arrow oriented horizontally and the front face of the button shall be parallel with the walk direction vi a seam of silicone sealant shall be applied between the back of the button housing and the pole to prevent the ingress of water into the pole the sealant shall be applied across the top and on both sides of the button vii a label complying with standard drawing tcnum shall be installed on the pedestal or pole directly above each pedestrian push button .
h audio tactile devices where specified on the drawings audio tactile units of the type nominated shall be mounted as shown on standard drawing tcnum .
i puffin pedestrian operated signals where a puffin pedestrian user friendly and intelligent crossing is specified the contractor shall install approved puffin crossing walk detectors in accordance with as num manual of uniform traffic control devices part num traffic signals and the austroads guide to traffic management part num traffic control and communication devices .
j flashing pedestrian crossings flashing pedestrian crossings shall be installed in accordance with standard drawing tcnum .
k attachment of equipment to other supports attachment of traffic signal equipment to service poles or structures which are not owned by the department of state growth shall be by means of matt stainless steel straps coach bolts or masonry bolts as applicable or such other methods as approved by the relevant authority the owner of the pole or structure and the superintendent .
above ground conduits attached to structures or poles owned by other agencies shall be num mm diameter galvanised wrought iron conduit or steel sheathing of an approved type .
above ground conduits shall extend up to a termination point for the electrical cables or to a height of num meters whichever is the lower .
l noncommissioned lanterns the faces of all installed but not yet operating lanterns shall be covered .
at sites that have not been switched on all vehicle lanterns shall be covered with not in use signs .
at remodel sites or sites where existing lanterns are operating all nonoperating lanterns shall be covered with a blanking sign or may be turned so as not to be visible to traffic .
m awnings where pedestals need to be installed under or through awnings or verandahs the installation shall be in accordance with standard drawing tcnum .
the contractor shall be wholly responsible for providing and making good any holes through awnings which may be necessary for the erection of pedestals .
where pedestals pass through awnings a clearance all round shall be left between the pedestal and the awning and finished such that water from the awning can not flow into the opening .
any alterations to the awning shall be carried out by a qualified plumber and with the agreement of the owner of the awning .
department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num num electrical system all electrical works conduits fittings materials and installations shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num wiring rules for all traffic signal related works .
a point of supply point of supply for traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the following requirements i the basic connection application shall be completed and submitted by the principal .
ii the contractor shall arrange for the installation of the point of supply with tasnetworks at the location approved at the preinstallation meeting .
iii the main switchboard shall be the traffic signal controllers main switchboard located within the signal controller cabinet .
iv the main switchboard shall contain a main circuit breaker and a suitably sized main fuse .
this is additional to tas networks service fuse .
v access to the main switchboard shall be within the traffic signal controller cabinet .
vi where possible the earth stake shall be installed in the base of the signal controller pit otherwise it shall be installed in an adjacent pit vii the main switchboard shall contain the men multiple earthed neutral link viii the circuit breaker controlling the traffic signals shall be clearly marked .
the contractor shall lodge all relevant associated documentation to comply with the requirements of the tasnetworks and worksafe tasmania for the provision of a num v num hz single phase power supply for final termination on not less than a num amp service fuse .
b site cabling cabling shall be installed in accordance with asnzs num and the following requirements i only type approved cable shall be used ii interconnecting traffic signal cables shall be drawn through the conduits and pits as shown on the drawings iii a draw cord shall be left in each conduit at the completion of the cabling iv a spare length of not less than num m of each interconnecting cable shall be coiled in each cable pit v all cables shall be installed in a manner which ensures that sheathing and insulation are not damaged vi any cables damaged during installation or remodel works shall be immediately replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the department of state growth vii site cables shall be appropriately restrained at the point of termination e.g .
top of pedestals access points in mas jups etc .
to ensure that stress on terminations due to the self weight of the cable is minimised viii cables at the traffic signal controller base shall be coiled in the pit and appropriately secured ix sufficient cable shall be provided to reach num m above the controller base x no jointing of any multicore linking or communications cable shall be permitted .
department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num c cable sizes and wiring arrangements with the exception of terminations at the controller all cables and wiring shall be installed by the contractor and shall comply with the following requirements i at intersection traffic signals the traffic signal controller and all upper mounting assemblies andor terminal assemblies in mas jumas and jups shall be connected by a num core cable in a continuous ring circuit arrangement in accordance with standard drawing tcnum ii at pedestrian operated signals dual carriageway the traffic signal controller and all upper mounting assemblies andor terminal assemblies in mas jumas and jups shall be connected in sequence by a num core cable circuit in accordance with standard drawing tcnum iii at pedestrian operated signals single carriageway the traffic signal controller and all upper mounting assemblies andor terminal assemblies in mas jumas and jups shall be connected in sequence by a num core cable circuit in accordance with standard drawing tcnum iv at flashing pedestrian crossing zebra signals the control equipment and all upper mounting assemblies andor terminal assemblies shall be connected by a num core cable v for spurs and flashing red or yellow signals the control equipment and all upper mounting assemblies andor terminal assemblies shall be connected in sequence by a num core cable branch circuit vi at ramp metering signals the traffic signal controller and all upper mounting assemblies andor terminal assemblies in mas jumas and jups shall be connected by a num core cable .
d cabling of pedestrian push buttons pedestrian push button detectors shall be connected by flexible num core cable each core shall have a cross sectional area of not less than num mm to the appropriate termination positions for the multicore traffic signal cables .
the termination of push button cable connections shall be as detailed in table num below .
table num pedestrian push button cable connections core colour function white push button blue push button return brown call record black call record return greenyellow earth e detector feeder cables detector feeder cables shall be used to connect detector loops to the traffic signal controller and shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements i detector feeder cable shall be a type approved num core or num core shielded cable num cable per loop and each cable pair shall be clearly and durably marked at both ends to enable positive identification .
ii the maximum length of any individual detector feeder cable shall not exceed num m. department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num iii the contractor shall connect the detector loop cables to the detector feeder cables in accordance with this section by the use of crimp links and resin filled heat shrink .
iv the num wires for each individual loop e.g .
numsa numfa numsb and numfb as shown in standard drawing tcnum shall be tied together in a knot located close to the conduit end .
v unused loop cable ends shall be left open circuit .
vi all terminations joined or unjoined shall be separately insulated and sealed against the ingress of moisture with heat shrink containing resin or another acceptable method approved by the superintendent .
vii each detector feeder cable shall have sufficient length to allow num m to be coiled in the pit and to reach num m above the top of the controller base .
viii each feeder cable shall be clearly marked or labelled to clearly identify the connected loop .
ix a cable diagram shall be provided to superintendent detailing the loop cablefeeder cable connections .
g miscellaneous cabling for miscellaneous cable usage refer to table num below .
table num miscellaneous cable usage application cable type branch circuits off a ring circuit num core traffic signal cable linking cable between the controller and public transport or emergency service facilities left labelled but unterminated at the controller base suitable multicore data cable or num core traffic signal cable h cabling of large sites for large sites where the standard allocation of cores can not be readily adopted the contractor shall draw up a proposed cabling scheme and submit this to the superintendent for approval .
suitable arrangements for the cabling of a large site and also for a freeway diamond interchange site are shown on standard drawings tcnum and tcnum respectively .
i installation of detector loops the contractor shall arrange for the installation of vehicle detector loops in accordance with the drawings .
vehicle detector loop installations shall conform to specification for the installation of inductive detector loop tcs num .
where there are num lanes each loop may be cut back to the same side of the road or num to each side .
where there are num or more lanes the loops shall be cut back to the closer side of the road .
table num shows some examples for typical installations .
department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num table num cutting of detector loops number of lanes loops cut to left kerb loops cut to right kerb num num num num num num num num num num num num cutting loops into steel reinforced concrete bridge decks shall be avoided unless authorized by the superintendent .
j electrical works for street lighting and other services where street lighting or other services areas to be installed they shall in no way be interconnected electrically with the traffic signal installation .
k testing of electrical works the electrical installation shall be tested for correct cabling by the contractor .
the contractor shall be responsible for all testing associated with the proving of the electrical circuits in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num wiring rules and asnzs num .
in particular the following tests shall be carried out prior to installation of lanterns and hardware i continuity of all active conductors ii continuity of neutral and elv conductors iii continuity of earthing system in accordance with clause num of asnzs num iv insulation resistance test of all field cables in accordance with clause num of asnzs num wiring rules .
hp the results of the above tests shall be recorded on the forms provided at the end of this section and a copy provided to the superintendent .
the contractor shall also supply a copy of the certificate of electrical compliance to the superintendent .
the department of state growth will not commission the installation in the absence of the cec .
following the installation of all lanterns and hardware the contractor shall carry out a flash test to verify correct installation prior to the department of state growth performing formal testing and commissioning .
department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num num public transport and emergency vehicle integration a signals at railway level crossings the contractor shall obtain all the necessary permits and approvals for working on and adjacent to the rail track owners or the railway operators property and equipment .
where specified on the drawings the contractor shall install a num pair approved communication cable colour coded between the traffic signal controller and the railway control equipment .
where traffic signals are to be installed on each side of the railway the contractor shall supply and install numx num mm diameter conduits with draw cords as shown on the drawings and agreed by the railway track owner .
the contractor should note one of these conduits shall be for the traffic signal ring circuit cables the other for any ancillary site equipment .
.b coordination with emergency vehicle operations where specified on the drawings and in a location approved by the superintendent and the owner of the affected properties the contractor shall provide a suitable cable refer to table num within a num mm conduit between the controller and the push button in the emergency premises .
num precommissioning a precommissioning site inspection upon completion of the installation works a complete precommissioning inspection shall be undertaken by the contractor .
the contractor shall provide num hours notice to the superintendent of the time of the inspection .
the contractor shall complete the precommissioning installation report and provide it to the superintendent .
any item found to be defective or incorrectly installed shall be replaced andor rectified prior to commissioning .
the contractor shall advise the superintendent if any aspect of the works has not been completed .
b provision of power the contractor shall arrange for the submission of all necessary paperwork inspections payment of fees etc .
other than the ongoing cost of electricity supplied to obtain connection to mains supply .
the contractor shall advise the superintendent when power is available at the site .
department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num num completion of site works and commissioning a switchon the department of state growth shall coordinate the site switchon and arrange for all involved parties to be on site .
hp prior to switching the signals on the department of state growth shall carry out a flash test of the installation to ensure that each lantern is connected to the correct cable core .
the flash test shall be witnessed by the superintendent and confirmed as acceptable . .
the contractor shall lodge copies of all applications and notices relating to the supply of power and wiring of the site together with the certificate of electrical safety to the superintendent .
the time and date of the switchon shall be recorded on the controller record card in the controller .
the contractor is responsible for recording the time and date of switchon and for the power consumption readings as required in the electrical test report .
b removal of redundant hardware all redundant components of the hardware and equipment except those components below the finished surface level at the pedestals shall be removed unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings .
hardware and equipment attached to the redundant pedestals shall be removed prior to cutting off and removal of the pedestals .
all holes and depressions formed by the cutting off and removal of pedestals and by the removal of any other items shall be made safe and reinstated to the level of the surrounding surface .
footpaths and paved areas shall be reinstated to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
the contractor shall be responsible for disposal of all redundant materials and hardware .
existing traffic signal equipment and hardware which is not reused but is to be salvaged shall be delivered in good condition to a location specified by the superintendent .
any disused cable pits shall be removed and backfilled to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num electrical test report site name suburbcity site no continuity test of all active cables core ohms core ohms core ohms earth num num neutral num num elv num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num test carried out by signed date print name company department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num insulation resistance test of all field cables core ohms core ohms core ohms neutral num num elv num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num test carried out by signed date print name company department of state growth department of state growth november num section num page num of num power consumption record site name suburbcity site no voltage current reading minimum current reading maximum readings carried out by signed date print name company department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num conduits and pits for underground wiring and cabling this section crossreferences section num .
if section num is relevant it should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the supply and installation of conduits and pits as necessary to provide for underground electrical wiring and communications cabling as shown on the drawings or as specified .
num materials a conduits unless otherwise specified the contractor shall provide all plastic conduits which shall comply with the following standards as appropriate asnzs num asnzs num asnzs num unless otherwise approved by the superintendent all conduits installed underground for electrical wiring traffic signals and traffic services shall be heavy duty grade rigid orange upvc conduit to asnzs num or profile wallsmooth bore hd upvc conduit to asnzs num .
unless otherwise approved by the superintendent all conduits installed underground for communication cables shall be heavy duty grade rigid white upvc communication conduit complying with asnzs num or profile wallsmooth bore hd upvc conduit to asnzs num and complying with all relevant australian communications and media authority acma publications and standards .
b conduit sizes conduit sizes shall be in accordance with the relevant utility and industry codes regulations and standards applying to their intended use .
conduit sizes for traffic signals street lighting and traffic services shall be in accordance with the relevant specifications guideline and standard drawings listed in table num .
table num installation type specification guideline drawing number traffic signals tcs num tcnum street lighting tcg num tcnum tcnum tcnum tcnum consumers mains tcnum trunk conduit system tcnum freeway camera site tcnum freeway help phone site tcnum freeway data station site tcnum department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c bedding and backfill materials unless otherwise specified the contractor shall supply all bedding and backfill material in accordance with the requirements of clause num. d pits unless otherwise specified the contractor shall supply all pits and lids in accordance with the requirements of clauses num and num .
num excavation boring and trenching unless otherwise specified all conduits under a road carriageway shall be installed by boring .
detailed proposals for boring under carriageways shall be submitted to the superintendent for review two weeks prior to the programmed commencement of work .
unless otherwise specified boring by water jetting will not be permitted .
unless otherwise specified the annulus between the bore and the carrierconduit shall be filled by pressure grouting .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings or specified borings and trenches shall comply with the following depth requirements a where conduits are laid under carriageway pavements the minimum cover from top of conduit to the pavement surface shall be num mm for freeways and arterial roads and num mm for local roads .
the minimum cover from top of conduit to the invert level of open drains shall be num mm .
b where conduits are laid under footpaths or under unpaved areas the minimum cover from top of conduit to the surface shall be num mm for low voltage circuits and num mm for extra low voltage circuits and communications cabling .
c where conduits are laid under tram tracks the minimum cover from top of conduit to the track surface level shall be num mm .
d where conduits are laid under railwayroad crossings the minimum cover from top of conduit to track surface level shall be num mm .
the conduit installation shall meet the requirements of the relevant rail authority .
an underground conduit warning sign shall be installed in accordance with vicroads standard drawing tcnum .
open trenching shall be permitted in unpaved areas and across unpaved subgrade areas .
where open trench methods are accepted the lines of trenches wherever practical shall be straight and form the shortest link between terminals .
where the open trench method of crossing under a carriageway pavement is accepted the line of the trench shall be at right angles to the carriageway and the edges of trenches located within a road pavement shall be sawcut .
adequate drains to approved outlets shall be provided from junction pits .
trenches shall be graded to allow condensation and seepage to flow from conduits to the outlet provided .
any drains or services disturbed during the excavation or laying of conduits shall be immediately reported to the superintendent and shall be reinstated promptly .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num installation of conduits all conduits shall be installed as shown on the drawings or as specified .
all conduits for electrical and communications cabling shall be installed to conform to the relevant requirements of controlling legislation regulations industry codes and standards including asnzs num electrical installations australiannew zealand wiring rules asacif snum installation requirements for customer cabling wiring rules and any other relevant requirements of the australian communications and media authority acma .
all conduit installation works for electrical wiring and communications cabling shall be carried out by or under the direct supervision of appropriately registered and licensed personnel provided by the contractor .
all conduit installation works for electrical wiring shall be carried out by or under the direct site supervision of a licenced electrical contractor as required by thebuilding standards and occupational licencing division of worksafe tasmania .
installation of conduits shall be carried out in accordance with the approved installation method for the type of conduit as shown in table num .
table num conduit type installation method hd upvc plain thrust bore open trench hd upvc profile wallsmooth bore num mm only open trench hdpe continuous must have id not less than that of num mm hd upvc directional bore conduits for traffic signals and traffic services shall be installed to the following requirements a all conduits shall terminate in a pit in accordance with vicroads standard drawing tcnum b only one size conduit shall be used for a complete run between pits unequal size conduits shall not be joined in the ground c all conduits shall be temporarily sealed prior to cabling to avoid blockage d changes in conduit direction or depth shall be made by natural set or in the case of bottom entry by means of a swept bend elbows or tees shall not be used e all conduit joints shall be correctly prepared and sealed with approved solvent cement f conduits for detector cables shall be installed as shown in vicroads standard drawings tcnum and tcnum and g a num mm electrical orange conduit shall be used to convey the detector feeder cable from the detector pit to the cable pit as shown in vicroads standard drawing tcnum .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num draw cords each conduit for electrical wiring and communication cables shall be provided with one synthetic draw cord not less than num mm diameter and with a minimum breaking strain of num kn .
where the conduit terminates in a pit not less than num mm of the draw cord shall be tied to a marker peg num mm x num mm not less than num mm long and left coiled in the pit .
where the conduit does not terminate in a pit the draw cords shall be tied to a marker peg num mm x num mm not less than num mm long driven firmly into the ground with the top num mm projecting above finished surface and painted yellow .
num backfilling a material unless otherwise specified materials used for bedding and backfilling shall be free from perishable matter and shall conform with the appropriate grading and plasticity index requirements specified in table num .
table num material sieve size as mm plasticity index num num num num num percentage passing by mass min max bedding num num num num selected backfill num num num num common backfill num num pavement material shall be as specified and shall comply with the relevant requirements of the appropriate pavement sections .
b bedding bedding material shall be placed and compacted for the full width of the trench to a depth of not less than num mm on an earth foundation or num mm on a rock foundation .
following compaction the bedding material shall be shaped sufficiently to maintain the conduit in line as the sections are placed in position .
shaping of bedding material is not required for conduits less than num mm nominal diameter .
when conduit sections are in position additional layers of bedding material shall be placed and compacted to a height num mm above the bedding previously placed .
c filling unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings selected and common backfill shall be placed and compacted as follows under around and above the conduit after the sections are bedded i conduits under area to be paved where the trench has been excavated from the design subgrade level or above the trench shall be backfilled to design subgrade level with selected backfill material and above that level with common backfill material or the specified pavement material .
where the trench is excavated from below design subgrade level the trench shall be filled with selected backfill material .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num ii conduits under area not to be paved the trench shall be backfilled with selected backfill material to a level of num m above the top of the conduit and with common backfill above that level .
iii conduits through existing paved area unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings the trench shall be backfilled to the existing subgrade level with selected backfill material and the pavement restored using materials in accordance with subclause e below .
d compaction unless otherwise specified bedding and backfill materials shall have during compaction a uniform moisture content within the range num to num of the optimum moisture content as determined in the standard compaction test .
where backfill material contains material retained on a num mm as sieve the standard compactive effort will be performed on the material passing the num mm as sieve and during compaction the moisture content of the material passing the num mm as sieve shall be in the range num to num of the optimum moisture content so determined .
bedding and backfill the whole of which passes the num mm as sieve shall be compacted to refusal using hand held mechanical plant .
detailed proposals for the compaction of backfill materials of nominal size greater than num mm shall be submitted to the superintendent for review before commencing work .
where specified pavement material shall be assessed for compaction in lots as defined in section num .
the number of tests per lot shall be three .
all pavement material shall have during compaction uniform moisture content within the range num to num of the optimum moisture content as determined in the modified compaction test .
all pavement layers shall be placed and compacted in layers to a density ratio of not less than num .
the calculation of density ratio shall be based on modified compactive effort .
e pavement composition pavement layer material type thickness mm num cable pits and pit lids cable pits shall be constructed and installed as shown on the drawings at the terminal of conduits or as specified .
cable pits for traffic signal installations shall be constructed and installed in accordance with vicroads standard drawings tcnum tcnum and tcnum .
pits shall be constructed such that the level of the top of the pit lid in place matches the surrounding finished surface level .
the top of the pit wall shall be neatly finished such that the lid fits without movement .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num all pits junction boxes or terminal pits for electrical purposes shall be either watertight or suitably drained .
all conduit connections to cable pits shall be neatly made and the ends of the conduits trimmed off and the area between the conduit and pit wall stopped with cement mortar .
heavy duty pit lids shall be provided where the pit is located in a road pavement .
all cable pit installation works for electrical wiring and communications cabling shall be carried out by or under the direct supervision of appropriately registered and licenced personnel provided by the contractor .
all cable pit installation works for electrical wiring shall be carried out by or under direct site supervision of a registered licenced electrical contractor as required by the building standards and occupational licencing division of worksafe tasmania .
num detector pits for traffic signals detector pits for traffic signals shall be installed as shown on the drawings or as specified .
detector pits and detector pit covers shall be constructed and installed in accordance with vicroads standard drawings tcnum and tcnum .
the pit cover shall be securely fixed to the pit using the fixing device supplied .
detector pits shall be located so as to ensure adequate separation between pits and other features such as expansion joints drainage electrical or communication pits culverts etc .
num cleaning of site surplus excavated material shall be removed from the road reserve .
areas affected by the work shall be restored to a condition similar to that which existed prior to the commencement of the work .
num identification and recording all conduit locations not identified by pits immediately installed at the ends shall be marked with num x num mm stakes projecting num m above the ground with the top num mm painted yellow stakes or as otherwise agreed by the superintendent .
conduits under road pavement shall be marked with stakes clear of the road pavement .
conduits not under road pavement shall be marked with stakes at the ends at changes of direction and at intervals of not more than num m. this staking will be additional to any marker pegs to which draw cords are tied .
unless otherwise specified the actual installed location and depth of conduits and location of pits shall be accurately recorded on asconstructed drawings in a format agreed by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num noise attenuation walls this section crossreferences sections num num num num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the requirements for the supply of materials and the erection of noise attenuation walls noise walls .
num general a the following shall be as shown on the drawings i type of noise wall ii acoustic requirements iii protective coatings iv foundation details .
b the structural design of the noise wall shall be as described in bridge technical note btnnum noise barriers .
c timber posts shall not be used .
d if an existing fence or noise wall is being replaced existing timber posts shall be removed .
e openings in noise walls for inspection maintenance and emergency access shall be provided in the position and of the size and type shown on the drawings .
f the design life of noise panels and their fasteners and fixings shall be as follows i posts and other structural components num years ii panels panel fixings and fasteners num years g if construction of the noise wall requires access over or work adjacent to a landscaped area the contractor shall take steps to minimise damage to vegetation .
the contractor must submit to the superintendent a methodology for avoiding damage to vegetation .
h if a noise wall is located on or adjacent to a private property boundary the contractor shall ensure that there is no damage to private property including gardens vegetation and garden furniture .
any damage to private property shall be repaired by the contractor to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
num noise wall materials all materials shall be supplied by the contractor and comply with the following a steel for posts and panels steel posts and other steel components shall be i compliant with the australian standard for structural steel hot rolled bars and sections ii compliant with the australian standard for coldformed structural steel hollow sections iii the grade specified on the drawings department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num iv supplied and fabricated in accordance with section num v galvanised in accordance with the australian standard for hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles section num .
on completion of galvanising components shall receive decorative coatings and finishes as specified on the drawings andor in the landscape architectural design brief .
galvanised components that have been damaged or cut shall be repaired with a minimum of two coats of inorganic zincrich paint in accordance with the australian standard for paints for steel structures inorganic zinc silicate paint and the australian standard for hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles and in accordance with section num .
after repair of the galvanising damaged paint coatings shall be repaired in accordance with section num. b concrete for foundations concrete for foundations shall be grade vrnum in accordance with section num. c concrete panels concrete panels shall have sufficient strength to resist the loads to which they will be subjected including the selfweight of other panels and the imposed loads due to earth pressure and other loadeffects due to thermal expansion handling and accidental impact .
d transparent panels i panels shall be as specified on the drawings .
ii panels shall have a minimum thickness of num mm .
iii if panel sizes are specified the dimensions are deemed to be at a material temperature of numc .
the contractor shall make allowance for temperature variations .
iv coloured or tinted transparent panels shall be as described on the drawings or in the architectural design brief .
v materials shall be scratch and faderesistant .
vi the physical properties of transparent materials shall be stable when subjected to sunlight atmospheric gases and liquids such that the panel will retain sufficient strength and rigidity to meet the requirements of the design for the duration of the design life .
vii recycled products may be used provided that their physical properties comply with this section .
e plywood panels plywood panels shall be i compliant with the australian standard for plywood structural ii made with structural plywood of the stress grade described on the drawings but not less than stress grade fnum iii made with bquality softwood face and back veneers iv compliant with the shape and dimensional requirements stated in the australian standard for plywood structural v free of spurs and splinters department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num vi consistent in texture and appearance vii of minimum density num kgm viii branded in accordance with the australian standard for plywood structural .
f preservative treatments of panels copper chromium arsenic cca preservatives shall not be used .
i preservative treatments for panels shall be compliant with the australian standard specification for preservative treatment plywood applied before construction applied to areas of timber revealed by cross cuts such as holes notches and rebates in accordance with the manufactures recommendations .
ii the lowest panel together with any panel in contact with the ground is to be veneer treated to hazard level num in accordance with the australian standard specification for preservative treatment plywood .
all other plywood is to be treated to hazard level num. iii veneer treatment shall be compatible with the specified stain finish .
iv panels shall be redried or airdried to a moisture content of less than num per cent after preservative treatment to ensure dimensional stability prior to erection .
treated timber shall not be resawn dressed planed or modified except as required at specified points for fitting or joining .
hp the contractor shall submit to the superintendent preservation and grading certificates from the treatment plant showing chemical retention penetration of the preservation and compliance with the requirements of the australian standard specification for preservative treatment plywood before delivery of material to the site commences .
methods of analysis and testing of the material must comply with the australian standard .
g fire resistance panels shall have a low ignitability defined as an ignitability index less than num in accordance with the australian standard for methods for fire tests on building materials components and structures and a low spread of flame defined as a spread of flame index less than num in accordance with the australian standard .
materials for fire retardants for plywood shall be waterbased and nontoxic .
h fittings and fastenings i all fittings and fasteners shall have a num year design life and shall be suitable for external use in moderate industrial or marine environments corrosivity categories cnum and cnum classified in accordance with iso num. ii channels shall be galvanised in accordance with the australian standard for hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles .
iii the use of selftapping screws is not permitted .
iv panels shall not be drilled .
v panels shall be mounted in metal channels fixed to the posts which shall include rubber or similar gaskets to grip the panels but have sufficient freedom to allow their normal range of thermal expansion and contraction without damage to the panel or posts .
vi fasteners for connections between channels and structural members shall be of grade num stainless steel that complies with aticspnum fasteners for structural purposes .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num i coatings antigraffiti coatings shall comply with section num and the following requirements i clearfilm type sacrificial antigraffiti coatings shall not be used ii liquid sacrificial antigraffiti coatings are permitted provided that the coating is soluble in warm water iii coating shall be clear iv coating shall be applied to the extent described on the drawings or in the specification .
decorative coatings shall be as shown on the drawings andor the architectural design brief and shall comply with section num and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
in addition to the directions and application rate recommended by the manufacturer prior to applying the stain the panels must be clean free of dust and free of dirt the designated colours for both front and rear panels shall be stained over the full width and height of the panel including the edges the first coat shall be an undiluted full and generous floodcoat a minimum num hours drying time shall be allowed following the application of the first coat prior to application of the second coat .
hp the contractor shall submit colour samples and proposed arrangement to the superintendent for approval not less than two weeks prior to application to the noise walls .
these samples shall be applied to the specified noise wall panel material and shall be a minimum of one square metre .
each sample shall show all separate stages of coating .
j recycled materials hp noise attenuation panels made from recycled and recovered materials are permitted subject to approval by the superintendent .
the following details shall be submitted for review by the superintendent not later than num weeks prior to the intended use of the panels .
if requested by the superintendent the contractor shall submit documents that allow materials to be traced including i the composition of the materials including the systematic name of each material component and the percentage by weight in the finished product ii the proportion of recycled and recovered materials in the finished product .
definitions shall be taken from the australian standard for environmental labels and declarations selfdeclared environmental claims type ii environmental labelling iii laboratory analysis of the finished material that demonstrates the composition iv the source of the component materials including the state of origin v full description of the process of recycling and recovery and combination of the materials including the type of machinery involved and the source type and quantity of energy required by weight to produce the finished product vi test results that demonstrate the density of the recycled material vii test results that demonstrate the acoustic properties of the finished panel viii test results that demonstrate the strength of the material in the finished panel ix test results that demonstrate the transparency and translucence of the finished panel x test results that demonstrate the stability of the physical properties of the finished product over the required design life when exposed to sunlight and weathering department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num xi test results that demonstrate the linear coefficient of expansion of the material xii the method of fixing the panel xiii the proposed size of the finished panel .
all testing shall be conducted by a nata accredited or equivalent laboratory in accordance with australian standards to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
k other materials materials other than those described above may be permitted as follows hp if the contractor proposes the use of alternative materials for posts and panels full details of the strength durability acoustic properties appearance and other physical properties of the proposed material shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval not less than num weeks prior to the intended use of the material .
the contractor shall supply test certificates that demonstrate compliance with the specified requirements .
testing shall be conducted using australian standard test methods in a nata approved or equivalent laboratory .
if requested by the superintendent the contractor shall submit documents that allow materials to be traced to their point of origin .
num construction and installation of noise walls a general noise walls shall be free of holes or gaps .
b set out of noise wall noise walls shall be located in accordance with the drawings .
hp if the contractor proposes an alternative alignment details of the alternative shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval not less than four weeks prior to commencement of works .
c post holes hp prior to boring post holes the contractor shall review their location with the superintendent .
the contractor must seek the superintendents approval of any proposed relocations .
post holes shall be in the locations shown on the drawings .
post holes shall be covered at all times until the post has been installed .
unsuitable or excess excavated material shall be removed from site on completion of the works .
d foundations the size type and depth of foundations shall be as shown on the drawings .
excavation for foundations shall be as shown on the drawings and shall comply with section num .
excavation for noise wall foundations shall include all excavation necessary to provide the specified depth of bedding working space and space required for filling including the removal and replacement of unsuitable material .
the foundations shall be test rolled in accordance with section num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num soft or wet material that does not achieve the required ground bearing pressure stated on the drawings or does not pass the test rolling shall be treated as unsuitable material .
unsuitable material shall be excavated and replaced with num mm class num crushed rock or cement treated crushed rock compacted in layers not exceeding num mm to achieve the required ground bearing pressure stated on the drawings .
replacement material shall comply with the requirements of section num .
if the foundation is in rock all loose rock unsound material or water shall be removed and the surface shall be brought to the required level with blinding concrete .
hp prior to the placement of reinforcement and posts the contractor shall review the excavation for compliance with the specified requirements and shall inform the superintendent of any unsuitable soil conditions .
castinplace concrete surrounding foundation posts shall be brought to a level surface num mm above the finished surface level and shall then be tapered for a minimum distance of num mm from the base of the post to ensure that water drains away from the foundation .
e installation of posts posts shall be straight and vertical with a tolerance of num in num of the height of the post .
where the design requires non vertical or curved posts these shall be erected to the required angle or profile with a tolerance of num in num of the height of the post .
tops of adjacent posts shall be level or to the grade line on the drawings with a tolerance of num mm .
f installation of panels panels dimensions shall be to the sizes shown on the drawings with a tolerance of num mm in each dimension .
adjacent panels of stepped or sloping walls shall be stepped equally to meet the alignment of the wall or as shown on the drawings .
panels and planks shall be either horizontal or sloping as required on the drawings with a tolerance of num mm in num m. if the specified span for the panel can not be achieved the contractor shall submit details of the alternative panel length to the superintendent for approval .
hp the contractor shall submit details of alternative panel lengths to the superintendent not less than two weeks prior to commencing the fabrication of that section of the noise wall .
the lowest plank panel or units of a concrete noise wall shall be continuously supported by a plain concrete rectangular spread foundation with a minimum width of the panel thickness num mm and minimum depth of num mm .
the spread foundation shall be symmetrical about the centre of the panel unless the noise wall is on a boundary in which case the position of the spread foundation shall be adjusted .
the concrete strip foundation shall be grade vrnum placed and compacted in accordance section num .
topsoil shall be removed from the plan area of the strip foundation .
the excavation for the spread foundation shall be treated in accordance with clauses numd .
the maximum depth of soil against the lowest concrete panel shall not exceed num mm .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num g installation of transparent panels transparent panels shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements i all panels shall be supplied with masking film or protective sheets on both surfaces which shall not be removed until handling and installation of the panel are complete ii care shall be taken during the installation of panels to prevent cracking scratching or damage iii panels that are cracked scratched or damaged shall be replaced iv panels shall be restrained vertically at posts as detailed by the drawings .
h doors the contractor shall install doors of the type and in the position shown on the drawings .
openings and doors shall be framed with a suitably rigid frame which shall be made from the same materials as the noise wall panels and of the same colouration .
doors shall be hung securely and fitted with a locking mechanism that can be operated from either side of the noise wall .
all locks shall be lockwood assa abloy num padlock series which will be supplied by vicroads .
the contractor shall give the superintendent a minimum of four weeks notice of the need for locks .
gaps at openings for doors shall be sealed to ensure minimal noise transmission .
hp the contractor shall submit details of the door and frame design to the superintendent not less than two weeks prior to commencing the fabrication of that section of the noise wall .
num temporary fencing during construction the contractor shall provided temporary mesh fencing with a minimum height of num m which shall be covered with shade cloth to secure and screen any private properties and to prevent access to the freeway reserve andor private properties by animals people or vehicles .
num safety noise walls shall be erected in a safe manner and in accordance with the requirements of the work health and safety act num and all applicable regulations under that act .
subject to suitable risk assessments and hazard identification the contractor shall a employ suitable mechanical lifting devices to erect posts and panels .
mechanical lifting devices shall be stable sited in a suitable location and shall be operated by experienced personnel b provide temporary supporting structures to ensure stability of the noise wall during erection and assembly c provide temporary access in the form of mechanical platforms andor scaffolds if it is necessary to work at height .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num disposal of materials on completion of the project the contractor shall remove all surplus excavated and fill material unsuitable materials and noise wall materials from the site .
the site shall be left in a clean and tidy condition free from contamination .
num damage to noise wall components the contractor shall ensure all components are handled with care to avoid breakage scratches and other damage .
in the event that components are damaged these shall be replaced to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num source rock for the production of crushed rock and aggregates this section crossreferences sections num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent .
a number of standard sections are listed in table num if relevant those sections should also be included in the specification num description this section covers the durability hardness and where applicable the polished stone value requirements of source rock used for the production of crushed rock and aggregates for engineering use .
the requirements for pyroclastic rocks scoria are covered in section num and for recycled crushed concrete in section num .
the requirements for gravel sand and soft or ripped rock are covered in section num .
any additional source rock requirements relevant to specific applications are covered in the appropriate product standard specification sections .
num definitions assigned los angeles value the assigned los angeles value lav is a hardness rating derived from los angeles abrasion test results which is assigned to each source annually through the source rock investigation process .
assigned polished stone value the assigned polished stone value psv is a friction rating derived from polished stone value test results which is assigned annually to each source where applicable by through the source rock investigation process .
material type rock from a particular source and which is distinguishable on the basis of colour texture hardness the degree of weathering and test properties .
non quarry rock rock obtained from a location other than a quarry or within a construction site .
non quarry rock is usually processed by an onsite portable plant but may also be taken to a nearby quarry for processing .
quarry rock an in situ rock mass located in an operating quarry or a part of a quarry .
rock durability classification classification of a material type as sound rock marginal rock or unsound rock in terms of the durability requirements of clause num .
rock type rock is classified as igneous metamorphic or sedimentary on the basis of the classification scheme detailed in vicroads code of practice for source rock investigations as specified in section num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num source rock the rock mass which is used or proposed to be used in the production of crushed rock or aggregate .
the rock mass can be igneous metamorphic or sedimentary rock .
unsound rock unsound rock is that material whether in the source or as spalls or as crushed particles which a is soft friable or composed of clay or weathered rock or which contains matter which degrades when alternately wetted and dried or b in the case of igneous except basic igneous and metamorphic rock has a degradation factor source rock less than the minimum value for marginal rock specified in table num or c in the case of basic igneous rock has a secondary mineral content greater than the maximum value or an accelerated soundness index value less than the minimum value for marginal rock specified in table num or d in the case of sedimentary rock has a ball mill value greater than the maximum value for marginal rock specified in table num .
num source rock a general prior to the commencement of work the contractor shall nominate the source from which the crushed rock and aggregate will be obtained .
crushed rock and aggregates shall only be produced from an accredited source with a current assigned lav hardness and where appropriate an assigned psv value .
the quarry operator shall engage vicroads technical services to investigate and classify source rock in accordance with vicroads code of practice for source rock investigations as specified in section num .
the superintendents approval shall be obtained prior to changing the source of material .
if at any time the contractor proposes to obtain material from a source other than the confirmed accredited source the superintendent shall be notified in sufficient time so that investigations as may be required can be carried out before approval is given .
if the quarry operator proposes to use a source rock type other than those listed in tables num and num the quarry operator shall engage vicroads technical services to carry out investigations as may be required and the department of state growth will determine whether the rock type is acceptable and will set appropriate test values .
b durability source rock shall be considered sound marginal or unsound in accordance with the provisions of tables num and num. c hardness the hardness of the source rock shall be measured by a los angeles abrasion test on the product and the assigned los angeles value shall comply with the test values shown for the different product applications in table num. d friction rating the polished stone value of the source rock shall be measured by a polished stone value test on the product and the assigned polished stone value shall comply with the test value shown for the different surfacing applications in table num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num source rock which does not comply with the specified durability and hardness requirements but from which crushed rock and aggregates of proven satisfactory performance have been produced may be accepted for use subject to the written approval of the superintendent .
table num durability requirements for sound rock rock type test value degradation factor source rock min secondary mineral content max accelerated soundness index min ball mill value max acid igneous granitic rocks num other acid igneous num intermediate igneous trachyte num other intermediate igneous num basic igneous num num metamorphic hornfels num other metamorphic num sedimentary argillaceous sediments num arenaceous sediments num table num durability requirements for marginal rock rock type test value degradation factor source rock range secondary mineral content range accelerated soundness index range ball mill value range acid igneous granitic rocks num other acid igneous num intermediate igneous trachyte num other intermediate igneous num basic igneous num num metamorphic hornfels num other metamorphic num sedimentary argillaceous sediments num arenaceous sediments num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num los angeles value lav for product applications source type rock type los angeles value max standard specification sections num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num base subbase subbase class a class b class c quarry rock acid igneous granitic rocks num num num num num num num a num num other acid igneous num num num num num num num num num num intermediate igneous num num num num num num num num num num basic igneous num num num num num num num num num num metamorphic num num num num num num num num num num sedimentary argillaceous sediments a b num num a num num a num num arenaceous sediments a b num num a num num a num num river gravel pebble a num num a a num num a num num calcrete a a a a a num num a num num pyroclastic scoria a a num a refer section num a b b num non quarry rock b b num b b num num a b num notes a not permitted for this use b not permitted for use unless otherwise accredited by vicroads c non quarry granite or sedimentary rock shall comply with lav values listed under quarry source rock .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num polished stone values psv for surfacing applications specification section application polished stone value min num hot mix asphalt type h hg and hp wearing course type v wearing course num num num stone mastic asphalt type h wearing course num num regulation gap graded asphalt type h wearing course num num sprayed seal treatments class a num num ultra thin asphalt type h wearing course num num open graded asphalt type h wearing course num num bitumen crumb rubber asphalt type h wearing course num num bituminous slurry surfacing where specified in clause num or wearing course where traffic volume per lane exceeds num vpd num num aggregate for sprayed bituminous surfacing class a num num minimum testing requirements the quarry operator shall engage vicroads technical services for all inspections investigations and testing of rock sources and source rock material types in accordance with vicroads code of practice for source rock investigations as specified in section num .
vicroads will provide rock type durability classifications hardness values friction ratings and reference materials as is deemed necessary for the assessment of coarse aggregate quality by visual assessment as specified in section num .
the contractor shall ensure that all quarried products come from an accredited source in accordance with this specification .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num bituminous cold and warm mixes this section crossreferences section num .
if section num is relevant it should be included in the specification .
if section num is not included in the specification all references to it should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num general this section covers the requirements for the manufacture of sizes num num num and num dense graded and open graded bituminous cold and warm mixes .
the requirements relate to quality of aggregates and bituminous materials mix design and properties of product .
num definitions bituminous cold mix bituminous cold mix is a mixture of bituminous binder with fine and coarse aggregates with or without filler .
the bituminous binder may be cutback bitumen or bitumen emulsion .
the material may be mixed hot or cold but is spread and compacted cold .
bituminous warm mix a bituminous warm mix is similar to a bituminous cold mix but is manufactured hot from a heavy grade of cutback bitumen and is used on the same day as it is mixed while the material is still warm and workable .
binder binder is the bituminous material used to hold the mixture of aggregates together as a cohesive mass .
residual binder residual binder is bituminous material including any flux oil or polymer but not cutter .
in the case of bitumen emulsion it is the binder that remains after the water has separated .
assigned los angeles abrasion loss the assigned los angeles abrasion loss is a hardness rating derived from los angeles abrasion loss test results and is assigned to each source through the source rock investigation process on the basis of past test data obtained from testing products .
coarse aggregates coarse aggregates are aggregates retained on a num mm as sieve .
fine aggregates fine aggregates are aggregates passing a num mm as sieve .
num aggregates a general the combined aggregate mixture shall consist of crushed rock or crushed gravel or a mixture of crushed rock and sand or crushed gravel and sand .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num when aggregates are crushed rock they shall consist of clean hard durable angular rock fragments of uniform quality .
when aggregates are crushed gravel not less than num by mass of all particles shall have two or more faces produced by crushing .
sand aggregates shall consist of clean hard durable grains free from lumps clay mica and foreign matter .
b source rock source rock shall comply with the requirements of section num source rock for the production of crushed rock and aggregates .
c crushed aggregate products i the flakiness index of each separate sized coarse aggregate shall be as specified in table num. ii unsound rock and marginal rock in that fraction of the combined mixture retained on a num mm as sieve shall not exceed the percentages specified in table num .
if no facilities exist at the mixing plant to sample the combined mixture the unsound rock and marginal rock in that fraction of each aggregate retained on a num mm as sieve shall not exceed the percentages specified in table num .
table num test test value flakiness index max num total of marginal and unsound rock by mass max num unsound rock by mass max num d crusher fines crusher fines shall i consist of a uniformly graded product of separate particles from the crushing of rock which complies with the requirements of clause numb ii be free from lumps and aggregations iii comply with the relevant requirements of table num .
table num test test value degradation factor crusher fines min num plasticity index max num num filler filler shall comply with as num hot mix asphalt a guide to good practice .
the added filler required by clause num to be included with particular aggregate types shall be hydrated lime portland cement or cement works flue dust .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num bituminous materials the binder to be used shall be one of the following a medium curing cutback bitumen of grade or equivalent field produced grade as shown in table num and complying with the requirements of as num cutback bitumen .
bitumen used for field produced cutback bitumen shall comply with as num bitumen for pavements .
the cutter shall comply with as num oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements .
table num grades of cutback bitumen mix type standard grade field produced equivalent viscosity range pa.s grade as num residual binder class num bitumen parts by volume numc cutter parts by volume numc type num amc num num num num num num type num amc num num num num num num type num amc num num num num num num type num amc num num num num num num type num amc num num num num num num b bitumen emulsion of grade cam manufactured from class num bitumen and complying with the requirements of as num bitumen emulsions for construction and maintenance of pavement .
num mix requirements unless otherwise directed the grading of the combined aggregates and the proportion of residual binder shall lie within the limits specified in tables num and num for each size of mix specified in clause num schedule of details .
aggregates of coarse or medium grained acidic rocks e.g .
granite adamellite granodiorite quartz porphyry shall contain not less than num filler as specified in clause num .
the residual binder content shall be expressed as a percentage by mass of the total mix .
the target grading and residual binder content for each size of mix shall be approved by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num grading of combined aggregates including any filler sieve size as mm percentage passing by mass dense graded open graded size num size num size num size num size num size num size num size num size num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num proportion of combined aggregates and residual binder sieve size as mm percentage passing by mass dense graded open graded size num size num size num size num size num size num size num size num size num aggregates num num num num num num num num num residual binder num num num num num num num num num total mix num num num num num num num num num unless otherwise specified or directed the type of cutback bitumen mix shall be supplied to meet the requirements of table num .
table num mix type description and season for use ambient temperature for use c minimum overnight temperature c for stockpiling type num cold mix winter num num num type num cold mix springautumn num num num type num cold mix summer warm mix winter num num cold mix num num warm mix num type num cold mix hot weather only warm mix springautumn num cold mix num num warm mix not suitable type num warm mix summer num warm mix not suitable the superintendent may approve the addition of up to num parts of flux oil for cutback bitumen mixes required for extended stockpiling periods for up to num weeks and for very cold weather conditions .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num binder quality cutback bitumen that has been stored at elevated temperatures for more than num week shall be tested for compliance with clause num and if necessary adjusted by the addition of cutter and subsequent circulation to produce a homogeneous mixture .
num mixing and mixing temperatures the temperature of the aggregates and cutback bitumen at the time of mixing shall be sufficiently high to permit mixing as specified .
at no time shall temperatures of materials exceed the following class num bitumen numc cutback bitumen see table num aggregates delivered into mixer shall not exceed the maximum temperatures of the relevant cutback bitumen used or numc for bitumen emulsion binder .
at the time of mixing the temperature of the cutback bitumen shall be within the range specified in table num .
table num grade of cutback bitumen binder temperature mixing range c maximum storage temperature c amc num num num num amc num num num num amc num num num num amc num num num num amc num num num num the combined aggregates including filler and binder shall be thoroughly mixed in the correct proportions until at least num of the coarse aggregate particles are fully coated .
except for bitumen emulsion mixes the moisture content of the mix shall not exceed num .
a maximum moisture content of num may be permitted by the superintendent provided that an approved adhesion agent is added to the binder at the rate of num by mass of binder .
num bituminous cold or warm mix recycled from reclaimed asphalt pavement unless otherwise specified reclaimed asphalt pavement may be recycled by adding it to new mix during the mixing process subject to the requirements of this clause being met .
all cold and warm mixes reclaimed asphalt pavement shall comply with all aspects of section num for the size and type of mix specified for use .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num reclaimed asphalt pavement shall consist of milled or excavated asphalt pavement free of foreign material such as unbound granular base broken concrete or other contaminants and shall be crushed and screened to a maximum size not exceeding the size of mix produced .
the manufacturing process shall provide for addition of reclaimed asphalt pavement to a batch plant pugmill or drum mixer separately from other mix components by a method that avoids damage to the mix by overheating .
num frequency of inspection and testing at the mixing plant the contractor shall test production at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that all material supplied under the contract complies with specified requirements .
the frequency shall not be less than that shown in table num except that the superintendent may agree to a lower frequency where the contractor has implemented a system of statistical process control and can demonstrate that such lower frequency is adequate to assure the quality of the product .
table num checks required minimum frequency scrutiny for segregation uncoated particles separated bitumen excess bitumen or overheating before despatch from the plant each loaded truck temperature of asphalt before despatch from the plant each loaded truck or at intervals of num minutes if more than one truck is despatched in num minutes unsound rock content one test on each component of coarse aggregate per day degradation factor crusher fines at monthly intervals plasticity index of crusher fines at monthly intervals flakiness index of coarse aggregate num mm and larger at monthly intervals bitumen content and full sieve analysis of asphalt full extraction test one test per day the contractor shall make available for inspection at the plant all work sheets and results of checks carried out .
num schedule of details mix type nominal size mm dense graded tonne open graded tonne cutback bitumen coldwarm mixes type num type num type num type num type num bitumen emulsion cold mixes cam other department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num gravel sand and soft or ripped rock for pavement base and subbase num description this section covers the requirements for naturally occurring or partly processed gravel scoria tuff sand and soft or ripped rock including mixtures thereof and materials to be broken to size on the roadbed .
num definitions gravel gravel is a naturally occurring mixture of angular or rounded rock fragments substantially retained on a num mm as sieve with or without some finer material and all passing a num mm as sieve .
scoria and tuff scoria and tuff are pyroclastic materials which generally form unconsolidated deposits which are rippable and require minimal processing .
sand sand is a product of rock weathering substantially passing a num mm as sieve and is generally siliceous and free from appreciable quantities of clay and silt .
soft or ripped rock soft or ripped rock is rock extracted from a deposit without blasting and not requiring processing through a crushing plant for reduction of size .
num material source prior to the commencement of work the contractor shall confirm the source from which the material will be obtained .
num physical properties and gradings the material shall meet the relevant requirements of tables num and num and shall be free from vegetable matter and lumps or balls of clay or other deleterious matter .
where specified by means of a cross in table num the contractor shall supply to the superintendent for approval grading figures to indicate the average grading of the material proposed for supply .
the approved average grading shall become the target grading for material to be supplied .
the permitted range of grading about the target is specified in table num .
all material supplied shall comply with the grading limits .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num physical properties type of material and use base or subbase all passing sieve size as mm liquid limit max plasticity index ball mill max plasticity index passing num mm max california bearing ratio min min max value applicable to material passing num mm sieve initially at optimum moisture content and num of maximum dry density as determined by test using modified compactive effort but then soaked for num days prior to the cbr test .
table num grading requirements percentage passing by mass type of material and use base or subbase sieve size as sieve mm num num num num num num num num num num num contractor shall supply to the superintendent for approval grading figures to indicate the average grading of material proposed for supply .
table num permitted range of grading sieve size as mm permitted range of grading by mass num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num if the contractor proposes to use scoria or scoria blends the source of the scoria shall have an assigned los angeles value not exceeding that specified in table num .
table num scoria source rocks hardness requirements pavement courselayer assigned los angeles value maximum base num upper subbase num lower subbase num if at any time the contractor proposes to obtain scoria from another source without an assigned la value the superintendent shall be notified in sufficient time to allow a quarry investigation to be completed prior to the commencement of delivery .
num addition of water water added to the product shall be clean and substantially free from detrimental impurities such as oils salts acids alkalis and vegetable substances .
water supplied from sources where dissolved salts are known or likely to be present shall be tested for electrical conductivity prior to use .
the electrical conductivity shall not be more than num scm .
water sources classified by the relevant water authority as potable water shall be exempt from this requirement .
num material supplied to stockpile if the contractor elects or is required to supply the material to stockpile prior to delivery to the roadbed the following requirements shall be met a the product after recovery from the stockpile complies with this specification b the stockpile site is clean adequately paved and well drained c if a stockpile is constructed in more than one layer each layer is fully contained within the area occupied by the upper surface of the preceding layer d the surface of the stockpile shall be kept damp to prevent a net loss of moisture and to minimise the generation of airborne dust .
num minimum testing requirements the contractor shall test the material at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that all material supplied under the contract complies with the specified requirements .
the frequency shall not be less than that shown in table num except that the superintendent may agree to a lower frequency where the contractor has implemented a system of statistical process control and can demonstrate that such lower frequency is adequate to assure the quality of the product .
table num minimum frequency of testing test minimum frequency of testing grading plasticity index ball mill california bearing ratio department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num page num of num section num production of crushed rock for pavement base and subbase this section crossreferences sections num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if they are not included all references to those sections should be struck out to ensure that the remaining text is still coherent .
num description this section covers the production requirements for crushed rock produced from a variety of raw feed sources including quarries crushed concrete newer basalt surface spalls nbss and blended crushed rock mixes containing supplementary materials .
the section specifies the requirements for plant mixed wetmix crushed rock products including num mm nominal size classes num and num base num mm and num mm nominal size class num upper subbase and for class num lower subbase .
the material class pavement course use and nominal sizes shall be as specified in the special clauses andor the drawings andor the schedule .
sources from which crushed rock can be produced for base and subbase are specified in section num source requirements for the production of crushed rock and aggregates .
requirements for crushed pyroclastic rocks scoria are covered in section num crushed scoria for pavement base and subbase .
construction requirements for unbound flexible pavements incorporating crushed rock products are covered in section num construction of unbound flexible pavements .
section num details the relevant references to australian standards as test methods and codes of practice referenced in this section .
num definitions crushed rock a crushed rock is a material composed of graded coarse and fine aggregate components produced by the crushing scalping and screening of a raw rock feed source newer basalt surface spalls nbss andor crushed concrete and may also be a blend of components which includes limited quantities of supplementary materials .
crushed rock class for the purpose of this specification crushed rock products are to be supplied in various classes broadly defined as follows class num is a premium cohesive pavement base material for unbound pavements where a very high standard of surface preparation for a sprayed sealed or thin asphalt surfacing is required .
it has a minimum plasticity index requirement and will likely have additional requirement for maximum permeability when used for heavy duty unbound pavements .
class num is a high quality pavement base material for unbound flexible pavements in locations where a very high standard of surface preparation may not be required .
class num crushed rock product does not have a minimum plasticity index or a maximum permeability requirement .
recycled materials are permitted for class num crushed rock .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num class num is a high quality upper subbase material for heavy duty unbound flexible pavements .
it may have a minimum permeability requirement to provide positive drainage to the subsurface drains and overlying unbound pavement layer .
where specified class num may be used as base for lightly trafficked pavements provided the material produces sufficient cohesive fines during compaction .
recycled materials are permitted for class num crushed rock .
class num is a lower subbase material for heavy duty unbound andor bound pavements or a subbase material for most other types of pavements .
it may have a maximum permeability requirement .
recycled materials are permitted for class num crushed rock .
plant mixed wetmix crushed rock pmwmcr plant mixed wetmix crushed rock is a mixture of crushed rock and water produced at a controlled mixing plant to close tolerances of moisture content based on the modified optimum moisture content of the material .
recycled material materials obtained from a construction andor demolition site which are crushed and re processed to produce a crushed rock or a supplementary material .
supplementary material a durable material added to a crushed rock to improve the workability and physical properties .
num material source crushed rock manufactured at a quarry or nonquarry site shall not be used until the material source has been investigated and accredited in accordance with vicroads code of practice for source investigations rcnum as listed in section num .
material sources used in the production of crushed rock shall comply with the relevant requirements of section num source requirements for the production of crushed rock and aggregates .
num crushed rock mix registration crushed rock mixes proposed for use on specified works shall be registered in accordance with vicroads code of practice for registration of crushed rock mixes rcnum as listed in section num .
all mix designs registered with the department of state growth are issued a status according to compliance as general the requirements of vicroads code of practice rcnum have been met .
conditional mixes which do not comply in all respects with the requirements of the code of practice but which are considered appropriate for use subject to conditions attached to the registration .
expired a mix which has passed the expiry date but mix details are retained for record purposes .
withdrawn withdrawn from use because of unsatisfactory field performance but details are retained for record purposes .
hp all crushed rock proposed for use on department of state growth funded works shall be current registered mixes in accordance with vicroads code of practice rcnum and conform to specified requirements applicable to that class of product .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num page num of num the supplied registered mix shall not be changed unless the superintendent has been advised of the change and given written approval .
crushed rock mixes registered as conditional shall not be used unless the superintendent has been advised of any mix registration conditions and approved the mix for use .
approval of a registered crushed rock mix for use under the contract does not guarantee the handling properties or performance of the mix nor relieve the contractor from contractual obligations in regards to rectification of defects .
num components a coarse and fine aggregates coarse and fine aggregates shall consist of clean hard durable angular fragments of uniform quality .
if all or part of the fine aggregate is produced from a different source or location andor is separately added into the production process the combined fraction of fine aggregates shall be tested for degradation factor fine aggregate as listed in section num .
the degradation factor fine aggregate of a sample of the combined fine aggregates shall not be less than num .
the frequency of testing shall be as specified in table num. b supplementary materials supplementary materials shall only be incorporated in a crushed rock as a part of a registered crushed rock mix .
supplementary materials which are non durable or subject to appreciable breakdown will not be permitted .
the amount of any supplementary materials e.g .
crushed rockconcrete brick glass clayey sand and clay filler etc .
used shall not exceed the maximum allowable percentage of the total dry mass of the crushed product as specified in the registered crushed rock mix .
supplementary materials included in a registered crushed rock mix shall be i noncementitious in nature except for lime added under the provision of clause numd ii free of any organic matter and screened if necessary to remove all oversize particles lumps and balls of clay or particles exceeding num mm in the case of a clayey filler iii stored and maintained in a dry and free flowing state and added to the product as a separate component at any stage after completion of primary crushing iv distributed into the product by a method that is capable of verifying that the pre determined distribution rate has been achieved v uniformly mixed through the product by use of a pugmill .
c blending of products containing coarse aggregates the blending of two or more crushed rock products containing coarse aggregates from different sources or rock types will only be permitted as a part of a registered crushed rock mix .
the submitted crushed rock mix shall clearly state the proportions by mass retained on each sieve for each component type that will be used in the blend .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num a crushed rock mix containing a blend of coarse aggregates shall be subject to the following conditions i each component of the crushed rock blend shall individually comply with the applicable requirements of department of state growth standard section num and code of practice rcnum unless otherwise approved bythe department of state growth ii all material to be blended shall be fully crushed and screened to the maximum aggregate size permitted in the product prior to blending iii all coarse and fine aggregates in the blend shall comply with the relevant requirements of clause numa iv if the blend has not been subjected to field placement and compaction the contractor shall prove that the material is capable of consistently meeting all requirements of relevant specifications v where a suitable blend has been registered as a crushed rock mix the total proportions by mass of each rock type in the blend shall not be varied by more than or num by mass .
num crushed rock product a crushed rock in stockpile crushed rock in stockpile shall comply with all applicable test requirements for that class of crushed rock product as set out in vicroads code of practice rcnum and this standard section .
crushed rock shall be tested in accordance with the frequencies specified in table num. b permeability where permeability values are specified the crushed rock shall comply with the values listed below in table num .
table num permeability test requirements in the table below delete symbols and insert required value if not applicable insert not applicable refer guide notes clause num for further information test test value class num class num class num class num permeability msec num x num max .
min .
max .
value applicable to material passing num mm sieve initially at optimum moisture content and num of maximum dry density as determined by test using modified compactive effort .
the contractor shall provide to the superintendent the target grading and plasticity index required to satisfy the specified permeability requirement .
the permeability of class num crushed rock shall be a minimum value which complies with conditional formula presented below .
the maximum permeability values for class num and class num crushed rock as specified in table num shall not be exceeded unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the minimum permeability value msec pnum for the class num crushed rock shall comply with the following pnum pnum num x pnum where pnum is the permeability value msec for the class num crushed rock based on the lowest of either the value provided in table num or that submitted in the registered crushed rock mix and pnum is the permeability value msec for the class num crushed rock based on the lowest of either the value provided in table num or that submitted in the registered crushed rock mix .
where the grading of the supplied crushed rock varies by more than or num of the nominated target grading in the crushed rock mix the contractor will provide any additional information requested by the department of state growth to demonstrate that specified requirements e.g .
permeability are still being met .
c plant mixed wet mix crushed rock where specified in table num crushed rock shall be supplied as plant mixed wet mixed crushed rock pmwmcr .
for pmwmcr the aggregates and water shall be mixed in a pug mill .
pmwmcr shall be supplied at the moisture content as nominated by the contractor to suit the weather conditions and the methods used for spreading and compaction of the material in the roadbed .
pmwmcr shall be supplied to the roadbed as specified in table num .
if not specified material may either be supplied as pmwmcr or as crushed rock .
table num material to be supplied as pmwmcr delete all symbols and insert yes as applicable location material class num class num class num class num d sulphide mineralisation crushed rock manufactured from sources containing sulphidesulphate mineralisation shall not be used unless the fraction of the crushed rock passing the num mm sieve complies with the ph and conductivity test requirements specified in table num .
table num ph and conductivity test requirements test test value soil to water ratio ph units num min num num conductivity scm num max num num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the superintendent may accept a nonconforming material if it is treated with hydrated or quick lime .
the contractor is required to specify the method and amount of hydrated or quick lime to be combined with the product to meet the requirements of table num and table num .
table num ph of material after addition of lime test test value ph units num minimum the lime stabilising agent shall be added at the time of production of the crushed rock and prior to stockpiling .
num grading of uncompacted classes num num num and num crushed rock and pmwmcr basesubbase after completion of manufacture but before compaction classes num num num and num crushed rock and pmwmcr basesubbase shall comply with the relevant grading requirements passing and where specified retained on each sieve of vicroads code of practice rcnum as listed in section num .
the crushed rock grading shall not extend from the coarse limit on one sieve to the fine limit on the following sieve or vice versa .
unless otherwise advised as a part of the crushed rock mix registration process the initial target grading shall be at or near the centre of the specified grading envelope .
the target grading may be varied from time to time to achieve the specified post compaction grading contained in section num .
the specified grading limits shall remain unchanged regardless of the target grading .
class num subbase of a different nominal size to that specified may be accepted by the superintendent provided it meets the grading requirements for the nominal size as described in vicroads code of practice rcnum .
num addition of water water added to the crushed rock products either onsite or in pmwmcr shall be clean and substantially free from detrimental impurities such as oils salts acids alkalis and vegetable substances .
water sources shall be tested for electrical conductivity and ph in accordance with the current australian standards as listed in section num .
the electrical conductivity shall not be more than num scm and ph within the range of num to num unless otherwise approved bythe department of state growth .
the use of reclaimed water will require the approval of the superintendent and shall conform to vicroads guidelines for reclaimed water integrated water management guidelines as listed under other referenced documents in section num .
water sources added to crushed rock shall be tested at a maximum of twelve monthly intervals during the course of supply or when the nature of the water source has changed .
water sources classified by the relevant water authority as potable water shall be exempt from the above requirements .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num moisture content a crushed rock in stockpile crushed rock manufactured and placed in stockpile at the quarry or processing plant shall have a minimum moisture content of num by mass .
b plant mixed wet mixed crushed rock where the contract includes supply and delivery only the moisture content of the crushed rock at the point of delivery expressed as a percentage by dry mass shall be within num to num of the target nominated from time to time by the superintendent .
num material supplied to stockpile where the contractor is required to supply pmwmcr or crushed rock to stockpile prior to delivery to the roadbed to the following requirements a the product after recovery from the stockpile complies with this specification b the stockpile site is clean adequately paved and well drained c if a stockpile is constructed in more than one layer each layer is fully contained within the area occupied by the upper surface of the preceding layer d crushed rock supplied to stockpile shall have a minimum moisture content of num by mass e all pmwmcr delivered to stockpile shall be supplied at a moisture content of not less than omc unless the material is to be wet mixed again prior to delivery to the roadbed where the minimum moisture content in stockpile shall be not less than num by mass f the surface of the stockpile shall be kept damp to prevent a net loss of moisture and to minimise the generation of airborne dust .
num handling of crushed rock products handling of crushed rock including stockpiling and loading of trucks shall be undertaken to minimise segregation .
num minimum testing requirements the contractor shall test crushed rock products and pmwmcr at such a frequency to ensure that the supplied material consistently complies with the specified requirements of the department of state growth standard sections code of practice num and any additional testing specified as a condition of registration of the crushed rock mix .
the test frequency shall initially not be less than that shown in table num except that the test frequency for grading plasticity index unsound rock content ph and conductivity and degradation factor may be halved where the most recent ten successive test results meet the specified requirements .
if any subsequent test result fails another test shall be immediately undertaken .
if the second test fails the test frequency shall revert to the minimum test frequency specified in table num and the contractor shall not return to half the test frequency until a further ten successive test results comply with the specified requirements .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num minimum frequency of testing test minimum frequency of testing grading final product on each production day one per num tonnes or part thereof .
unsound rock content num one per production day of a sample taken from the final product .
foreign material content num on each day one per num tonnes moisture content crushed rock num pmwmcr one per production day on each production day one per num tonnes .
plasticity index class num base in each production week one test per num tonnes .
class num base and classes num and num subbase in each production month one test per num tonnes .
california bearing ratio num cbr values shall be retested annually for each registered mix during supply or when the superintendent judges the physical properties of the crushed rock have changed .
degradation factor fine aggregate num one per num tonnes on each production day where specified as a condition of the crushed rock mix .
permeability permeability values where specified shall be retested annually for each registered mix during supply or when the superintendent judges the physical properties of the crushed rock have changed .
los angeles value num once per month or when the superintendent judges the physical properties of the crushed rock has changed .
ph and conductivity num one per production month flakiness index one per production month crushed particles num one per production month supplementary materials one per num tonnes on each production day where specified as a condition of the crushed rock mix num not applicable to class num subbase unless otherwise specified num applicable only when payment is to be made on a mass basis num applicable to crushed concrete products only .
num applicable to crushed concrete and all class num subbase products .
num applicable only to sources containing sulphidesulphate mineralisation num applicable to crushed rock manufactured from river gravel only department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num cementitious treated crushed rock for pavement subbase this section crossreferences sections num num num and num .
if any of the above sections are relevant they should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the production requirements of num mm nominal size for pavement subbase treated with a cementitious binder to produce a bound material .
crushed rock produced from a variety of raw feed sources including quarries crushed concrete and newer basalt surface spalls nbss can be utilised for this application along with registered crushed rock blends containing supplementary materials .
construction requirements for cementitious treated pavement subbase is covered by section num .
sources from which crushed rock can be produced for cementitious treated subbase are specified in section num source requirements for the production of crushed rock and aggregates .
section num details the relevant references to australian standards as test methods and codes of practice referenced in this section .
num definitions crushed rock a crushed rock is a material composed of graded coarse and fine aggregate components produced by the crushing scalping and screening of a raw rock feed source newer basalt surface spalls nbss andor crushed concrete and may also be a blend of components which includes limited quantities of supplementary materials .
cementitious binder a cementitious material capable of being uniformly mixed into a granular pavement material to bind the particles together to increase its strength .
cementitious binders include portland cement type gp or blended cement type gb or a blend of ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs hydrated lime fly ash alkali activated slag or other pozzolanic material supplied in accordance with this specification .
cement treated crushed rock cement treated crushed rock ctcr is a registered mixture of crushed rock cement and water produced at a controlled mixing plant to close tolerances of grading moisture content and binder content .
fly ash a fine powder of pozzolanic material extracted from the flue emissions produced from the burning of black coal complying with requirements of as num supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement fly ash as listed in section num .
pozzolan a siliceous or aluminosiliceous material when finely ground can be mixed with lime or portland cement to form a cementitious material .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num recycled material materials obtained from a construction andor demolition site which are crushed and re processed to produce a crushed rock or a supplementary material .
slag ground granulated iron blast furnace slag ground granulated iron blast furnace slag ggbfs complying with requirements of as num supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement ggbfs as listed in section num is a pozzolan produced by fine grinding of slag produced as a by product from the smelting of iron ore .
supplementary material a durable material added to a crushed rock to improve the workability and physical properties .
num material source ctcr manufactured at a quarry or nonquarry site shall not be used until the source has been investigated and accredited in accordance with vicroads code of practice rcnum source investigations as listed in section num .
material sources used in the production of cement treated crushed rock shall comply with the relevant specified requirements of section num source requirements for production of crushed rock and aggregates .
num cement treated crushed rock mix registration ctcr mixes proposed for use on specified works shall be registered in accordance with vicroads code of practice for registration of crushed rock mixes rcnum as listed in section num .
all mix designs registered with the department of state growth are issued a status according to compliance as general the requirements of vicroads code of practice rcnum have been met .
conditional mixes which do not comply in all respects with the requirements of the code of practice but which are considered appropriate for use subject to conditions attached to the registration .
expired a mix which has passed the expiry date but mix details are retained for record purposes .
withdrawn withdrawn from use because of unsatisfactory field performance but details are retained for record purposes .
hp cement treated crushed rock proposed for use on department of state growth funded works shall be current registered mixes in accordance with vicroads code of practice rcnum and conform to specified requirements applicable to that class of product .
the supplied registered mix shall not be changed unless the superintendent has been advised of the change and given written approval .
mixes registered as conditional shall not used unless the superintendent has been advised of any mix registration conditions and approved the mix for use .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num approval of a registered ctcr mix for use under the contract does not guarantee the handling properties or performance of the mix nor relieve the contractor from contractual obligations in regards to rectification of defects .
num components components of the cement treated crushed rock shall comply with the requirements of department of state growth standard section num a b and c. num cement treated crushed rock product prior to the addition of any binder the crushed rock shall comply with relevant specified requirements for class num crushed rock as set out in vicroads code of practice rcnum section num section num and this specification .
the crushed rock shall be tested in accordance with the frequencies specified in table num .
num cementitious binder a cement portland and blended cements shall be type gp rapid setting binder or gb medium setting binder and comply with the requirements of as num general purpose and blended cements as listed in section num .
it shall be stored in weatherproof structures and any cement damaged by moisture shall not be used .
if type gb cement is proposed only the following blends are permitted i cementslag blend num to num cement content ii cementfly ash blend num to num cement content iii cementslagfly ash blend num to num cement content .
b slag and lime blends slag and hydrated lime may be used in blended combination as a slow setting cementitious binder .
the requirements for hydrated lime shall be as specified in as num limes and limestones as listed in section num .
slag used shall be ground granulated iron blast furnace slag ggbfs meeting the requirements of asnum supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cements ggbfs as listed in section num .
the contractor shall nominate the type brand and source of the ggbfs to be used .
slaglime shall be blended uniformly in the ratio of num slag to num hydrated lime unless laboratory testing indicates that superior strength of the ctcr is achieved by using a different ratio .
if the blend is to be varied the proportion of lime shall not be less than num .
the contractor shall provide evidence that the blend ratio has been met for all material supplied .
slaglime blend shall have a mortar bar num day compressive strength of num mpa and num day mortar bar compressive strength of num mpa .
the test shall be the same test specified for portland and blended cement except that the cement to water ratio shall be adjusted to match the consistency of mortar produced for the compressive strength test for gb cement in accordance with as num .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num c slow cementitious blends incorporating alkaliactivated slag or fly ash special blends of slow setting cementitious stabilising agents incorporating alkaliactivated slag or fly ash which do not meet mortar bar strength requirement specified in as num supplementay cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement may be used subject to the blend satisfying the mortar bar test requirement specified in clause numb .
the maximum binder working time shall be determined in accordance with the vicroads test method rcnum determination of the maximum allowable working time for a cementitious binder as listed in section num to confirm that the binder is a slow setting binder .
fly ash shall be supplied to meet the requirements of as num supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cements fly ash as listed in section num .
num addition of water water added to the crushed rock products either onsite or in pmwmcr shall be clean and substantially free from detrimental impurities such as oils salts acids alkalis and vegetable substances .
water sources shall be tested for electrical conductivity and ph in accordance with the current australian standards as listed in section num .
the electrical conductivity shall not be more than num scm and ph within the range of num to num unless otherwise approved bythe department of state growth .
the use of reclaimed water will require the approval of the superintendent and shall conform to the vicroads guidelines for reclaimed water integrated water management guidelines as listed under other referenced documents in section num .
water sources added to crushed rock shall be tested at a maximum of twelve monthly intervals during the course of supply or when the nature of the water source has changed .
water sources classified by the relevant water authority as potable water shall be exempt from the above requirements .
num mixing the crushed rock supplementary materials if any cementitious binder and water shall be combined via a controlled process utilising hopper bins cement dispensing silo and a pugmill .
the mixing period and the time of addition of water shall be such as to produce a uniform mixture of the components .
num cementitious binder content and unconfined compressive strength ucs requirements a cementitious binder content the contractor shall determine the content of cementitious binder required to meet the minimum num day ucs specified in table num using modified compaction .
the cementitious binder content may be further increased to allow for the effects of production variability .
the binder content so determined shall become the design cementitious binder content which shall not be less than the minimum cementitious binder content specified in table num .
during manufacture the cementitious binder content shall be determined in accordance with as num cement content of cement stabilized materials as listed in section num .
cementitious binder shall be added and mixed into the crushed rock to produce a uniform binder content .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num after mixing the cementitious binder content of the mixture expressed as a percentage by mass of the dry crushed rock shall be within num of the design cementitious binder content .
b unconfined compressive strength test the contractor shall carry out ucs testing in accordance with the test frequency specified in table num .
the ucs test result shall be the mean ucs determined from a pair of specimens tested in accordance with as num unconfined compressive strength of compacted materials as listed in section num and compacted using modified compactive effort .
for the purposes of ucs testing one representative sample of fully mixed cement treated material shall be taken either from the plant or at the point of delivery in accordance with as num sampling preparation of stabilised pavement materials as listed in section num and compacted in the mould within two hours of mixing .
the ucs during production shall be assessed on a rolling average basis where the average of the most recent three ucs test results shall not be less than the minimum value specified in table num .
table num cementitious binder content and unconfined compressive strength pavement design modulus mpa minimum design cementitious binder content by mass minimum num day mean ucs mpa rapid setting gp cement medium setting gb cement slow setting supplementary cementitious blends num num num num or num num num num num num moisture content where the contract includes supply and delivery only the moisture content of the mixture at the point of delivery expressed as a percentage by mass shall be within num to num of the target nominated by the superintendent .
num stockpiling of mixture where ctcr is temporarily stockpiled prior to loading the batching time shall be recorded on the delivery docket .
num handling of mixture handling of the mixture including discharging from mixing plant and loading of trucks shall minimise segregation .
num minimum testing requirements the contractor shall test ctcr products at such a frequency and within the relevant time limits to ensure that the supplied material consistently complies with the relevant specified requirements of the department of state growth standard sections code of practice num and any additional testing specified as a condition of registration of the crushed rock mix .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num the test frequency shall initially not be less than that shown in table num except that the test frequency for grading unsound rock content plasticity index ucs and degradation factor fine aggregate may be halved where the most recent ten successive test results have met the specified requirements .
if any subsequent test result fails another test shall be immediately undertaken .
if the second test fails the test frequency shall revert to the minimum frequency specified in table num and the contractor shall not return to half the test frequency until a further ten successive test results comply with the specified requirements .
table num minimum frequency of testing test minimum frequency of testing grading on each production day one per num tonnes or part thereof except where the total production on any day less than num tonnes .
unsound rockforeign materials content one per production day of a sample taken from the crushed rock product prior to addition of cementitious binder .
cementitious binder content on each production day one per num tonnes or part thereof except where the total production on any day is less than num tonnes .
moisture content on each production day one per num tonnes or part thereof except when total production on any day is less than num tonnes .
plasticity index in each production month one per num tonnes or part thereof .
degradation factor fine aggregate one per production day for crusher fines imported from another source or location within the source to that of the course aggregates .
or where specified as a condition of a crushed rock mix .
mean unconfined compressive strength in each week one per num tonnes or part thereof .
if production in any week is less than num tonnes the quantity may be added to the total production in the following weeks until a total of num tonnes is reached .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num aggregate for sprayed bituminous surfacing this section crossreferences sections num num and num and these sections should be included in the specification .
if any of the above sections are not included in the specification all references to those sections should be struck out ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent num description this section covers the requirements for classes a b and c aggregate produced by crushing and screening for use in sprayed bituminous surfacing .
the classes and sizes of aggregate to be supplied and stacksite requirements are specified in section num .
num definitions aggregate aggregate consists of substantially onesized mineral particles used as a cover material applied to a thin membrane of bituminous material .
assigned los angeles value the assigned los angeles value lav is a hardness rating derived from los angeles value test results which is assigned annually to each source by vicroads as per code of practice for source rock investigations as listed in section num .
assigned polished stone value the assigned polished stone value psv is a friction rating derived from polished stone value test results which is assigned annually to each source where applicable by vicroads as per code of practice for source rock investigations as listed in section num .
average least dimension the average least dimension ald is the average height of the aggregate particles when they are spread as a single layer with their least dimension vertical .
crushed aggregate an aggregate produced by crushing and screening of rock spalls or other material approved by the superintendent which has fully or num crushed faces .
partly crushed aggregate an aggregate produced by washing crushing and screening of a suitable material e.g .
coarse gravel which may not have fully crushed faces .
num source rock source rock used for the production of aggregates shall comply with the requirements specified in section num and shall be obtained from a vicroads accredited source with a current assigned lav and where required a current assigned psv .
synthetic or blended aggregates from different sources shall only be used with the approval of the superintendent .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num aggregate requirements and testing sampling and testing of aggregates shall be undertaken in accordance with vicroads codes of practice num and num. a general requirements i crushed aggregate shall consist of clean hard durable angular fragments of rock and shall be free from clay and organic matter .
granitic rocks river gravel and calcrete and other sedimentary rocks shall not be used for the production of class a sealing aggregate .
ii partly crushed aggregate shall be produced by crushing clean hard durable particles of gravel and shall be free from clay and organic matter .
the aggregate shall have a minimum of num by mass of aggregate particles having two or more faces produced by crushing .
partly crushed aggregate shall only be used for the production of class b and c sealing aggregate .
b sampling of aggregate the sampling of aggregate for specified testing shall be based on lots .
a lot shall consist of not more than num tonnes of aggregate of the same class and size .
the lot shall be uniform in appearance and be produced from the same source and under the same conditions .
the department of state growth may agree to increased lot sizes up to num tonnes where the supplier demonstrates that the source rock is of consistent quality and there is a history of satisfactory test results and performance .
each lot of aggregate shall be assigned a unique identification number andor unique stockpile location .
lots shall be stockpiled separately to ensure aggregate testing is fully traceable .
a representative sample shall be taken at random from each lot and tested for compliance with the requirements specified in clauses numd e and f not more than num days prior to delivery .
c testing of aggregate hp the results of all testing as required by this section shall be provided to the superintendent prior to delivery .
d unsound and marginal rock unsound and marginal rock in that fraction of a sample retained on a num mm as sieve shall not exceed the values specified in table num .
notwithstanding the requirements of clause numb regarding lot size where daily production of the same source and class of aggregate exceeds num tonnes per day the lot testing for unsound and marginal stone can be reduced to one lot per day .
table num marginal and unsound rock content limits class of aggregate total of marginal and unsound rock max by mass unsound rock max by mass individual test individual test a num num b num num c num num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num e flakiness index flakiness index tests shall be undertaken on aggregate sizes of num mm or above .
i for all source rock except granitic sources with an assigned los angeles value of num or less the flakiness index of aggregate shall not exceed the values specified in table num .
table num flakiness index requirements lav num class of aggregate flakiness index max by mass individual test a num b num c num ii for all source rock with an assigned los angeles value of more than num and for all granitic sources the flakiness index of aggregate shall not exceed the values in table num .
table num flakiness index requirements lav num class of aggregate flakiness index max by mass individual test b num c num f grading the grading by mass of one sized aggregate shall conform to the relevant requirements of tables num and num .
table num grading envelopes and minimum ald requirements for class a and b aggregate sieve size mm percentage passing as sieve by mass nominal size of aggregate num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num minimum ald num num num num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num table num grading envelopes and ald requirements for class c aggregate sieve size mm percentage passing as sieve by mass nominal size of aggregate num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ald to be reported g average least dimension for num mm aggregate and larger testing of ald values is required for each lot of aggregate supplied under the contract in accordance with the relevant ald test methods contained in section num refer codes of practice num and num and based on lot requirements as specified in clause numb .
num acceptance of aggregate if all of the specified test results comply with the relevant requirements of clauses numd e and f the aggregate represented by the lot will be accepted .
if any of the individual test results do not comply with the relevant requirements of this clause the lot will be rejected .
aggregate which does not meet the above acceptance criteria shall not be supplied or delivered .
num precoating of aggregate aggregate shall be precoated with suitable precoating material and each particle shall be uniformly coated to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
only aggregates which have been tested and meet the requirements of clause num to the superintendents satisfaction shall be precoated .
precoating of aggregate for primer sealing shall be at the discretion of the contractor .
a typical precoating material shall have a viscosity in the range num to num pa.s at numc and contain a bitumen residue of between num and num by mass and an adhesion agent of num by volume at normal concentration .
the use of alternative precoating materials will be considered .
specific proposals shall be submitted to the superintendent for review not less than num business days prior to use .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num num delivery aggregate shall not be delivered directly from stockpiled lots at the quarry to the stacksites unless the aggregate has been tested and meets the acceptance of all test requirements to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
where delivery of aggregate is made to stacksites at or near the site of the sealing works delivery shall be made to separate identifiable stacks for each lot of aggregate tested .
once delivery is commenced the contractor shall continue to promptly complete the delivery of the entire lot .
department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num section num hot melt bitumen adhesive for raised pavement marker installation num description this section covers the requirements for hot melt bitumen adhesive for use in bonding raised pavement markers complying with the requirements of as num part num to bituminous and concrete road surfaces .
the requirements relate to physical properties and packaging .
num physical properties hot melt bitumen adhesive is a homogeneous mixture of bitumen and mineral filler .
component properties a bitumen min .
max .
method penetration num g num s numc num astm dnum viscosity numc poise num astm dnum b filler min .
max .
filler content by dry mass of adhesive num num filler grading passing as num mm sieve num passing as num mm sieve num adhesive properties min .
max .
method softening point c num num astm dnum penetration num num astm dnum flow mm num astm dnum as modified heat stability flow mm num astm dnum as modified viscosity numc poise num astm dnum as modified flash point c.o.c .
c num astm dnum shelf life years from date of delivery num recommended pouring temperature c num num strength requirements bond strength development when tested in accordance with appendix e of as num as modified to allow use of hot melt adhesive the adhesive shall attain a bond strength of num mpa within the times specified in table num .
table num maximum times for bond strength development minutes adhesive bond curing at numc bond curing at numc bond curing at numc bitumen hot melt num num num department of state growth department of state growth august num section num page num of num bond strength in slant shear when tested in accordance with appendix f of as num as modified to allow use of hot melt adhesive the adhesive shall have minimum slant shear bond strengths as specified in table num .
table num slant shear failure stress substrate condition minimum slant shear stress mpa dry steel adhesive bond cured for num num h at numc numc num dry steel adhesive bond cured for num num h at numc numc and water soaked for num days num wet hardened concrete adhesive bond cured for num num h at numc numc num wet hardened concrete adhesive bond cured for num num h at numc numc and water soaked for num h num wet hardened concrete adhesive bond cured for num num h at numc numc and water soaked for num days num bond strength in shear when tested in accordance with appendix g of as num as modified to allow use of hot melt adhesive the adhesive shall have a minimum bond strength in compressive shear as specified in table num .
table num bond strength in shear substrate minimum bond strength in compressive shear mpa all ceramic and reflective markers in accordance with as num types a b and ab dry or bond cured for num num h at num numc and num days soak num bond behaviour under impact shear when the adhesive is tested in accordance with appendix h of as num as modified to allow use of hot melt adhesive there shall be no relative displacement of a slant shear block assembly when subjected to a drop impact energy of num j .
num packaging and identification each container shall display the following information manufacturers identification of product manufacturers name suppliers name date of manufacture batch number directions for using .
department of state growth department of state growth september num section num page num of num section num manufacture of road signs num description of sign types this section covers the requirements for the manufacture and packaging of all road signs both permanent and temporary which are made with steel or aluminium substrates .
the sign types to which this section applies are categorised and defined as follows category a flat sheet permanent or temporary signs unbraced this category comprises small signs up to the following maximum dimensions a rectangular signs up to num mm nominal horizontal width b triangular signs up to num mm side c diamond signs up to num mm side d signs of other shapes including circular octagonal trapezoidal up to num mm nominal width e rectangular temporary signs up to num mm width and up to num mm depth but excludes any sign whose width to height ratio exceeds num to num refer category b below .
this category also comprises overlay panels intended to be fitted to the face of a category b sign .
category b flat sheet permanent or temporary signs braced this category comprises all flat sheet signs larger than those described in category a above .
category c folded box edge temporary signs category d extruded aluminium section signs this category comprises fingerboards roadstreet name signs and the like made from extruded aluminium sections .
num substrate materials each sign blank shall be manufactured from a material selected from table num according to the corresponding category for that sign .
the manufacturer shall supply a certificate of compliance in respect of metal grades alloys and tempers if requested .
table num material description material to comply with appropriate sign categories refer clause num aluminium sheet num mm thick as num in the following grades and tempers a b alloy temper num num hnum or hnum hnum or hnum zincaluminium coated steel sheet num mm thick as num c extruded aluminium section as num in the following grades and tempers d alloy temper num num num tnum tnum tnum department of state growth department of state growth september num section num page num of num num blank manufacture a general requirements i manufacturing tolerances dimensional tolerances shall be as follows num overall dimensions of blank num mm or num of dimension whichever is the greater .
num holes size tolerance num num mm hole centre dimension geometric position mating hole centres tolerance num mm nonmating hole centres tolerance num mm num maximum allowable warp twist or departure from flatness num mmmetre blanks shall be free from undulations or ripples which may result in noticeable ripples or distortions on the sign face .
num blank squareness in the case of a single panel sign no corner of the panel shall be more than num mm from its theoretical position relative to other corners .
in the case of multipanel signs adjacent panels shall fit together so that any gap between panels is not more than num mm wide and parallel to within num mm over the length of the panel .
num general fabricating dimensions the greater of num mm or num of dimension .
ii fixings num rivets rivets shall be monel or stainless steel and shall have a shank diameter of num to num mm and a head diameter of num to num mm .
where the rivet head bears on a cellular type retroreflective sheeting an num mm od nylon washer shall be placed under the rivet head .
rivets placed on coloured sign face material shall have the rivet heads coloured to match the sign face material .
all rivets shall be installed after sheeting and legend have been applied to the blank .
note guide signs are preferred to be braced using a flushed rivet system with no exposed rivet to reduce the risk of the sign sheeting being damaged .
num adhesive fixings adhesive fixings intended by the manufacturer for the purpose of fixing cover strips or stiffening sections and used in accordance with the current manufacturers specification may be used for making a horizontal or vertical joint pursuant to clause numbiinum and for fixing stiffening sections pursuant to clause numbiii .
iii preparation sign components shall be prepared prior to painting andor the application of sheeting backgrounds andor legends andor adhesive fixings as follows num all burrs shall be removed and all rough edges shall be dressed .
blanks shall be smooth and free from fabrication defect and chemical residue .
department of state growth department of state growth september num section num page num of num num all unpainted sign components and sign face blanks shall be prepared to satisfy the current surface preparation requirements of the sheeting manufacturer andor paint manufacturer andor adhesive fixing manufacturer .
b specific requirements signs in category b i panel size and joint limitations num the number of joints both horizontal and vertical shall be minimised on the basis of a sheet size of num x num mm except that for signs specified as overlay panels a sheet size of num x num mm shall apply .
num the width and height of any one panel shall not be less than num of the width and height of any other panel .
ii panel joints num location horizontal panel joints shall not occur through any internal border or through any word or numeral legend of character height num mm or less other than the descenders of any lower case legend or any numeral and borders on route marker shields .
vertical joints shall be so located to minimise the amount of legend directly over the joint .
num making joints each panel shall be painted or covered with sheeting as appropriate before the joints are made .
sheeting on either side of a joint shall be colour matched in accordance with the requirements of clause numaiinum .
horizontal joints horizontal joints made with rivets shall coincide with the location of a stiffening section required by subparagraph iii below .
horizontal joints made with adhesive fixings shall not coincide with the location of a stiffening section required by subparagraph iii below and shall be backed by a cover strip of the same material as the blank num num mm wide terminating num num mm short of the edge of the sign .
vertical joints vertical joints shall be backed by a cover strip of the same material as the blank num num mm wide terminating num num mm short of the edge of the sign and discontinued at each horizontal stiffening section with a gap not exceeding num mm .
a cover strip may be omitted if the length of the cover strip would be less than num mm .
the cover strip shall be attached to each blank sheet either by a single row of rivets evenly spaced across the sign at a spacing not exceeding num mm with an edge distance not exceeding num mm from the end of the cover strip by adhesive fixing or other approved method of fixing .
short cover strips attached by rivets shall be provided with a minimum of two rivets on each side of the panel joint .
num incomplete joints for large signs an incomplete joint with provision for field assembly in a manner which ensures structural integrity of the sign pursuant to clause numa requires approval by the superintendent .
the sign panels shall be numbered and the manufacturer shall provide assembly details and all rivets or other fixings for field assembly .
department of state growth department of state growth september num section num page num of num iii stiffening sections num all sign blanks shall be stiffened by the attachment on the rear face of one or more continuous horizontal lengths of galvanised cold rolled steel channel with num x num mm crosssectional dimensions or aluminium extruded section with num x num mm crosssectional dimensions with internal clamping ridges .
joining of stiffening sections shall only be permitted when the length of the sign exceeds the longest available stiffening section .
where joints are permitted they shall be staggered and made so as to ensure the structural integrity of the sign .
num the number of such stiffening sections shall be as given in table num .
table num vertical dimension mm number of sections num x num mm or num x num mm up to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num above num one extra section for each extra num mm of height signs between num and num mm horizontal dimension shall have two sections with the lower section num mm in length and centrally place horizontally .
the lower of the two sections on signs greater than num mm horizontal dimension need only be num mm in length and centrally placed horizontally .
num the location of the stiffening sections shall be as follows one section centred vertically .
two sections located symmetrically on the blank at a spacing of num times the height of the blank num mm .
the maximum spacing shall be num mm .
three or more sections outer sections to be located between num and num mm measured from the edge of the blank to the centre line of the section and both outer and intermediate sections located such that no space between any two adjacent section varies by more than num mm from any other space .
the maximum spacing shall be num mm .
the ends of each stiffening section shall terminate num mm num mm short of the edge of the sign .
department of state growth department of state growth september num section num page num of num num stiffening sections fixed with rivets shall be attached to the blank or each blank in the case of a horizontal joint by a single row of evenly spaced rivets at a spacing not exceeding num mm with a distance not exceeding num mm from the end of the stiffening section or any vertical joint .
num the bearing surface of each stiffening section shall be flat or concave over a substantial part of its width .
num blanks having a dimension measured at right angles to the stiffening sections in excess of num mm shall be fitted with additional transport bracing at right angles to the main stiffening sections as given in table num .
table num dimension parallel to stiffening sections no .
of bracings required crosssectional dimensions up to num mm num num to num mm num num x num mm num to num mm num num x num mm num to num mm num num x num mm greater than num mm num num x num mm cross section dimensions refer to galvanised cold roll steel channel .
num x num mm aluminium extruded section may be substituted for num x num mm for galvanised cold roll steel channel .
sections or numbers of sections alternative to those specified in table num may be used as transport bracing provided they are galvanised steel or aluminium extruded section and at least as strong in bending as the prescribed sections .
the transport bracing sections shall be securely bolted to the stiffening sections at every intersection point in such a way that they may be readily removed after installation of the sign on its supporting posts or structure .
each bracing shall extend num num mm beyond the upper and lower edge of the blank to provide edge protection for the finished sign during handling and installation .
c specific requirements signs in category c all blanks shall be made from a single sheet of steel except signs with a smaller overall finished dimension greater than num mm which may have one joint .
blanks shall be manufactured in accordance with the drawings .
d specific requirements signs in category d i sign blanks shall be either a single section of nominal vertical dimension num mm or num mm or shall be of composite construction comprising separate web and flanges securely attached to one another to provide a nominal vertical dimension in excess of num mm but not more than num mm .
ii acceptance of extruded aluminium sections shall be by type approval in individual cases .
the current list of approved sections is given in table num .
department of state growth department of state growth september num section num page num of num table num description of alloy overall vertical dimension mm area cross section mmnum web thickness mm numtnum numtnum and numtnum num num num num num num note the overall vertical dimension of composite sign to be num mm maximum .
num application of sign backgrounds and legends a general requirements i painted background backs edges etc .
painted sign face backgrounds back and edges where specified by the drawings shall be achieved either by num application of a stoving primer to a dry thickness of num to num mm followed by a stoving enamel in the final specified colour to a dry thickness of num to num mm or num application of a yellow oxidezinc chromate primer to a dry thickness of num to num mm followed by a low gloss polyurethane paint conforming with as num in the final specified colour applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions or num use of prepainted coil stock in the specified colour comprising galvanised sheet steel factory primed and painted with a weather resistant finish not less than num mm total paint thickness on one or both sides .
standard paint colours for traffic signs shall be as specified in as num road signs for nonreflective colours .
where grey edges or backs are specified on a sign the colour shall be as num colour no .
nnum mid grey ii sheeting backgrounds num retroreflective sheeting shall conform with all of the relevant requirements of as num for the class and colour of the sheeting specified on the drawings refer vicroads road design note rdn num and be selected to meet the sign colour and reflectivity requirements in the sign colour and reflectorisation schedule as given in table num .
num colour of nonreflective sheeting shall conform to the requirements of as num .
num sheeting shall be applied in accordance with current manufacturers specifications and instructions .
num sheeting splices may be provided parallel to one edge only .
num the number of sheeting splices shall be minimised on the basis of the widest available sheeting roll .
the minimum width of any sheeting strip shall be num mm .
num sheeting splices where permitted shall overlap by num to num mm unless class numa material is used where joints shall be butted in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
department of state growth department of state growth september num section num page num of num num background sheeting need not be brought to the edge of a sign provided that it can be overlapped by a border made of sheeting by at least num mm .
num separate pieces of any sheeting abutting a splice or abutting a panel joint shall be colour matched when viewed in daylight .
separate pieces of retroreflective sheeting abutting a splice or abutting a panel joint shall be further matched for retroreflected colour .
num any sheeting laid unbroken over a panel joint shall be cut through on the line of the joint using a sharp knife .
num sheeting shall not be applied over any raised protuberance including bolt and rivet heads .
iii application of legends borders etc .
num borders legends numerals internal dividing lines and symbols shall be applied to the sign in accordance with the sign design drawing or if no sign design drawing is provided or otherwise applies in accordance with the sign colour and reflectorisation schedule by either for reflectorised legends application of adhesive sheeting or silk screening with an approved transparent ink over a retroreflective background material or an approved pressure sensitive coloured overlay film over a retro reflective background material for nonreflective legends application of adhesive sheeting or by silk screening with an opaque ink or process paint approved by the sheeting manufacturer .
num sheeting used for the above purpose shall comply with the same requirements as sheeting background and shall be of the type and colour indicated on the drawings .
num where silk screened transparent ink or pressure sensitive coloured overlay film is used in the application of a legend border etc .
inks or film shall be applied only as recommended by the ink or film manufacturer and background sheeting manufacturer .
the colour and retroreflective performance of any portion of the sign which is screened using transparent inks or overlay film shall be indistinguishable .
num all letters numerals and interletter and interword spacings shall conform with the size and series indicated on the drawings .
num tolerances on legends shall be as follows tolerance on shape size and alignment of legend elements including letters numerals arrows symbols etc .
the spacing between letters in a word and the width of borders edge strips and dividing lines shall be num mm or num of dimension whichever is the greater .
legend position tolerance on legend position shall be as above except that horizontal location of line of words may vary by up to one half the letter stroke width if necessary to avoid placing a vertical letter stroke over a panel joint .
legend alignment each legend word or line of words shall be parallel with other legend border and sign edge within num mmm .
other dimensions including length of a line of legend the horizontal spacing between words or groups of legend elements and the vertical spacing between lines of legend or groups of legend elements shall have a tolerance of num mm or num of dimension whichever is the greater .
department of state growth department of state growth september num section num page num of num legends which do not meet the tolerance on spacing between letters in a word but meet the tolerance on overall line length and are judged to be acceptably spaced by visual inspection may be accepted .
num sheeting splices are permitted on sign borders and internal dividing lines .
all other legend elements shall be a single piece of sheeting .
b specific requirements signs in categories a and b i backs and edges of signs shall be left unpainted unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
ii for multiple panel signs adjoining panels shall be butted together while the border and legend are applied following which any of the border and legend crossing a joint shall be cut through on the line of the joint using a sharp knife .
the panels shall then be jointed in accordance with the requirements of clause numbii .
iii for unbraced signs in category a with a cellular reflective sheeting background a circle num num mm diameter shall be cut from the sheeting concentrically around each mounting hole .
c specific requirements signs in category c i yellow faced signs shall be painted as follows num front face of folded box section black .
note adhesive sheeting is not acceptable for this purpose .
num recessed face of sign nonreflective background yellow .
num recessed face of sign reflectorised background yellow or black .
num outer edge of sign yellow or black .
num inner box section return black .
num back of sign yellow .
ii red faced signs shall be painted as follows num edges front face of folded box section inner box section return recessed face of sign red .
num back of sign yellow or red .
num colour red for above purposes to be as follows reflectorised or nonreflective red sign background as num paint colour no .
rnum fluorescent red sign background as num paint colour no .
rnum .
iii reflective or fluorescent sheeting applied to the recessed face as a sign background shall be not less than the overall nominal dimensions of the signboard in size less num mm in both width and height and shall be placed centrally on the recessed face .
d specific requirements signs in category d i sheeting strips reflective or nonreflective shall extend to within num mm of the top and bottom edge of the sign .
the material shall be applied so that it adheres firmly and securely to the web over its full width .
ii uncovered parts of the web and flanges of the sign shall be left unpainted .
e digital printing digital printing technologies may be used for manufacture of signs .
department of state growth department of state growth september num section num page num of num only matched component inks and printer devices recommended by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer shall be used .
the ink and any protective coating must be compatible with the background material both in application and durability .
num labelling a the following information shall appear on the rear face of signs in clause num categories a to c and on sign in clause num category d on any part of the web not covered by sheeting i designation of the manufacturer limited to num letters .
ii four numerals indicating the month and year of manufacture e.g .
num or num. iii for guide signs and other signs with site specific legend the sign reference number shown on the drawing which will generally be the drawing number .
iv code designation of the brand and class of the retroreflective sheeting used as shown in table num and the brand of the nonreflective or fluorescent sheeting used .
b information to be stamped into the rear face of the sign shall be stamped prior to application of any sheeting or be embossed into a separate piece of metal which will be subsequently attached to the sign rear face by the use of an adhesive fixing .
c letters and numerals used for labelling on the rear of signs shall be a minimum of num mm high and shall be capable of being readily discerned after painting with a coat of paint up to num mm thick .
for category d signs num mm letters minimum shall be used .
d on signboards with both dimensions larger than num mm the information shall be located within a num mm radius of the lower left hand corner of the rear face of the sign such that it can be read from below the sign .
num packaging handling and storage a packaging if the contractor is responsible for sign unloading the packaging of signs in terms of size and mass shall be consistent with the resources provided by the contractor .
packaging shall protect the signs from damage during handling and transport taking into account the recommendations of the sheeting manufacturer .
the outer face of each package shall show information as follows i signs with standard non sitespecific legends e.g .
regulatory warning signs the standard sign number and quantity of each type of sign in the package plus delivery instructions as given on the order or otherwise advised shall be legibly marked ii guide signs and other signs with site specific information a copy of the sign drawing or drawings included in each package shall be securely attached to it in a clear weatherproof envelope to the outer face of the package to be readable without opening the envelope iii a notice shall be attached to each package warning of damage that may result from improper storage and handling and setting out the requirements for storage and handling generally as described in clause numb .
b handling and storage signs shall be handled and transported so as to prevent damage to the sign face or other components .
signs shall be stored vertically in such a manner to prevent damage to the sign face edges or components taking into account any recommendations of the sheeting manufacturer .
department of state growth department of state growth september num section num page num of num num warranty a sign face material the contractor shall give to the department of state growth a warranty for the periods given in table num that all retroreflective fluorescent and nonreflective materials used in the manufacture of signs shall remain in good condition in the following respects i no evidence of cracking crazing peeling or lifting from the substrate delamination blistering chalking wrinkling or edge shrinkage greater than num mm excepting accidental damage and ii no evidence of fading or gross colour change except that loss of fluorescence in a fluorescent material will be accepted provided that the colour change is not significant in comparison with the samples provided in as num appendix d and iii in the case of retroreflective and fluorescent retroreflective materials retention of a photometric performance not less than percentage values given in table num below at the warranted period based on relevant photometric performance tables in section num of as num part num when tested at an entrance angle of num degrees and an observation angle of num degrees in accordance with appendix a .
where a particular colour is not given in those tables maintenance of an agreed set of photometric performance values which are to be not less than half the values obtained from tests of that material when new .
table num material class num warranted outdoor durability num warranted retained cil values num class numw retroreflective material ten years num class numw retroreflective material white with overlay twelve years num class numw retroreflective material screen printed ten years num class numw retroreflective material digitally printed ten years num class num retroreflective material twelve years num class num retroreflective material white with overlay twelve years num class num retroreflective material screen printed ten years num class num retroreflective material digitally printed ten years num class num retroreflective material seven years num class num retroreflective material white with overlay seven years num class num retroreflective material screen printed seven years num class num retroreflective material digitally printed seven years num fluorescent material yellow and yellowgreen ten years num fluorescent material orange three years num nonreflective material seven years na notes num as specified on the drawings num from the date of manufacture as indicated on the sign by stamping in accordance with clause numaii num cil coefficient of luminous intensity as defined in as num department of state growth department of state growth september num section num page num of num b signboard and components the contractor shall give to the department of state growth a warranty that the signboard and components shall remain in good condition in all respects other than those covered in paragraph a above accidental damage or vandalism excepted for an equivalent period to sign background material class specified in table num. c giving of warranty the execution of a formal instrument of contract or the submission of a quotation by a contractor for goods to be supplied in accordance with this specification shall constitute the giving of the warranties specified herein by the contractor to the department of state growth .
d warranty claims if any sign or retroreflective material fluorescent retroreflective or nonreflective materials used on a sign deteriorates to a condition poorer than those indicated in subparagraphs a and b above within the time limits specified either the contractor shall replace the sign or shall pay to the department of state growth a sum sufficient for the department of state growth to obtain a replacement sign on a pro rata basis as follows i failure within the appropriate warranted period as specified in table num from the stamped date total cost of supply delivery and erection of a new sign to be borne by the contractor .
ii failure after more than num year from the stamped date the contractor to bear the total cost of supply and delivery of a new sign less an allowance equal to that cost multiplied by the ratio of the expired life to the total warranty life .
the contractor shall be solely responsible for meeting all claims under these provisions and shall not reassign any such responsibility to any other organisation .
num inspection and testing a the superintendent reserves the right to inspect any phase of the manufacturing process .
b on request at any time during the currency of the contract the contractor shall provide a test panel num mm square typical of any stage of production including unapplied retroreflective fluorescent retroreflective fluorescent or nonreflective material .
for testing silk screened work the contractor shall supply a testing screen which will print his trade mark or other identification on portion of the panel together with a strip at least num mm wide across the panel .
the superintendent may require proofs to be taken from any silk screen before production commences .
c all tests shall be conducted in accordance with the current test methods used by vicroads .
num approval by the superintendent in considering any request for an approval required by this section the superintendent will take into account a evidence of use in maintenance of similar signs b performance under similar service conditions c manufacturers specifications and other product details d conformance with relevant australian standard requirements department of state growth department of state growth september num section num page num of num the superintendents approval may be conditional and require the contractor to use materials in a specified manner .
num sign colour and reflectorisation schedule the contractor shall select the materials used in sign manufacture so as to conform to the colour and reflectivity requirements given in table num below .
table num sign type num .
sign sheeting material legend border chevron and arrow where applicable background num .
guide signs advance direction signs cl num white cl num standard green or brown intersection direction signs cl num white cl num standard green or brown fingerboards black ci num white reassurance signs cl num white cl num standard green route codes and national highway route shield cl num yellow cl num standard green overhead mounted signs direction signs cl numw white cl numw standard green or brown clearance signs black cl numw white wrong way genum cl numw white cl numw red regulatory signs generally black or as specified elsewhere ci numw generally white or red or as specified elsewhere cl numw other sign elements such as arrows route codes etc .
cl numw cl numw scenic lookout and geological feature signs ci num white cl num brown information baystourist layby signs cl num white cl num brown streetroad names signs and plates black cl num white service symbols and tourism shields ci num legend graphic cl num white photographic images digital print on cl white cl num white town name signs black ci num white historic town name signs ci num white ci num brown historic feature signs e.g .
bridges ci num white ci num brown local government boundary signs black ci num white stream name signs black ci num white route markers ci num white ci num standard green kilometre posts gnum ci num white ci num standard green traffic instruction signs black ci numw white or yellow reduce speed signs gnum ci num white ci num red advance lane designation signs ci num white ci num standard green road project identification signs colours and reflectivity to be in accordance with the design drawings num .
tourism information signs note there signs are generally private signs tourism feature signs e.g .
wildlife park woolmers cl num white cl num brown commercial tourism facility signs cl num yellow or white cl num blue or brown major attraction signs cl num whiteyellow cl num brownblue department of state growth department of state growth september num section num page num of num sign type num .
sign sheeting material legend border chevron and arrow where applicable background e.g .
mona tahune airwalk tasmanian visitor information network centre signs cl num yellow tvin symbol ci num white legend cl num blue visitor radio signs cl num white cl num blue promotional welcome to tasmania tourism precinct municipaltown boundary greeting signs touringthemed route signs the legend border background colours and reflectivity of these signs shall be determined by the department .
some of these signs may contain photographs .
on class num background signs the legend border service symbols andor tourism shields shall be class num .
num .
regulatory signs regulatory signs except as listed below generally black or as specified elsewhere ci num generally white or red or as specified elsewhere ci num pedestrian crossing rnum black fluorescent yellow green children crossing rnum black fluorescent red orange parking rnum series redgreenblack white ci num safety zone rnum black fluorescent yellow green num .
warning signs all except as listed below black cl num yellow or ci num white as specified pedestrian warning series wnum wnum wnum and supplementary plates wnumwnum wnum wnum num wnum wnum wnum and wnum black fluorescent yellow green school wnum black fluorescent yellow special wildlife warning signs dusk to dawn wildlife warning sign wnum num panel a panel b cl numw white black black cl num w fluorescent yellow wildlife awareness sign wnum ci num green ci num white folding warning signs i.e .
frost ice snow road closed etc .
black ci num yellow num .
hazard markers chevron alignment markers dnum black cl num yellow all other hazard markers black cl num white num .
temporary warning signs workers tnum black fluorescent orange prepare to stop tnum cl num white cl num red all other warning signs black cl num yellow
