department of transportation and infrastructure standard specifications for highway construction january num ja the as p prep will n it is toda of a stan the c bid i of w cons requ shal entir the as d the gove spec qua intro stan spec and con anuary use o standards preprinted pared as de not compet the respon ate copy of agreement ndard spec crown con tems in the work and cle struction pro uirements o l form part rety .
standard s efined in th standard ern the pe cifically not ntity are oduction d ndard cond cifications requisite tract .
y num of new br in the dti componen esign aids ently serve sibility of th f the stand terms of cifications .
struction c e standard early identif ovisions to of the notic t of the c specificatio he definition specificatio rformance ed as a bid found und ivision num ditions .
it understand behaviour fore runswick standard s nts of a co or as a ma e those purp he bidderc dard constr payment the stand contracts ac specificatio fy the scop produce th ce of tend ontract as ns rely on t ns item num ons form p of the con d quantity .
der the fo num paymen t is impera d this inter of the c eword k provinc specificatio onstruction anual of de poses .
contractor t ruction con a genera dard specif ct. ons are inte e material he specified er are inco if they ha the use of s num. part of the ntractor ev items wh ollowing d nt adjust ative that rrelationsh ontractor w cial stan ns are inte contract .
esign proce to ensure th ntract includ al conditio fications are ended to be requireme d end produ orporated b ad appeare specific wo contract ven though hich are not divisions tments and users of hip to the o within the dards nded to be they are edures and hey have a ding the ar ons b an e complian e complete nts and sp uct .
by reference ed here in rds and ph documents an item i t noted as division num d division these stan overall co context o used e not d they an up rticles d the t with units pecific e and their rases s and s not a bid num num ndard ntract of the depa janua num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num artment ary num table of co clearing grubbing removing common e unclassifie solid rock ditching borrow metal pipe metal pipe subdrain subdrain o table of co production aggregate shoulder m fine gradin cold milling shoulder r shoulder s bituminous stan of trans num num num num num num ontents isolated tree excavation d excavation excavation large outlet ontents of highway a basesubbas material ng g asphalt co rumble strips subdrain s tack coat ndard sp portatio ta standa divisio num table o num termino num abbrev num definitio num authorit num permits divi s division num aggregates se oncrete ecificati on and inf able of con ard spec on num intr of contents ology iations ons ty of the engi s ision num g num paveme ions frastruc ntents cification roduction ineer grading num con num con num prec num foun num bac num bac num indu num cha num rem num app num stan ent struct num asp num asp num part num full num micr num chip num pulv num sho num stan cture ns n ncrete pipe ncrete pipe l cast concrete ndation exca kfilling around kfill for struc uced trench ain link fence moval of fenc lication of wa ndard drawing ture halt concrete halt concrete tial depth rec depth recyc ro surfacing p seal verizing ulder process ndard drawin large e box culvert vation d structures ctures e ce ater gs e method sp e ers cycling cling sing gs page num of num pecification depa janua num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num artment ary num table of co portland ce concrete in reinforcing tension sp steel h pile steel pipe steel shee excavation precast pre posttensio steel supe steel lamin bridge pot table of co storm sew precast ca sluice box frame with adjustment relocation paving cat stan of trans ontents ement concre n structures g steel plices es piles et pile cofferd within coffe estressed co oning system erstructure nated bearing bearings ontents wer pipe atch basin h grate or co t of catch bas of catch bas tch basin apr ndard sp portatio ta divisi ete dams erdams ncrete beams m gs divis over sins and man sin on ecificati on and inf able of con on num str s sion num m nholes ions frastruc ntents ructures num sea num fing num stee num guid num serv num wat num sho num eng num free num rem num rem num rem num stan municipal num pipe num curb num con num asp num rem num rem num rem num stan cture led expansio ger joint asse el ballastwall de rail syste vice duct st terproofing oring ineered fill edraining ba moval of asph moval of conc moval of struc ndard drawin e zone materi b and gutter ncrete sidewa halt sidewalk moval of curb moval of sidew moval of unde ndard drawin on joint assem emblies angle m structure tructures ackfill halt concrete crete ctures gs ial alk k and gutter walk erground serv gs page num of num mblies es structures vices depa janua num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num artment ary num table of co guide post removal of guide rail removal of energyabs removal of terminal castinpla concrete e under roa undergroun undergroun power poin removal of screw base removal of sign or lig table of co geotextile sediment c filter scree jute mats erosion co removal of gabions random r rock weir armour sto individual r gravel for f stan of trans di ontents ts f guide posts f guide rail sorbing guide f energyabs ace concrete encased road dbed duct nd duct nd junction b nt f power point e f screw base ht base ontents control fence en ontrol structur f erosion con iprap one protection rock placeme fish habitat ndard sp portatio ta ivision num s e rail termin orbing guide barrier dbed duct box t e division e re ntrol structure n ent ecificati on and inf able of con traffic c al rail n num envi e ions frastruc ntents control de num rem num ligh num rem num med num rem num sign num rem num roa num rem num ove num ove num rem num ove num rem num pave num con num stan ronmenta num tops num hyd num fert num mulc num roo num tree num tem num tem num fish num culv num soil num stan cture evices moval of sign ht standard moval of light dian flashing moval of medi n post moval of sign adside sign moval of road erhead sign s erhead sign s moval of over erhead sign moval of over ement markin nstruction traf ndard drawin al soil roseeding tilizing ching ot wads es and shrub mporary wate mporary wate h rescue vert erosion p reinforceme ndard drawin or light base t standard light an flashing l post dside sign structure foun structure rhead sign st rhead sign ngs ffic control gs s r barrier r control wor protection ent gs page num of num e light ndation tructure rks depa janua num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num artment ary num table of co haulage s haulage a overhaul overhaul overhaul table of co scheduling work sche subcontrac supply of m hiring prac insurance s signs traffic con detours maintenanc constructio pits and qu examinatio asphalt co geotechnic scales and private tru heavy equ stan of trans di ontents soil rock and asphalt conc common exc unclassified solid rock e ontents g edule ctors materials ctices schedule trol persons ce of traffic f on roads uarries on of soils info oncrete core d cal instrumen d weighing pr cks ipment ndard sp portatio ta div in ivision num d aggregate rete cavation excavation excavation division num flow ormation data tation rocedures ecificati on and inf able of con ision num l librar nternal us payments num standa ions frastruc ntents library ry se only s adjust num fixe num forc num extr num pay num adju num mob ard condit num bac num com num line num wor num disp num env num wor num safe num aud num con num fals num form num part num valu num adv num limi num spe num com num stan cture tments ed rates ce account ra work ment adjustm ustment for as bilization tions k up alarms mpaction es and grades rk progressio posal areas ironmental re rking conditio ety support s ited safety p nstruction dra sework mwork tnering ue engineerin isements ited funds cified work mpletion date ndard drawin ments sphalt binder s s n equirements ons systems rogram awings and ca ng gs page num of num r price alculations depa janua artment ary num sho sta ar te g ins for pla affi stan of trans ort form cont andard constr rticles of agre erms of paym eneral condit urance sched rm of tender ans and stand idavit i ndard sp portatio ta tract ruction contra eement ment a tions b dule e f dard specificat s standa ecificati on and inf able of con append act tions g subject in ard draw ions frastruc ntents dix ndex wing inde cture ex page num of num depa table janua it num num num num num artment e of conte ary num tem num t num a num d num a num p stan of trans ents terminology .
abbreviations definitions authority of th permits ndard sp portatio descr e engineer .. ecificati on and inf introductio ription ions frastruc on cture numbe page num num num num num di r of es vision num page num depa term janua num num num num num artment inology ary num terminol .num this do .num item to t .num arti .num whene that any reques unacce design followed .num unless shall re gender n .num working pronou intende headings .num the he conven meanin particula .num particul this doc .num particul conflict .num whene any oth practice .num in the e betwee stan of trans logy ocument is div m is generally the work .
icle is used to ver in the co ything is don sted deem eptable sati nated and su d by the word otherwise sp fer to this doc notation g titles havin ns such as he ed to refer to p s titles and adings titles ience and for ng of the stand ar specific lar specificati cument and a lar specificati s in codes ver a conflict her reference e the most str event of a con en the choices ndard sp portatio vided into spec y used with te o reference an ontract docum e or to be do med neces isfactory un uch similar ex ds by the eng pecified in the cument .
ng a mascul e his and him persons of eith d captions and captions r the ease of r dard conditio cations ions are defin re particular a ons shall prev and stand in interpretat ed document ringent require nflict the eng s of action as n ecificati on and inf introductio cific items .
ext that conta ny subsection ments and in d one if as wh sary perm nsatisfactory xpressions the gineer or to t e text all refe line gender m are utilized her sex and a s appearing in reference only ns specificat ned as specif and specific to vail over those dards tion applicatio including b ement shall a ineer shall be noted to be in ions frastruc on ains reference of an item .
documents re en or where mitted su suspended en the expres he engineer erences to sp such as wo in these spe re gender neu n this docume y and in no wa tions andor th fications adop o a contract .
e published h on or directio but not limite apply to the w e the sole jud n conflict betw cture e to payment esulting during contemplate uitable ap sufficient ssion shall ha as the case m pecifications orkman work ecifications fo utral .
ent have been ay define lim he particular s pted subsequ erein whenev on occurs betw ed to related work .
dge of the mo ween the docu and performa g the work it ed required pproved a authorized ave the same may be .
items tables kmen and fo r the sake of n inserted as it or enlarge t specifications uent to the pu ver in conflict t ween this doc codes ando ost stringent re ments .
item num page num ance related is provided directed acceptable specified e force as if s or figures oreman and brevity are a matter of he scope or s. ublication of therewith .
cument and or standard equirement ter pag num rminology ge num num cross .num cros and .num .num .num y referenc ssreferences can be categ inclusive re xxx.num or co of the work u for the adher of the item .
separate item portion of the with or to item item x appears as s standard dra departm es s form an imp gorized as follo eference to a onstruction xx under the item rence to or th m referenc e work under the requirem xx indicates uch in the lis awing refere stan ment of tr introduc portant role in ows a portion of a xx.num section m where the r e performanc ce to another the item whe ents of the that the cro st of approxim ence to the ap dard spe ransport ction the interpreta another specif indicating tha eference is n ce of the requ r specification re the referen e crossrefere ossreferenced mate quantitie pplicable draw ecificatio tation an ation of the s fication item at the crossre oted .
there w uirements of t n item item nce is noted is nced item .
th d item is a s es of the tend wing .
ons nd infras standard spec in general to eferenced sec will be no sep he crossrefe xxx indicat s carried out he crossrefer separate unit der documents tructur item num january num cification item o the materia ction forms pa parate payme erenced sectio ting that som in accordanc rence to the fu t payment an s. re num num ms als art nt on me ce ull nd depa abbr janua num artment reviations ary num abbrevia .num wherev contrac aa ac ais an ap as as aw bp cg ca cs cw de dt df mt op pc pc ss tr si aa ch ca ce ch cs cs dr em eo ep esa gc lo pc pe pv ra rc ro sp stan of trans ations ver the follow ct documents shto ci si si egnb ce tm ws r gsb ancsa sa wb elg i o to pss ci ca pc b dt w ap bdc p pa r mm os p al c c p c ap cp ow cap ndard sp portatio ing abbreviati s their intent a american as american co american iro american na association o american so american so american we bureau of pu canadian ge canadian sta canadian sta canadian we department o department o department o ministry of tr ontario provi prestressed c portland cem steel structu transportatio international average ann creosote har corrugated a common exc canadian hig aluminum co aluminum co dimension r environmenta equivalent o environmenta equivalent si general cond limit of contr precast con polyethylene polyvinyl chl reclaimed as reinforced c right of way structural pla ecificati on and inf introductio ions or terms and meaning s org sociation of s oncrete institut n and steel in ational standa of professiona ociety of civil e ociety for testi elding society ublic works d eneral standa andards asso andards asso elding bureau of environmen of transportat of fisheries a ransportation incial standar concrete inst ment associat res painting c on research b system of un ual daily traf rdwood aluminum allo cavation ghway bridge oated corruga orrugated stee atio for plastic al manageme pening size al protection p ingle axle loa ditions b of t ract ncrete pipe oride sphalt pavem concrete pipe ate corrugate ions frastruc on are used in t shall be as fo ganizations state highway te nstitute ards institute al engineers a engineers ing and mater y department of ards board ociation ociation u nt and local g tion and infras and oceans of ontario rd specificatio titute tion council board nits terms ffic oy pipe e design code ated steel pip el pipearch c pipe ent manual d plan ad the contract ment d aluminium a cture the specificat ollows y and transpo and geoscien rials f commerce government structure new on e pe dti alloy pipe tions the pla ortation officia ntists of new b new brunswi w brunswick item num page num ns or other als brunswick ick ab pag num num bbreviation ge num num public .num whe the t num si term .num the out .num oth are .num wh of m ph are de en fo le ns spcsp spcapa spcspa sre une watcm ations and en publication time of the sig ms e following ta t under the te her terms and e used .
here no units measure shal hysical quan ea ensity nergy orce ngth departm structural structural structural solid roc unclassifi work area d regulatio ns or regulatio gning of the c ble of commo rms of the sta d abbreviation are indicated ll be millimetr tity sta ment of tr introduc plate alumin plate corrug plate alumin k excavation ed excavation a traffic cont ons ons are referre contract .
on metric term andard speci ns may be use on the plans res unless oth c square square hectar square gram p kilogra tonne joule kilojou megaj newto kilonew megan micron andard s ransport ction terms um coated c ated aluminiu um coated c n trol manual d ed to the refe ms and abbrev ifications .
ed if they are s for the meas herwise noted common si u e millimetre e metre re e kilometre per cubic met am per cubic per cubic me newton metre ule oule on wton newton n specifica tation an corrugated ste um alloy pipe corrugated ste dti erence is to th viations shall referenced in surement of le d. units tre metre etre e ations nd infras eel pipe arch eel pipearch he latest versi apply to all w n the context ength or dista si sym mm mnum ha km gmnum m kgm tm j kj mj n kn mn m tructur item num january num ion available work carried in which they ance the unit mbol mnum num a mnum mgl mnum mnum j j n n m re num num at y depa abbr janua artment reviations ary num physi light mass perme powe press stress temp time torqu unit w stan of trans ical quantity eability r sure s perature ue weight ndard sp portatio y ecificati on and inf introductio com millimetre metre kilometre lux kilolux milligram gram kilogram tonne metre per metre per watt kilowatt pascal kilopasca megapasc newton pe kilonewto meganew degree ce second minute hour day year newton m kilonewto ions frastruc on mmon si unit e r second r year l cal er square me on per square wton per squa elsius metre on per cubic m cture ts etre metre are metre metre si symbo mm m km lx klx mg g kg t ms ma w kw pa kpa mpa nmnum knmnum mnmnum c s min h d a nm knmnum item num page num ol ab pag bbreviation ge num ph ve vis vis vo vo vo ns hysical quan elocity scosity dyna scosity kine olume solid olume fluid olume rate o departm tity amic matic f flow sta ment of tr introduc c metre kilome pascal millipa square square cubic m cubic d cubic m millilitr litre kilolitre cubic m cubic m litre pe andard s ransport ction common si u per second etre per hour l second ascal second e millimetre p e metre per se millimetre decimetre metre re e metre metre per sec er minute specifica tation an units er second econd cond ations nd infras si sym ms km pa mpa mmnum mnum mm dm mnum ml l kl mnum mnum lm tructur item num january num mbol s h s as nums s mnum mnum num l l num s in re num num depa defin janua num num artment nitions ary num descript .num the fol meanin .num where meanin of a cap .num where standar having definitio actual basi marku employ addendum aggregate paveme aggregate and the backslope bidder a represe borrow an ofway bridge any bridge leng backs o bridge wid betwee railing .
change or contrac basis of completion comple stan of trans tion llowing words ng ascribed to it is intende ngs ascribed in pital letter for t words and p rd dictionary d regard to the ns ic rate rate ps for the c yee and not di see tender base the ent .
subbase th e subgrade .
slope betwe a person pa entative subm n excavated m . y structure in gth the grea of abutment w th the clea en the bottom rder a writte ct documents f payment and date the eted .
ndard sp portatio s and phrase them set out ed that words n this definitio the first letter phrases are definition com context in wh e per hour pa contractors o rectly accrued addendum layer of crus e layer of agg een the backo artnership or mitting a tende material used excess of num m ater dimension walls or betwee r width of a m of curbs or en order issue s or quantities d time adjustm date specifie ecificati on and inf introductio es wherever below in orde s and phrase ons item such of each word not defined i mpilation of a hich such word id to the con overhead pro d to that empl shed aggrega gregate place ofditch and o r corporation er for the work in constructio m in span leng n of a structu en ends of br structure me if curbs are ed by the en s or both wit ments for the w d in the con ions frastruc on used in the er to provide c es used in th words and p or each word n this item t astm standar ds or phrases ntractors emp ofit or other oyee .
ate placed as ed as a distin riginal ground acting dire k. on the source gth carrying ve re measured ridge deck .
easured at rig not used be ngineer to the thin the scope work affected ntract docum cture contract doc consistency a he contract d hrases shall b d of a phrase .
then reliance rd definitions s are used .
ployee exclus administrativ s a distinct ct layer betw d. ectly or thro e of which is lo ehicular ando along the cen ght angles to etween the in e contractor e of the cont d by the chan ents on whic cuments sha nd clarity of in documents a be designated should be p andor astm ive of any all ve costs rela layer directly een the aggr ough a duly ocated outsid or pedestrian ntre of the de o the centre o nner faces of covering cha ract and esta ge .
ch the contra item num page num all have the ntent .
are to have d by the use placed on a m dnum and owances or ated to the y below the regate base authorized e the right traffic .
eck between of the deck f parapet or anges in the ablishing the act is to be de pag finitions ge num conform whe mea contract contract emp paym contract gen add such ame culvert for t day a c daylight on a dust th teste the w enginee of n sect this unde thro expl will b equipme main com finished foreslop grou highway boun extra initial wo d m complianc ere working to ans complianc t as per the a tor the party ployees who ment of all leg t documents neral conditio enda incorpo h other docu endments to t any structur he passage o calendar day t shall refer a daily basis fr he fine partic ed by standar whole sample er the chief new brunswic tion num of the s shall include er the contra ugh authoriz lanations and be given .
ent all mac ntenance and mpletion of the d grade the g pe the slope und in case of y the whole nded by the a land which t ork schedule departme ce with reaso olerances are ce with such to articles of ag y of the first is primarily lia gal debts perta the execu ons b sta orated into the uments as m he contract m re not classifi of water under and shall incl to the hours rom the enviro cles of a mas rd sieve analy e passing the engineer of th ck otherwise e contract .
e any person ct and shall i zed assistant directions ne chinery and d also tools a work .
grade to indic e between the f a fill .
strip of land right of way the owner ma the work sc sta ent of tra introduc onable and c e not specified olerances .
reement of th part to the c able for the ac aining to the w ted articles andard speci e contract be may be liste made pursuan ed as a bridg r any roadwa ude all days w between sun onment cana s defined by ysis methods num mm sieve he departme named as th n authorized b include withou ts such as ecessary for th vehicles tog nd apparatus cate the finishe e shoulder an reserved for a y lines as at ay from time t chedule subm andard s ansporta ction ustomary ma d. where wo e standard c contract acting cceptable perf work .
of agreemen ifications pa efore the exe ed in the a nt to the prov ge andor dra ay or driveway without excep rise to sunset ada weather w the percenta on a sample e size .
nt of transpo he engineera by himher to ut being limite engineers he satisfactory gether with th necessary fo ed pavement nd the ditch o and secured present or a o time acquire mitted per item specifica ation and anufacturing a orking toleran construction c g directly or formance of t nt the tende articular spec cution of the articles of ag isions of the a ainage system y. tion .
t. sunrise and website .
age passing t ed prepared a ortation and in architect as p o perform on ed to any pers technicians y prosecution he necessary or the proper c elevation of t or between th for the use o as said lines e during the p m num .
ations d infrast and construct nces are spec contract .
indirectly thro the contract a er terms of cifications p articles of a greement an articles of ag m which provid d sunset time he num micron and tested on nfrastructure o per general herhis beha sons acting e inspectors and completi y supplies fo construction a the centre line he shoulder a of the travellin may be chan progress of the tructure item num january num tion tolerance cified confor ough agents o and also for th payment a plans and an greement an nd subseque greement .
des an openin es are availab n size sieve a the fraction o of the provinc conditions b alf any functio ither directly o by whom a ion of the wo or upkeep an and acceptab e. and the origin g public bein nged to includ e contract .
e num num es m or he a ny nd nt ng le as of ce b on or all rk nd le al ng de depa defin janua artment nitions ary num laboratory by the o lane the p lump sum inclusiv althoug overbreak the esta any roc overburden exclusiv overexcava enginee owner sha pavement pavement subbas load to plans sha and ot dimens professiona practice and co profile a c excava distinct progress e the ter public holid new br quantity th to be u actual docum rightofwa roadbed referen stan of trans any official t owner .
portion of a tra price a co ve for the com gh a quantity m the portion ablished paym ck formation e n any materi ve of the grub ation all exc er .
all be as state surface and structure a se aggregate the subgrade all include all ther drawings sions and deta al engineer e in the provin ode of ethics .
charted line in tion and grad from a plan o stimate sha ms of payme day shall inc runswick day he amount pr sed as an est aggregate of ents as determ ay the land s that portion nced from cen ndard sp portatio testing facility avelled way fo ontract item f mpletion of the may be given of any rock w ment lines reg ncountered o al that must b bbed material .
cavation beyo ed in the gene or base mixes all material p e base and p e. graphical rep s or exact ails of the wor shall mean nce of new b ndicating grad ding work tak or overhead vi ll have the sa nt a and the clude the follo labour day resented on th timate of the f work perfo mined by mea secured and re of the road ntreline .
ecificati on and inf introductio maintained b or the moveme for which pay e work define in the contra which is exca ardless of wh or to any othe be removed to ond that spe eral condition s whether por placed above pavement prov presentations reproductions rk .
n a qualified brunswick an des and dista ken along a c iew .
ame meaning e general con owing days o remembran he tender fo work .
final p ormed or ma asurements m eserved to the dway between ions frastruc on by the owner ent of a single yment will be ed .
payment act documents avated displac hether the exc r cause .
o access unde ecified perform ns b section rtland cement e the subgra viding suppor including but s thereof w professional nd as defined ances and usu centreline or o g as progress nditions b. only new ye ce day and c orm is to be co payment to the terial furnishe made by the e e public for hi n the inside cture or any other t e line of vehic made at a s is not based o s. ced or loose cess is due to erlying suitab med without num. t asphalt con ade which w rt for and the not limited to which show l engineer re and bound b ually depth of other designa s claim as at ears day go christmas da onsidered as e contractor ed in accord engineer .
ighway purpo edges of slo testing facility cles .
single tendere on a measure ened outside a the inherent c le constructio the written o crete andor c would include e distribution o o profiles cro the location egistered or by the apegn f cut and heig ated line .
a si ttributed to it b ood friday ca ay .
approximate will be made dance with th oses .
opes of ditch item num page num y designated ed price all ed quantity and beyond character of on materials order of the chip seal .
aggregate of the traffic osssections character licensed to nb bylaws ght of fill for de view as by usage in anada day only and is only for the he contract es and fills de pag finitions ge num roadwa the appe shoulde refe sidewalk skew or the case slope r soil par mate specifica that base statutory mon birth proc chri stripping rem structure struc foun clas subgrad surfa substan acce rem d ay that portio slopes refe ertaining to th er that portion erenced from k that portion r skew angle roadway with e of culverts w run to rise exp rticle sizes erial bo co gr sa sil cla ations the s define the p ed .
y holiday nday the day hday of the s clamation of t istmas day a g either the oval of the as es bridges ctures concr ndation drains sed herein .
de the layer ace which for ntial completio eptance and o ediation of oth departme on of the righ erenced from he work .
n of the road centreline of n of the road the acute a h a line paralle with the centre pressed as a r the following oulder aver obble aver ravel part and part t part exh ay fine to ex cons num µm statements p products mate shall include y fixed by pro sovereign ca the governor and boxing da e removal of sphalt cement s culverts c rete barriers s and other fe r whether in ms the finishe on the con occupancy e her deficiencie sta ent of tra introduc htofway req centreline way from the f the slopes of way construc ngle formed b el to the face e line of the b ratio .
soil particles rage dimensio rage dimensio ticle passing a ticle passing a ticle passing a ibits no streng grained soil o xhibit plasticit siderable stre m. rovisions and erials and wo the following oclamation o anada day in council as ay .
topsoil ando from the agg catch basins cribbing w eatures which cut or fill as ed elevation o ndition of the xcept for the es as defined andard s ansporta ction quired for cons and includin outside edge f ditches and cted for the us by the interse of the abutme barrel .
sizes shall a on greater tha on between num a num mm sieve a num mm sie a num µm sieve gth when air d or the fine gra ty within a ran ength when air d requirement orkmanship u g days only f the govern new brunsw s a general d or overburden regate .
drop inlets m walls building h may be enc prepared to of this layer de work when performance by the engine specifica ation and struction limi g ditches ch es of the lane fills .
e of pedestria ction of a line ents the cent apply for the an num mm .
num and num mm e and retained eve and retain e and is nonp dried .
ained portion o nge of water c r dry .
also de ts contained i upon which th new years nor in counci wick day lab day of thanks n or the actio manholes ret gs sewers countered in t support the efined at the c the work sit of any clean eer .
ations d infrast ited by the ou hannels and e or lanes to t ans .
e normal to th tre line of the terms used t m. d on a num m ned on a num µm plastic to slight of a soil that c contents and e efined as parti in the contra he contract fo day good il for the cele bour day the sgiving reme on of water r taining walls service pipe the work and pavement st centreline .
te is ready fo nup andor fin tructure item num january num utside edges o all structure the inside edg e centre line o piers or in th to describe th mm sieve .
m sieve .
tly plastic and can be made exhibits icle finer than act document for the work friday easte ebration of th e day fixed b embrance da resulting in th overhead sig es subdrain d not otherwis tructure or th or the owner ishing and th e num num of es ge of he he d ts is er he by y he gn s se he rs he depa defin janua artment nitions ary num substructur skewba wingwa cast in superintend work .
superstruct bearing tender add has the compon docume ticket see unit price equipm necess utility a fa is not l televisio weight cer delivere describ informa work incl supplie work area work site interest stan of trans re all that p ack of arches alls and wing place box culv dent the co ture all that gs of simple an dendum a c e effect of mo nent of the te ents to which e weight certi the amount ment materia ary to comple acility maintain imited to san on services .
rtificate a vou ed to and ve e the quantit ation pertinent udes all labo d and installe the location the lands a t upon which ndard sp portatio part of the s and tops of f protection ra verts and cas ontractors au t part of the nd continuous change in a te odifying the te nder and sha the addendum ficate .
t stated in the ls transporta ete the work a ned by a mun nitary sewer ucher issued erified by the ty of material t and necessa our material a d or erected c in the work s and premises the work is to ecificati on and inf introductio structure below footings of rig ailings and fo st in place con uthorized repr structure sup s spans and t ender issued ender .
a ten all be deemed m refers .
e contract re ation costs a and does not i nicipality publ storm sewer by the owne owners rep upon which p ary for the eva and services complete at th site on which w owned by th o be performe ions frastruc on ow the bearin gid frames in or the expres ncrete arches .
resentative of pported on p the deck slab prior to the ti nder addendu d to take prece epresenting th nd expenses include the hs ic authority or water elect r at the point presentative a payment of th aluation of the required as he place of bu work is being he owner or ed and as defi cture ngs of simple ncluding but n sed purposes f record in re iers or abutm of rigid frame me and date um shall be c edence over he price per s and any a st. r regulated au tric gas stea of origin of a at the work he load is to b e load by the e shown or de uilding .
g carried out .
r in which the ined in the co e and continu not limited to s of winter co esponsible ch ments located es .
of tender clo considered as those parts o unit for all la and all other uthority and in am telephone load to a truc site .
this vo be based and engineer and escribed in th e owner has ontract docum item num page num uous spans backwalls oncreteing harge of the d above the osing which s an integral of the tender abour tools incidentals ncludes but e and cable k driver and oucher shall d shall show others .
he contract proprietary ments .
depa auth janua num num num artment ority of th ary num orders o .num the co given a .num if the c engine accorda constru .num equipm docum .num the en which f unautho .num any w descrip notifica .num upon o replace .num if t eng acc stan of trans he enginee of the eng ontractor shal at any time by contractor di er the cont ance with term ction meth ment and meth ents .
ngineer reserv fails to consis rized wor ork done or ptions detaile ation shall be order of the ed by the con the contracto gineer may ca cordance with ndard sp portatio er ineer ll promptly an y the enginee sagrees with tractor shall ms set out in hods and e hods used sh ves the right t tently produc rk material supp d in the co considered a engineer un ntractor at his or fails to co ause unautho h the terms of pecificat on and inf introductio nd efficiently r with respect any order perform the the general c equipment hall be approp to order the d e satisfactory plied by the ontract docum as unauthorize nauthorized w sher own exp omply prompt orized work o f the general tions frastruc on comply with a t to the work direction or i work as in conditions .
priate to perfo discontinuance y results .
contractor w ments or es ed and may n work or mate pense .
tly with any or material to conditions .
cture all orders dir or the condu instruction gi nstructed and orm the work e or use of an which is beyo stablished by not be measu erial shall be order made be remedied rections and ct thereof .
ven at any t d shall serve k outlined in th ny equipmen ond the lines y the owner ured for paym e remedied r under this s removed or item num page num instructions time by the e notice in he contract t or method grades or by written ent .
removed or section the replaced in depa perm janua num artment mits ary num descript .num the co item num .num all othe requisit expens stan of trans tion ontractor sha num and the co er permits req te for the car se unless oth ndard sp portatio ll review all p ontract docum quired but no rrying out of erwise specif ecificati on and inf introductio permits in for ments .
ot forming pa the work sha fied .
ions frastruc on rce for the w art of the con all be obtaine cture work and the ntract docum ed by the co conditions as ments but nec ontractor at h item num page num s set out in cessary and hisher own depa table janua it num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num artment e of conte ary num tem num c num g num r num c num u num s num d num b num m num m num s num s num c num c num p num f num b num b num in num c num r num a num s num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num stan of trans ents clearing grubbing removal of is common exca unclassified e solid rock ex ditching borrow metal pipe metal pipe l subdrain subdrain outl concrete pipe concrete pipe precast concr foundation ex backfilling aro backfill for st nduced trenc chain link fe removal of fe application of standard draw shaping solid ro subdrain subdrain tension case num case num case num case num case num foundati foundati chain lin chain lin ndard sp portatio descr olated trees .
avation excavation xcavation large et e e large rete box culv xcavation ound structure tructures ch ence ence water wings of overburde ck transitions n n outlet rodbar asse num cross culv num cross culv num cross culv num cross culv num storm drai ion excavatio ion excavatio nk fence nk gate ecificati on and inf grading ription vert es en at top of s s longitudina embly vert subgrad vert subgrad vert original vert original inage culvert on for footing on for footing ions frastruc solid rock ba al de above orig de above orig ground abov ground abov t longitudinal s solid roc s common cture numbe page .. num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ackslope ginal ground ginal ground ve subgrade ve subgrade l to the centre k and commo over solid ro di r of es trench num trench num trench num trench num eline of road on cases ock case vision num page num .num m .num m num m .num m dway depa clea janua num num num num artment ring ary num descript .num this ite brush a .num mercha market material .num none id submitta .num the co constru .num the co specific .num the en .num mercha materia the com .num before licence .num the pro .num if th wo .num the dri transpo .num in f no sha .num trees s the eve .num nonme num .num no of a .num all eve stan of trans tion em consists of and slash .
antable timbe in the genera s dentified .
als ontractor shall ction ontractor sha cally directed b gineer shall id antable timber al shall becom mpletion date commencing the contract e price shall b oducts market he former lice ork to the form iver of any ve ortation certif filling out the .
shall be xx all be identified shall be cut so ent of significa erchantable tr num using equip shredding ch a watercourse other nonme enly distribute ndard sp portatio f cutting and s er is defined a al vicinity of the submit upon all carry out t by the engine dentify clearin r shall be sa me the propert e. g clearing on tor shall offer t be the curren ting board res ensee decide mer licensees ehicle transpo ficate tc for tc other xxxxx the c d. o that stump h ant snow cove rees not felle pment designe hipping or pla e or wetland .
erchantable tr d over the gro ecificati on and inf grading salvaging me as any timbe e contract .
n request a co the work as er .
ng limits and b lvaged unles ty of the cont any part of to sell to the f nt price negot sponsible for t es to purchas specifications orting wood f r crown land in the top rig contract num height is not gr er to a height d by cutting ed for that pur acement of sh rees and all b ound within th ions frastruc rchantable ti r for which th opy of any pe indicated in buffer zone lim ss otherwise tractor and sh the work sit former license tiated betwee the area in wh e the cut tim s. from the wor d permit harve ght corner us mber and the reater than num. as agreed wit may be shred rpose but sha hredded or ch brush and sla he clearing lim cture mber and dis he contractor rmits require the contrac mits with ribbo approved by hall be remove te that had b ee all merchan en the former hich the timbe mber the con rk areas sha est for each se dti row e place name .num m above av th the enginee dded in place all not be bulld hipped materia ash shall be s mits .
sposing of all r can find an ed to carry ou ct documents ns or similar m the enginee ed from the w been crown ntable timber licensee and er is harvested ntractor shall all have in th load .
w under ha e of the clear verage ground er .
e to a stump dozed down .
al shall occur shredded or c item num page num other trees established t the work .
s andor as means .
r. salvaged work site by land under involved .
d the forest d. perform the he vehicle a arvest block ring location d level or in p height per within num m chipped and cl pag num num num earing ge num num .num .num .num orna .num the sedi .num .num clea exce .num the do c .num initia plan rem .num .num the skid .num .num .num stoc as a num measu .num the acco .num .num the mea num basis o .num pay disposal by b notwithstand disposed of s top of slope a amental trees contractor imentation of directional ha for access by be made to a aring shall no ept to provide contractor sh cutting therein al clearing of ns and any o oval of merch non merchan re shall be no ding trees acr where clearin by the engine cease work i in the case of complete clea ckpiling or load approved by th rement fo quantity to ordance with t all measurem areas of remo asured for pay of payment ment for work departm burning is proh ing num such that the and toe of slop s and shrubs s shall limit g watercourses and felling and y heavy equip avoid rutting so ot be performe access throu hall not use h by hand or b merchantable other waterco hantable timbe ntable timber s o long skids o ross a waterc ng of a steep eer or a repre mmediately .
f work suspen aring on the af ding of merch he engineer .
or payment be measured this item .
ments shall be oval of merch yment as clear t k under this ite sta ment of tr gradin hibited .
to num engineer can pe and surve shall not be di ground distur s and wetlands d harvesting s pment .
when oft ground are ed within wetl ugh the buffers eavy equipm y equipment e timber withi ourses identifie er .
shall be remo f timber on st ourse .
slope in snow esentative of w nsion per num ffected area .
antable timbe t d for payment e made in a ho antable trees ring .
em shall be at andard s ransport ng all nonmerc n set and gra y crosssectio isturbed witho rbance to m s. shall be used cable skidde eas .
land buffer zo s as approve ent for clearin able to reach n num m of eith ed during the oved at the tim eep slopes ad w or ice condit work safe nb .num the c er or waste ma t shall be the orizontal plane within num m of t the unit pric specifica tation an chantable tree ade stakes for ons .
out written per minimize the where ground rs are used t ones unless s ed by the engi ng within num m h in to cut an her side of wa e course of th me of the struc djacent to wa tions is suspe b for safety re contractor sha aterials adjac e number of e. watercourses ce .
ations nd infras es brush and r cut and fills rmission from potential for d conditions a the full range such areas ar neer .
m of stream ba d yard out the atercourses id he work sha cture installati atercourses a nded through easons the c ll not be respo cent to the high hectares of l s per num tructur item num january num d slash shall b set stakes fo the engineer r erosion an are not suitab of cables sha re frozen har anks and sha e timber .
dentified on th all be limited t ion .
nd no felling o a written orde contractor sha onsible to hway shall be and cleared num shall be re num num be or r. nd le all d all he to or er all e in depa grub janua num num num num artment bbing ary num descript .num this ite .num this ite operatio material .num none id submitta .num the co constru .num the co specific .num the of t .num the co .num grubbin stumps .num in c gru the .num grubbin original diversio .num gru to b .num the co necess extra sh have fa standa of trans tion m consists of em also consis on done by ot s dentified .
als ontractor shall ction ontractor sha cally directed b e work shall i timber lying on ontractor shall ng shall be ca are removed cut sections a ubbing shall be engineer .
ng shall not be ground exc ons for structu ubbing shall n be wasted as ontractor shall ary to redress haping hydro allen as a resu ard speci portatio f the removal a sts of removal hers .
submit upon all carry out t by the engine nclude dealing n the ground carry out the arried out with and topsoil is and in fill sect e carried out e carried out cept as appro ures are to be not be carried indicated in t be responsib s any areas g oseeding and lt of root seve fication on and inf grading and disposal o of shredded a request a co the work as er .
g with stump due to clearin work in accor h root rakes o s left for salvag tions where th to a width num m in fill sections oved by the carried out .
out in swamp he contract d ble at hisher grubbed beyo or mulching o erance due to s frastruc of roots and st andor chippe opy of any per indicated in height over num ng by others .
rdance with ite or similar equ ge under the e he subgrade m from the cle s where the su engineer wh ps and other a documents or own expense ond the speci of the expose the overwidth cture tumps .
ed material left rmits required the contrac .num m and with em num and it uipment such excavation ite is within num earing line or ubgrade is mo here foundatio areas where t by the engine e to carry out fied limits inc ed ground and h grubbing .
t behind from d to carry out ct documents h brush slash tem num. h that only th em .
m of the orig as otherwise ore than num m on excavation the underlying eer .
t any remedia cluding but no d removal of item num page num the clearing the work .
s andor as h and pieces e roots and inal ground directed by m above the n or stream g material is al measures ot limited to trees which gr pag num num num rubbing ge num num .num roo disp .num .num .num .num whe root disp .num .num no m brid num measu .num the in ac .num num basis o .num pay ots and stump posed of within the materials spread out an original groun where roadb grubbed mat material or b num .
burying may documents a covered with accordance w ere the dispos s and stumps posed of outsid burning of gr materials rem ge or any oth rement fo quantity to b ccordance wit all measurem of payment ment for work departm s with or with n the work sit s may be plac nd tramped fla nd using a cra bed fills excee erials either o borrow and be permitted andor as appr excavated m with num. sal measures s with or witho de the work s ubbed materia moved during er structure .
or payment be measured f th this item .
ments shall be t k under this ite sta ment of tr gradin hout nonmerc te by tubgrind ced under fills at in a uniform awler tractor o ed num m in heig on the existin shall tramp t at other loca roved by the e aterial as dire s of num a out nonmerc site in accorda als shall not b grubbing sha t for payment s made in a ho em shall be at andard s ransport ng chantable tree ding or by bu s over num m in m layer to a c of num t or heav ght to subgrad ng ground or the materials tions within th engineer if th ected by the e are determine hantable timb ance with item be permitted .
all be permitte shall be the nu orizontal plane t the unit pric specifica tation an es brush and urial as follows n height to su compact mass vier .
de the contra r on the first l s to a num m he work site he materials a engineer and ed by the eng ber brush and m num. ed to be place umber of hect e. ce .
ations nd infras d slash as per s ubgrade if the s no more tha actor may pla lift of compac thickness as as indicated are spread out the surface h gineer to be d slash as per ed within num m tares of grubb tructur item num january num r num shall b e materials ar an num m abov ace one layer o cted excavate s described in the contra t tramped an hydroseeded unfeasible th r num may b m of a culver bing carried o re num num be re ve of ed in ct nd in he be rt ut depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of iso ary num descript .num this ite isolated .num an mm .num an material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num isolated .num orname .num the co property .num the co measure .num the qu stumps basis of p .num payme st of trans olated tre tion em consists o d stumps .
isolated tree m above the ex isolated stum s dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b d trees and st ental trees an ontractor shal y resulting fro ontractor shall ment for p uantity to be m s removed and payment nt for work un tandard portatio es of the remova is defined as xisting ground mp is defined a all carry out t by the engine umps shall be nd shrubs sha l be respons om the work .
carry out the payment measured for d disposed of nder this item specific on and inf grading al and dispos a tree having d surface .
as a stump ha the work as er .
e clearly ident ll not be distu ible to repair removal in ac r payment sha in accordance shall be at th cations frastruc sal of isolated g a minimum aving a minim indicated in tified as such rbed without w at herhis o ccordance wit all be the num e with this ite he unit price .
cture d trees comp diameter of num um top diame the contrac in the field by written permis own expense th num and num mber of isola m. lete with stum num mm meas eter of num mm ct documents y the enginee ssion from the any damag num. ted trees and item num page num mps andor sured at num m. s andor as er .
e engineer .
e to private dor isolated depa comm janua num num num num num artment mon excava ary num descript .num this ite work s material .num for tem meeting submitta .num submitt constru .num genera .num the spe .num the .num the det .num pol dire .num .num the em .num .num if a ma .num .num wh con sub .num .num tra ind standa of trans ation tion em consists o site of soil and s mporary stream g the requirem als tals are requir ction al e contractor ecifically direct e contractor s e contractor tailed in the co lyethylene lin ection of flow a the contrac e contractor s bankments .
low spots a days work at any time du ake all necess the depth r compacted t here the roa nduct operatio bgrade unles any surface shall be mai limit posted f ansitions in cu icated on stan ard speci portatio of the excavat d all other mat m diversion ch ments of cgsb red in accorda shall carry ou ted by the eng shall carry out shall constru ontract docum ners for temp and overlaps ctor shall be re shall maintain and ruts that c or if rain is im uring the work sary repairs to utted andor to meet the re adbed being ons so that th s approved by e constructed intained in a c for the work a ut and fill co ndard drawing fication on and inf grading tion and place terials not clas hannels clea b num shall ance with any ut the work a gineer .
the work in a ct offtakes an ments .
porary stream shall be a min esponsible for n surface drai could pond wa mminent as w k the surface o reinstate the displaced sha equirements o constructed hroughtraffic y the enginee or exposed condition suc area .
nditions at th g num .
s frastruc ement within ssified as solid r polyethylene be supplied b crossreferen as indicated i accordance w nd stream div m diversions nimum of num r maintenance nage during e ater shall be r work progresse becomes rut e surface grad all be scarifie of this item .
is subject to does not trav er .
by the contr ch that traffic c he ends of b cture the work site d rock .
e liners a min by the contrac nced item form in the contra ith item num a version chan shall be ins mm in the dir e and removal excavation of removed no la es during the tted or displac de .
ed moisture c o throughtraff vel directly on ractor and su can safely tra bedrock cuts e or disposal nimum of num mi ctor .
ming part of th act documents and item num. nels as ident talled transve rection of flow of the liners .
f cuts and con ater than the e day .
ced the cont conditioned s ffic the cont n an undercut bjected to th avel along it a shall be car item num page num outside the ils thick and is item .
s andor as tified andor erse to the .
nstruction of end of each tractor shall shaped and tractor shall t surface or roughtraffic at the speed rried out as co pag num ommon exca ge num num .num exca .num .num .num avation avation the contract been complet the contract optimum usag .num any mat shall be s .num the time .num stoc comp or be .num stock assu .num tops .num the con requirem the top num .num the con common placemen .num borro place .num common stockpiled engineer .num stock supp to en .num stock mate all co main .num stock shall over .num work where the su depth below s departm tor shall not co ted for the wo tor shall contr ge of the exca erial suitable salvaged and depth of exca of excavation kpiles shall pletion of ditc e a potential s kpiling shall b red .
soil stockpiles ntractor shall ents of num num mm of the ntractor shall excavation e nt of any mate ow shall not b ed at a lesser n material salv d such that th r. kpiling of com porting the ent nsure maximu kpiles shall no erials nor nea ommon mater ntained at all ti kpiles shall be be shaped to the edge of st k will involve th ubgrade requi subgrade on a standa ment of tr gradin ommence any ork area involv rol the excava avated materia for topsoil f d stockpiled at avation of the n between th not be locat ches and slop source of silta be carried ou s shall be mul separately e borrow aa subgrade .
conduct ope either has be erial under item be placed in a cost to the ow vaged by the he material do mmon material tire weight and m recovery of ot be placed ar property line rial is not pos mes .
e built in layer o maintain sur tockpiles shal he rehandling ires undercutt a plane parall ard speci ransport ng y excavation u ved .
ation and han als is achieved from cuts an t the location topsoil layer e contractor ted where the pes as per ite ation to waterc ut such that th ched in accor xcavate or o anum as indicate erations such een used or m num. areas where e wner unless o e contractor f es not becom shall be done d dimension o f the stockpile near a quarry es tree lines ssible or pract rs not exceedi rface drainage l not be perm g of excavated ting subexcav el to the subg fication tation an until the origin ndling of the d as follows nd from fill ar s approved shall be as d and the engi ey shall inhib em num block courses .
he maximum rdance with it otherwise salv ed in the con that all usa shall be used excavated ma otherwise auth for reuse oth me saturated a e on a welldr of the stockpil d materials .
ypit face stri or drainage d tical and acce ing one metre e before the n itted .
d material from vation shall be grade crosssl s nd infras nal crosssect common mat reas that sha by the engin determined in neer .
bit orderly co k or inhibit na recovery of tem num. vage materia ntract docume able material d in the wor aterials could horized by the her than as t at a location a rained level b les and in suc ipping piles o ditches such t ess to the sto e in thickness next layer is be m stockpiles .
e carried out t lope .
tructur item num january num tion survey ha terial such th all be stripped eer .
the field at th onstruction an atural drainage the material ls meeting th ents for use resulting fro rk prior to th be hauled an e engineer .
topsoil shall b pproved by th base capable ch a manner a or piles of othe that retrieval ockpile shall b and each laye egun .
dumpin to the specifie re num num as at d he nd e is he in m he nd be he of as er of be er ng ed depa comm janua num num artment mon excava ary num num .num hau aut .num the tha .num in c be wou .num wh bed .num exc pro dire .num exc con .num bou item .num placem .num the con .num the sur .num em for lift .
.num .num ma mm .num .num ma num in num .num .num wh tha as num m standa of trans ation uling of comm thorized by the e contractor s t would cause cuts the area shaped to eli uld impede na here common drock backslo cavated mate operty of the ected by the e cavated mate ntractor and s ulders num mnum o m num. ment e placement nform to lines e placement rface drainage mbankments s reslopes and e on ungrubb approved by aterial placed t m. the lift thickn proof that the aterial placed num borrow a num .
in backfilling by the engin here embankm n num for the t each lift of fill m. ard speci portatio mon excavatio e engineer .
shall shape dit e water to pon between the t iminate vertic atural drainage material is u opes shall be s erial designate owner and s engineer .
erial designate shall be dispos or larger that a of excavated and grades p of material s e. shall be const each success bed areas sw y the engineer to within num ness may be e specified de in the top aanum as indica g of undercuts neer .
ments are con top num m belo is placed so th fication on and inf grading on over aggre tches to the lin nd shall be rem top of the bac al or overhan e. underlain by a shaped as ind ed by the en shall be eithe ed by the eng sed of in acco are encounter d material sha provided .
hall be in lay tructed such t sive lift shall be wamps and r r. mm below su increased to a ensity can be a num mm of ated in the co deeper than structed again ow subgrade hat the next lif s frastruc egate bases nes and grade moved .
ckslope and th nging faces e a deep bedro dicated on sta ngineer as su er stockpiled gineer as wa ordance with it red in the wo all be carried yers and eac that the first l e completed t rough terrain ubgrade shall a maximum of achieved thro f the subgra ontract docum num mm the nst an existing the spreading ft is keyed in cture ubbase shall es specified a he edge of the exposed roots ock cut the m andard drawin urplus and us or otherwise ste shall bec tem num. ork shall be ha out in accor ch layer shal lift when shap to the full widt the initial lif have a maxi f num mm if th ughout the en ade shall me ments and sha lift thicknesse g earth sidehil g equipment s nto the sidehil not be permi and any grade e ungrubbed s s and any ma material at the ng num. seable shall placed in th come the pro andled in acco rdance with it l be shaped ped forms the h prior to plac ft thickness s mum lift thick he contractor ntire lift .
eet the requi all be placed es shall be as l having a slo shall cut into th l to a width no item num page num itted unless e conditions surface shall aterial which e top of the remain the e work as perty of the ordance with tem num to to maintain e toe of the cing the next shall be as ness of num can provide irements of as specified determined ope steeper he sidehill ot less than co pag num num num num ommon exca ge num num .num .num num .num com .num .num .num num .num culv .num num .num driv .num avation where the w the other side the roadbed side of the ro excavated m constructed s in the contrac .num maximum limits sho .num maximum driven .
mpaction the contract num .
.num any isola the spec quality m in cuts the s by a test strip .num if the sub prior to b documen each lift of ex of num of the verts where excav any existing p .num the cont .num pipe dete and shall maintena .num salva deter .num unsalvag disposed veways driveways ex utilizing mate departm work involves p e the spread as each lift o oadbed or the material place shall be a mat ct documents m num mm be own on the pla m num mm wh tor shall carry ated soft spots cified compact atching the su subgrade surfa p. bgrade has be being backfille nts to subgra xcavated mate e maximum dry vation involves pipe is not dam tractor shall no ermined by the l be reused i ance depot .
ageable pipe rmined by the geable pipe a of outside the xcavated und rial excavated standa ment of tr gradin placement of m ing equipmen of material is p existing road ed behind s terial meeting s and shall ha hind abutmen ans or here structure y out moisture s or other are tion criteria s urrounding ma ace shall be c een undercut ed with borro ade .
erial after pla y density .
s removal of maged and is otify the engin e engineer to in the work s e that is dam engineer sha nd waste sha e work site .
der this item d from the cros ard speci ransport ng material firstly nt shall cut int placed so tha dway slope to tructures or the requirem ave lift thicknes nt breastwalls es shall be co conditioning eas within the hall be excav aterial as dire compacted to the undercut ow aanumquali cement per num culverts the salvaged for r neer prior to e be salvageab site under item maged as a all be replace all become the shall be repl ssing whereve fication tation an y along one si to the edge o at the next lift o a width not l in areas wh ents of num sses as follow or other earth onstructed or t and compact e top num m of vated and ba ected by the e num of the co t surface shal ity material a num shall b contractor sh reuse .
exposing any e ble shall rema m num or tra result of th d by the cont e property of laced the sam er possible .
s nd infras de of the roa of the previous t is keyed in ess than num m here structur borrow aa ws hretaining st through which tion in accord f the subgrad ackfilled with engineer .
ontrol density l be rolled wit as indicated i be compacted hall take care existing pipe .
ain the propert nsported to th he contractor tractor .
the contracto me day they tructur item num january num adbed and the sly built side o to the adjace m. res are to b anum as indicate ructures to th h piles shall b dance with ite de not meetin material of th y as determine th a static rolle n the contra d to a minimu e to ensure th ty of the owne he nearest dt rs actions a or and shall b y are remove re num num en of nt be ed he be m ng he ed er ct m at er ti as be d depa comm janua num num num artment mon excava ary num num .num wh pav avo .num .num measure .num the qu excavat .num the vol on orig .num in t pay .num excava as defin basis of .num paymen excavat standa of trans ation here excavatio vement shall oid damage to the contrac beyond the d own expense the excavat use in emb disposed of o ment for p uantity to be m ted and place lume shall be ginal ground c the areas to b yable under th ation of soft sp ned by this ite payment nt for work u tion as identif ard speci portatio on involves pa be cut to a n o the adjacent ctor shall be designated lim e of the areas ted pavement ankment con outside the w payment measured for p ed stockpiled a e as measured crosssections be grubbed th his item shall pots deleterio m shall be me under this item fied under the fication on and inf grading aved drivewa neat straight l lands and ro responsible mits of the exc s affected .
t shall be brok nstruction unl work site .
payment shall andor dispos d in situ and c s surveyed by he crosssectio include mater ous materials easured for pa m shall includ e contract .
s frastruc ays parking lo line and edge oadbed .
for damage t xcavation and ken down into less designat be the numb sed of in accor computed by y the engineer ons shall be t rial in the grub offtakes stre ayment .
de a separate cture ots or other a e and remove to the pavem for the repair pieces small ted by the e er of cubic me rdance with th the average r on the natura taken before g bbed layer rem eam diversion e unit price fo abutting privat ed in a mann ment and oth r or restoration enough to be engineer as w etres of comm his item .
end area met al ground .
grubbing and moved under channels and or each type item num page num te lands the ner so as to her surfaces n at hisher e suitable for waste to be mon material thod based the volume item num. d driveways of common depa uncla janua num num num num num artment assified ex ary num descript .num this ite work s compos material .num for tem meeting submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the co .num the co in the c .num polyeth flow and .num the .num the co excavat .num the co excavat measure .num the qu materia .num the vol on orig .num in t pay .num excava the exc stan of trans xcavation tion em consists o site of materia sed of a mixtu s mporary stream g the requirem als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall ontractor shall contract docu hylene liners fo d overlaps sh e contractor s ontractor sha tion in accord ontractor sha tion in accord ment for p uantity to be al excavated a lume shall be ginal ground c the areas to b yable under th ation per num. avation of driv ndard sp portatio of the excavat als classified ure and variab m diversion ch ments of cgsb red in accorda all carry out t by the engine carry out the construct offt ments .
or temporary all be a minim shall be respo all handle m ance with num all handle ma ance with num payment measured for and either plac e as measured crosssections be grubbed th his item shall num of offtakes veways shall b pecificat on and inf grading tion and place under neither le and undete hannels clea b num shall ance with any the work as er .
work in accor takes and stre stream divers mum of num mm nsible for mai material which num. aterial which num. r payment sh ced stockpiled d in situ and c s surveyed by he crosssectio include mater stream divers be measured tions frastruc ement within r common exc ermined distrib r polyethylene be supplied b crossreferen indicated in rdance with ite eam diversion sions shall be m in the direct ntenance and h would othe would other hall be the nu d or disposed computed by y the engineer ons shall be t rial in the grub rsion channels for payment .
cture the work site cavation nor bution of both .
e liners a min by the contrac nced item form the contrac em num and it n channels as installed tran ction of flow .
d removal of th erwise be cla rwise be clas umber of cub of in accorda the average r on the natura taken before g bbed layer rem s soft spots d e or disposal solid rock exc .
nimum of num mi ctor .
ming part of th ct documents tem num. identified and nsverse to the he liners .
assified unde ssified under ic metres of ance with this i end area met al ground .
grubbing and moved under deleterious ma item num page num outside the cavation but ils thick and is item .
s andor as dor detailed direction of er common r solid rock unclassified item .
thod based the volume item num. aterials and un pag num classified ge num num basis o .num pay exca d d excavatio of payment ment for wor avation as ide departm on t k under this it entified under stan ent of tr gradin tem shall inclu the contract .
ndard spe ransport ng ude a separat ecificati tation an te unit price f ons d infrast for each type tructure item num january num of unclassifie e num num ed depa solid janua num num num num num artment d rock exc ary num descript .num this ite work s .num solid ro volume material .num none id submitta .num submitt .num the co informa .num cop the .num cop occ .num the co .num a le bla app .num a le constru .num genera .num the spe .num the .num the em .num .num any be for stan of trans cavation tion em consists o site of solid ro ock is defined .
s dentified .
als tals are requir ontractor shall ation py of insuran rein .
py of the bl cupational ce ontractor shall etter signed b sting sequen propriate code etter indicating ction al e contractor ecifically direct e contractor s e contractor s bankments .
low spots a days work y surface con maintained in the work are ndard sp portatio f the excavat ock .
as in situ bed red in accorda submit to the nce policy as asters certifi ertification act .
submit upon r by the certified ces and cha es .
g anticipated t shall carry ou ted by the eng shall carry out shall maintain and ruts that c or if rain is im nstructed or ex n a condition s a. ecificati on and inf grading ion and place drock and na ance with any e engineer in s it relates to cation per r . request the fo d blaster or a arges have be times of the ut the work a gineer .
the work in a n surface drai could pond wa mminent as w xposed by the such that traffi ions frastruc ement within t aturally occurr crossreferen n advance of o blasting an regulation num ollowing inform professional een designed day at which as indicated i accordance w nage during e ater shall be r work progresse e contractor ic can safely t cture the work site ring boulders nced item form any drilling a nd any prebl num under mation engineer sta d and perform blasts shall ta in the contra ith item num a excavation of removed no la es during the and subjecte travel along it e or disposal that are num mnum ming part of th nd blasting th ast survey re the apprenti ating that drill med in accor ake place .
act documents and item num. f cuts and con ater than the e day .
ed to through at the speed item num page num outside the num or larger in is item .
he following equirements iceship and pattern and rdance with s andor as nstruction of end of each traffic shall limit posted so pag num num olid rock e ge num num .num .num .num num .num blas .num .num .num excavation transitions in indicated on s rock cuts an blasting sha sunset .
.num blasting between holiday sting near we the contract insurance po notwithstand conducting i sampling for .num any well during th contracto the contract controlled an b departm n n cut and fill c standard draw nd fills shall be ll be permitte within num m num p.m. a without prior ells or structu tor shall carry olicy submitte ding num nspections o water quality ls adversely he course of or is required tor shall carry nd do no exce allowabl based on dis sta ment of tr gradin conditions at wing num. e shaped in a ed only betwe of any reside and num a.m notification to ures y out a prebla d per num num the owner on residential .
affected by t the work a for any wells y out the wo eed the requir le instantane stance from b figure andard s ransport ng the ends of t accordance w een num minut ence or busin m. monday to o and approva ast survey in num. will before a wells within the work th ndor will det s found to be ork such that rements of fi eous charge blast and wa numa specifica tation an the bedrock c with item num. tes after sunr ness shall not o friday or o al by the eng accordance w and during th n num m of e owner will termine if rep permanently vibrations fro igure numa .
e limits ave velocity ations nd infras cuts shall be rise and num m t be permitted on any week ineer .
with the requi he work unde area of blas l provide wat pair or replac damaged .
om drilling an tructur item num january num carried out a minutes befor d to take plac kend or publ irements of th er this item b sting includin ter temporari cement by th nd blasting ar re num num as re ce ic he be ng ily he re depa solid janua num artment d rock exc ary num .num excava .num the enc .num .num the roc .num .num .num .num in sub .num prio dep len .num the roc .num wh bac .num .num .num .num loo saf stan of trans cavation ation e contractor countered .
the area ide top of bedroc e contractor s ck such that op fracturing per num the contra requiremen the top num where the conduct ope has been u item num .
.num borrow lesser co cuts in bedr bgrade and o or to backfillin pth specified gth of the bed e contractor s ck to meet the here soil is e ckfilling shall b isolated poc subexcavate if the subgr than pockets specified sol .num the sa docume where the s of the bedro drawing num osened rock s fe condition an ndard sp portatio shall notify t entified shall b ck elevation fo shall be respo ptimum usage of bedrock s num. actor shall s nts of num num mm of the su contract inc erations such used or shall b shall not be p ost to the own rock the ro on a plane par g a bedrock u and the ditch drock cut or num shall fill any ov tolerances sp encountered be carried out ckets of soil ed as directed ade crosssec s of soil in a lid rock subex me type of ents shall be u subgrade line ock and the num. shall be remov nd the rock so ecificati on and inf grading the engineer be stripped of or crosssectio onsible to cont e of the excava hall be carrie separately ex borrow aanum ubgrade .
cludes borrow that all usable be used in the placed in area ner unless oth adbed shall rallel to the s undercut the r es shall be ex num m longitudin verexcavated pecified in item below subgr as follows encountered by the engine ction is partly bedrock subg xcavation .
borrow aa used to backfi longitudinally soil at the tra ved from the b o removed sha ions frastruc r when mate f overburden oning .
trol the fractur ated materials ed out so as t xcavate or o as indicated w to be place e material res e work prior t as where exca herwise autho be subexcav ubgrade cros roadbed shal xcavated to at nally whicheve areas in the m num. rade in a be below subg eer and backf y in bedrock a grade the so anumquality ma ill both the bed y is in and ou ansition point backslope of b all be utilized i cture rial appearing and the eng ring excavatio s is achieved to produce s otherwise sal in the contra ed in the wo sulting from so to the placem avated mater orized by the e vated to the ssslope .
l be subexcav t least the sam er is the lesse bedrock unde edrock cut a grade within filled with finel and partly in s oil shall be sub terial as ind drock and soi ut of solid rock ts shall be a bedrock cuts s n embankme g to be bedr ineer shall de on and handli as follows hattered rock vage rock m act documents ork the cont olid rock excav ent of any ma ials could be engineer .
e specified d vated to the fu me grade ove er .
ercut with fine area subexca a bedrock c ly shattered ro soil and const bexcavated to dicated in th l undercuts .
k and soil sub s indicated o so as to leave nt constructio item num page num rock is first etermine the ing the solid k for use as meeting the s for use in tractor shall vation either aterial under hauled at a epth below ull width and er the entire ely shattered avation and cut shall be ock .
titutes more o match the he contract bexcavation on standard e a neat and n. so pag num num olid rock e ge num num .num .num .num .num num .num plac .num .num .num .num .num .num excavation the contract andor fill any naturally occ directed by th excavated m property of th directed by th excavated m contractor an cement rock emban friable rock fo .num large roc over the between .num rock pla subgrade contain n be filled w embankment foreslopes a lift .
.num on ungr approved each lift of r repositioned t .num rock suit num t or pla .num friable ro where emba than num for t as each lift of num m. where the w the other side the roadbed the roadbed excavated m constructed s in the contrac departm n tor shall shap y low spots wit curring boulde he engineer .
material design he owner an he engineer .
material design nd shall be dis kments shall or which lift th cks and bould surface of the them .
aced as backf e in an emba no fragments g with rock spall ts shall be co nd each succ ubbed areas d by the engin rock shall be to minimize vo table to be pla aced and tram ock shall be co nkments are c the top num m f fill is placed s work involves p e the spread as each lift o to a width not material place shall be a mat ct documents sta ment of tr gradin pe the ditches th finely shatte ers after be nated by the nd shall be e nated by the sposed of in ac be constructe ickness shall ders shall not e layer onto w fill over an un ankment sha greater than num ls .
onstructed suc essive lift sha swamps an neer .
compacted s oids and bridg aced in a num m mped by a craw ompacted with constructed a below subgra so that the ne placement of m ing equipmen f material is p t less than num ed behind s terial meeting s and shall ha andard s ransport ng remove any ered rock to a ing measured engineer as either stockpile engineer as ccordance wit ed in lifts not not exceed num be placed in hich they are ndercut in so all be the roc num mm in any ch that the fir all be complete nd rough terr such that roc ging and to co lift shall be co wler tractor of h a vibratory ro gainst an exis ade the sprea ext lift is keye material firstly nt shall cut int placed so that num m. tructures or the requirem ave lift thicknes specifica tation an y rock knobs t achieve the sp d by the en s surplus and ed or otherw waste shall th item num. t exceeding num num mm .
clusters or n pushed and f oil or rock or ck salvaged u y dimension a rst lift when s ed to the full w rain the initia k fragments onsolidate the ompacted with f at least num t m roller of a mini sting earth sid ading equipm ed into the sid y along one si to the edge o the lift is key in areas wh ents of num sses as follow ations nd infras that would im pecified width gineer shall d useable sh wise placed in become the num m in thickne nests but shal finer rock plac r as the top num under num and voids in th shaped forms width prior to p al lift thicknes are further b e embankment h a vibratory r mass .
mum num t ma dehill having a ment shall cut dehill to a widt de of the roa of the previous yed into the a here structur borrow aa ws tructur item num january num mpede drainag and grade .
be placed a hall remain th n the work a property of th ess except fo l be distribute ced in the void num mm of th num and sha he surface sha the toe of th placing the ne ss shall be a roken down o t. roller of at lea ss .
a slope steepe into the sideh th not less tha adbed and the sly built side o adjacent side o res are to b anum as indicate re num num ge as he as he or ed ds he all all he ext as or ast er hill an en of of be ed depa solid janua num num num artment d rock exc ary num num .num .num .num no tren measure .num the qu excavat .num the vo method noted in .num if th line .num the num .num boulder .num where the ov calculat .num thi sec larg qu basis of .num paymen excavat stan of trans cavation maximum num limits identifi maximum num driven .
excavated ro nch shall be c ment for p uantity to be ted and either olume of bedr d based on th n num. he contractor e to be used to e payline for num to the rs greater tha in the opinion erbreak shall ted within the s percentage ctional area fo ge percentage antity is useab payment nt for work u tion as identif ndard sp portatio num mm behind ed on the pla num mm where ck shall be pla onstructed un payment measured fo r placed stock rock shall be he topofrock fails to give n o calculate the the rock un intercept of th n num mnum in volu n of the engin be measure lines staked b may be incre or which the e of the area ble material .
under this item fied under the ecificati on and inf grading d abutment br ns or e structures s aced within num nder item num. or payment s kpiled or dispo as measured k sections surv notice under num e quantity of s ndercut surfac he foreslope a ume shall be m eer overbrea ed for payme by the enginee eased at the d width of ove a of solid roc m shall include e contract .
ions frastruc reastwalls or shall be const m of either sid .
hall be the n osed of in acc d in situ and veyed by the num then solid rock exca ce shall be as excavated measured ind ak in ditches a ent up to but er at the statio discretion of th rbreak is not ck excavation e a separate cture other earthre tructed or thro de and for the number of cu cordance with computed b engineer aft n the enginee avation .
the theoretic .
ividually for p and backslope t not exceedi ons at which t he engineer fo excessive bu n staked and unit price fo etaining struct ough which pi e depth where bic metres o this item .
by the averag ter the bedroc r shall determ cal undercut ayment .
es has been u ng num of th the overbreak or stations of s ut represents d if all of the or each type o item num page num tures to the iles shall be e an induced of solid rock ge end area ck exposure mine the rock line as per unavoidable he quantity k occurs .
small cross a relatively e overbreak of solid rock depa ditch janua num num num num artment hing ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num ditching existing continu directio .num the dire .num the co .num the co in the fi .num the co from the .num the ma shall be .num a drive ditch an .num drivewa accorda possible .num wh ens .num .num stan of trans tion em consists o s dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b g shall consis g ditch such th ous smooth g n. e tendered q ected by the e ontractor shall ontractor shall nished work .
ontractor shal e work .
aterials excav e disposed of o way crossing nd slopes rem ays with a cu ance with item e. here excavatio sure that any e the contrac any pipe de owner .
ndard sp portatio f the excavat all carry out t by the engine t of removing hat the width o grade providin quantity includ engineer .
not excavate shape ditche l repair any d vated from wit outside the w designated t maining after e ulvert designa m num andor on involves re existing pipe i ctor shall notify etermined by t ecificati on and inf grading ion and dispo the work as er .
vegetal matte of the bottom ng positive gra des cleaning or undermine es to a uniform damage at h thin the ditche work site .
to be remove excavation ma ated for replac item num utiliz emoval of dri s not damage y the enginee the engineer ions frastruc osal of materia indicated in er and up to a of the ditch is avity drainage ends of driv e the foreslop m crosssectio isher own ex es shall becom ed and not rep atch the adjace cement shall zing material e iveway culve ed and is salva er prior to expo to be salvage cture al from existin the contrac a maximum o s not less than e without pond veway culvert pe during the c on with no go xpense to ad me the prope placed shall b ent ditch and be replaced excavated fro erts the cont aged for reus osing any exis eable shall re ng ditches .
ct documents of num mm of n num m and the ding in the sp ts and cross course of the w ouges or ridge djacent prope erty of the con be excavated slopes .
in the same om the crossin tractor shall ta se .
sting pipe .
emain the pro item num page num s andor as soil from an e ditch has a pecified flow culverts as work .
es remaining rty resulting ntractor and so that the workday in ng wherever ake care to operty of the dit pag num num num tching ge num num .num ditc num num measu .num the out i num basis o .num pay .num salvagea site or t stockpiled .num unsalvag disposed .num if the pip engineer hes shall be .num and num rement fo quantity to b in accordance of payment ment for work departm able pipe shal transported d as directed geable pipe a of outside the pe is damage r the contract stabilized ag num at the end o or payment be measured f e with this item t k under this ite sta ment of tr gradin ll be reused by the contr by the engine nd waste sha e work site .
ed as a resu tor shall be res gainst erosion of each days t for payment s m. em shall be at andard s ransport ng in accordanc ractor to the eer .
all become the ult of the co sponsible to r n with hay or ditching .
shall be the n t the unit pric specifica tation an ce with item num e nearest dt e property of ntractors acti replace the pip straw mulch umber of line ce .
ations nd infras num or item num ti maintenan the contracto ions as dete pe .
in accordan ar metres of d tructur item num january num num in the wo ce depot an or and shall b ermined by th nce with num ditching carrie re num num rk nd be he num ed depa borr janua num num num artment row ary num descript .num this ite work s material .num all mate .num borrow substan .num dus .num bor exc .num .num .num bor test .num .num mu .num bor .num bor .num borrow the max submitta .num the co num days .num submitt standa of trans tion em consists o site .
s erials shall be shall consist nces and sha st content sha rrow anum shal ceeding num w borrow anum s tested in acc borrow anum s rrow a shall h t per num num t if successive reduced at th .num sedimen greater lsnum para para perce dstone clayst rrow a shall h rrow b shall h shall be subj ximum particle als ontractor shall s in advance o tals are requir ard speci portatio f supply of m supplied by t t of soil ando all meet the fol all be determin l be pit run g when tested p shall not cont cordance with hall have a m have a dust co . e test results he discretion o ntary rock pro than num a grading m . num the mic .
num and num ent loss calcu tone andor si ave a maximu ave a dust co ject to the app e size shall no notify the en of obtaining m red in accorda fication on and inf grading material from o he contractor or rock free o lowing require ned in accorda gravel quarri per mto lsnum tain more tha astm cnum maximum plast ontent not exc indicate a d of the enginee oposed for us when test modified as foll crodeval abra num a num μm s ulation .
iltstone shall n um plasticity i ontent not exc proval of the ot exceed two ngineer in wri material from th ance with any s frastruc outside the w r. of roots stum ements ance with ast ed or ripped num. n num of par and cnum .
ticity index of ceeding num ust content b er .
se as borrow ted in acco lows asion machine sieve shall be not be accepta ndex of num. ceeding num .
engineer at t thirds of the l iting for appro he proposed b crossreferen cture work site and mps organics tm cnum .
rock having rticles passing num. tested at a m below num the w a shall have ordance with e shall run num e added to de able as borrow he time of pla ift thickness b oval of the so borrow source nced item form d its placemen andor other g a microdev g the num μm minimum frequ e test frequen e a microdev h test me minutes .
etermine mas w aanum .
acement in th being placed .
ource of mate e. ming part of th item num page num nt within the deleterious val loss not sieve when ency of one ncy may be val loss not thod mto ss b in the e work and erial at least is item .
bo pag num orrow ge num num const .num the spec .num the .num the .num borr .num if at mak .num .num the unde plac .num ove disp .num the with .num .num the .num ruction contractor s cifically directe contractor sh contractor sh row placemen t any time du ke all necessa the depth ru requirements contractor s er items num cement of any ersize stones posed of so tha contractor sh item num .
any isolated specified com matching the placement of material plac num borro .num soil borro num .num rock bo using a fragment reposition .num in backfil the engin departm shall carry o ed by the eng hall carry out t hall carry out o nt shall be carr uring the wor ary repairs to utted andor d s of this item .
shall conduct num andor num material unde per num at the roadwa hall carry out soft spots or mpaction crite surrounding m f borrow shall ced in the w aanum as ind ow aanum as i num. rrow aanum as vibratory rolle s and spalls a ned to minimiz ling of underc neer .
stan ment of tr gradin ut the work gineer .
the work in ac operations at t ried out in acc rk the surfac reinstate the displaced sha the work su num either has er this item .
num and unsuit ay is left in a n moisture con other areas w eria shall be material and a be in lifts and top num m dicated in the ndicated in th s indicated in er of at least and compacte ze voids and b cuts deeper th ndard sp ransport ng as indicated ccordance wit the borrow so cordance with e becomes r surface grad all be scarifie uch that all u s been used o table material neat and tidy c ditioning and within the top excavated an as directed by d shall conform m to subgr contract doc he contract do n the contrac t num t mass .
ed such that r bridging and t an num mm t pecificat tation an d in the cont th item num an ource in accor item num. rutted or disp e. ed shaped a sable materia or shall be us ls from the b condition .
compaction o p num m of the nd backfilled y the enginee m to lines and rade shall m cuments and ocuments sh ct documents surface void rock fragments to consolidate he lift thicknes tions nd infras tract docume nd item num. rdance with ite placed the c and compacte al resulting fr sed in the wo borrow place of soil borrow e subgrade n with material r. grades provid meet the re shall be place hall be placed s shall be pla ds shall be f s are further b e the lift .
ss shall be as tructur item num january num ents andor a em num .
contractor sha ed to meet th rom excavatio ork prior to th ement shall b w in accordanc not meeting th l of the quali ded .
equirements o ed as follows as specified aced in one l filled with roc broken down o s determined b re num num as all he on he be ce he ty of in ift ck or by depa borr janua num artment row ary num num .num ma .num .num .num bor soil and pla .num .num .num emban foreslo .num on thic .num the co .num low wo .num where num for lift of fill .num where other s roadbe roadbe .num any bo can saf standa of trans aterial placed t soil borrow compacted t .num the lift t provide rock borrow compacted s voids and br rrow placed b l meeting the d shall be co ced as follows material beh identified in material ove driven shall kments shall opes and each ungrubbed a ckness in num. ontractor shall w spots and ru ork or if rain is embankments the top num m is placed so t the work invo ide the spre ed as each li ed to a width n orrow surface fely travel alon ard speci portatio to within num m shall have to a minimum thickness ma proof that the w shall have such that rock ridging and to behind structu requirements mpacted to a s hind abutmen the contract er which stru have a maxim be construct h successive l areas swamp .num as ap maintain surfa uts that could s imminent as s are construc m below subg that the next l olves placeme ading equipm ft of material not less than num subjected to ng it at the spe fication on and inf grading mm below sub a maximum of num of the y be increase specified den a maximum k fragments a o consolidate t ures or in area of num bo a minimum of nt breastwalls documents uctures shall mum lift thickn ted such tha ift shall be com ps and rough proved by the ace drainage pond water s s work progre cted against a grade the spre ift is keyed in ent of materia ment shall cu is placed so num m. throughtraffic eed limit poste s frastruc bgrade shall b lift thickness e maximum dr ed to a maxim nsity can be ac m lift thickness are further bro the lift using a as where stru orrow aanum as f num of the s or other ea shall have a m be construc ness of num m at the first lift mpleted to the h terrain the e engineer .
during the pla hall be remov esses during th an existing ear eading equipm nto the sidehi al firstly along t into the edg that the lift is c shall be ma ed for the wor cture be placed as f s of num mm ry density .
mum of num m chieved throu s of num mm oken down or a vibratory roll uctures are to s indicated in maximum dr arthretaining maximum lift cted or throug mm .
t when shape e full width prio e initial lift thic acement of bo ved no later th he day .
rth sidehill hav ment shall cut ll to a width no one side of th ge of the pre s keyed into intained in a c rk area .
follows and each mm if the con ghout the ent m and each repositioned ler of at least o be construct the contract d ry density for structures t thickness of num gh which pile ed forms the or to placing t ckness may orrow .
han the end of ving a slope s t into the side ot less than num he roadbed a eviously built o the adjacent condition suc item num page num lift shall be ntractor can ire lift .
lift shall be to minimize num t mass .
ted shall be documents r each layer to the limits num mm .
es shall be toe of the the next lift .
exceed the f each days steeper than ehill as each m. and then the side of the t side of the h that traffic bo pag num num orrow ge num num measu .num the plac .num if th usea so w .num num basis o .num pay iden rement fo quantity to b ced in accorda he contractor able excavate wasted shall b this volume of payment ment for wor ntified under th departm or payment be measured ance with this places more ed materials u e calculated a of material sh t k under this it he contract .
stan ment of tr gradin t for payment s item .
e borrow than under items num and that quan hall be conver tem shall inclu ndard sp ransport ng shall be the n n the tendere num num ando ntity deducted rted to tonnes ude a separat pecificat tation an number of ton ed quantity t or num the vo from the total s using num tm te unit price f tions nd infras nnes of borrow thereby causi olume of exca l quantity of b mnum .
for each class tructur item num january num w supplied an ing a waste o avated materi borrow .
s of borrow a re num num nd of al as depa meta janua num num artment al pipe ary num descript .num this ite pipearc num m material .num all pipe .num all pipe and sha .num bol stan of trans tion em consists o ch cspa an mm or less .
s e materials sha e and appurte all meet the re lts and nuts sh culvertstru aluminum c pip aluminu pip aluminum pipe cspcap diameter mm num num num num num num num num num num num num ndard sp portatio of supply and nd corrugated all be supplied enances shall equirements o hall be of the mat ucture type coated steel pe um alloy pe structures arch stand equiv spa num num num num num num num num ecificati on and inf grading d installation d aluminum a d by the cont l be manufac of table num same materia table terialfabrica material sta csa gnum aashto mnum astm bnum astm bnum astm bnum aashto mnum tab dard cspcs valent cspa an x rise mm num x num num x num num x num num x num num x num num x num num x num num x num ions frastruc of aluminum alloy pipe ca ractor .
ctured of alum num and table num al as the pipe .
num ation standa andard fab num num as num ast num num num as as as ble num spacap dim wall thi aluminum num num num num num num num num num num num num cture coated corru ap having a minum coated num. . ards brication sta csa gnum stm anumanum tm bnumbnum stm bnumbnum stm bnumbnum stm bnumbnum mensions ickness mm m aluminu coated na na num num num num num num num num num num ugated steel n equivalent steel or alum ndard num numm nummnum numm numm numm m corr um d p num num num num num num num num num num num num item num page num pipe csp diameter of minum alloy rugation rofile mm num x num num x num num x num num x num num x num num x num num x num num x num num x num num x num num x num num x num me pag num num num etal pipe ge num num .num cou faste e d num num .num heli corr .num all c acco .num bac .num .num num submit .num the supp .num .num the mate .num if th shal adva .num sub num const .num the spec .num if fis reinf uplers shall be ening systems quivalent diameter mm num to num num to num cal corrugate ugations for c cut edges an ordance with c kfill material s backfill mater if sufficient q determined b accordance w ttals contractor s plied meet the if fish weirsb each culvert contractor s erial from with e source of th ll identify the ance of obtain mittals are req ruction contractor s cifically directe sh weirsbaff forcement .
departm e aluminum c s as indicated c type cou flat d corru annular c d pipe greate coupling purpo d any damag csa gnum .
shall meet the rial shall be ob quantities of s by the engin with item num shall submit e specified req baffles are spe in accordance shall submit hin the work s he supply of t proposed sou ning backfill m quired in acco shall carry o ed by the eng fles are spec sta ment of tr gradin coated steel o d in table num table num cspcspaca es of upler imple or ugated corrugated er than num m oses .
ge to aluminu requirements btained from w suitable backf neer addition from a source upon reques quirements as ecified for a c e with num. upon reques site .
the backfill ma urce in writing aterial from th ordance with a ut the work gineer .
cified for a c andard s ransport ng or aluminum num .
num ap couplers minimum thickness mm num num mm diameter s um coatings s s of num. within the wo fill material ar nal backfill s e approved by st the manuf detailed on th culvert the c st the propos aterial is locat g for the appr he proposed s any crossrefe as indicated culvert the specifica tation an alloy and sh s minimum width mm num num shall have en shall be grou ork site as app re not availab shall be impo y the enginee facturers cer he contract d contractor sha sed source o ted outside th roval of the e source .
erenced item f d in the cont hook bolts s ations nd infras hall have conf m typ fas wedg b nds recorruga nd smooth a proved by the ble within the orted by the er .
rtification that documents .
all submit sho of the supply he work site engineer at le forming part o tract docume shall be isol tructur item num january num figurations an pess of steners ge or bolts bolts ated to annula nd recoated engineer .
work site a contractor t the materia op drawings fo of the backf the contracto east num days f this item .
ents andor a ated from th re num num nd ar in as in als or fill or in as he depa meta janua num num artment al pipe ary num .num the en selected .num the co grades .num the pip .num trench on the s .num if over excava compac .num installa .num backfill to num .num no bac enginee materia .num ma .num bac ram .num bac ma .num backfilli is not m .num on pip .num no traff backfilli andor i .num shoring work s .num the co accorda measure .num the qu supplied .num the stan of trans ngineer shall p d locations or ontractor shal for the work a pe sections sh excavation s standard dra excavation o ation with an cted to num o ation shall pro shall be plac num. kfill material s er including b als .
aterial over num ckfill shall be mmertype com ckfill shall be aximum dry de ing of metal p more than one ly compactors es .
fic or construc ng above the in the contrac g bracing sh hall be emplo ontractor shal ance with item ment for p uantity to be d and installed e measureme ndard sp portatio provide contro as may be re l be responsi as shown on t all be joined in shall be carrie awings num occurs the co n approved b of the maximu ceed upgrade ced and shape shall be placed but not limited mm in size sh placed in lift mpactors and e compacted ensity .
pipes shall pro lift of backfill .
s recommend ction equipme e pipe has be ct documents .
heeting pump yed maintain l construct m m num .
payment measured fo d in accordan ent shall be tak ecificati on and inf grading ol points in th equired .
ible for the la the plans .
n a straight lin ed out in acc to num. ontractor sha backfill mate um dry densit e. ed to lines an d in the excav d to the dimen hall not be pla ts of not mor not more than in accordanc oceed such tha ded by the pip ent shall be pe een attained a . ps temporary ned and remov maintain and r r payment sh ce with this ite ken along the ions frastruc he field to pro ayout and ma ne using stand cordance with ll at herhis o rial placed ty .
nd grades as i vation until the nsions of exca aced within num re than num m n num mm in t ce with item at the differen pe manufactu ermitted to pa as indicated o y roads ando ved by the co remove suitab hall be the nu em .
invert of the p cture ovide vertical aintenance of dard industry m h num and t own expense in accordanc indicated on s e excavation h avation and th num mm of any mm in thickne thickness for v num to a m ntial in elevatio urer shall be u ss over the m on standard d or bridges tha ontractor .
ble temporary umber of line pipe .
and horizonta f control for a methods .
to the limits a repair and f ce with item standard draw has been appr e character o metal pipe .
ess for vibrato vibratory roller minimum of num on between th used within num metal pipe unti drawings num at are necess y construction ear metres of item num page num al control at all lines and as indicated ill the over m num and wings num roved by the f foundation ory plate or rs .
num of the he two sides m of metal il the limit of num to num sary for the n detours in f metal pipe me pag num etal pipe ge num num basis o .num pay meta .num the site .num of payment ment for wor al pipe as ide owner shall .
partial payme yard .
departm t rk under this entified under t make partial p ent shall be m sta ment of tr gradin item shall inc the contract .
payment in ac made for spec andard s ransport ng clude a separ ccordance wit cialized meta specifica tation an rate unit pric th num for m l pipe accepta ations nd infras ce for each si metal pipe stor ably stored a tructur item num january num ze and type red at the wo at the supplier re num num of rk rs depa meta janua num num artment al pipe lar ary num descript .num this ite includin mm str pipe c material .num all pipe .num all pipe galvaniz .num bol cul alu al al .num helical purpose .num all cut e and rec .num backfill .num bac .num if s det acc stan of trans rge tion em consists ng but not lim ructural plate ap spcap s e materials sha e and appurte zed steel and lts and nuts sh vertstructur uminum coate pipe aluminum al pipe luminum struc pipe arc luminum struc box galvanized s plate arch corrugated es .
edges and an coated in acco material shal ckfill material sufficient quan termined by cordance with ndard sp portatio of the supply ited to all cs csp or cspa spcapa an all be supplied enances shall shall meet th hall be of the mat re type ed steel lloy ctures h ctures steel h pipe shall ha ny damage to ordance with c l be class a shall be obtai ntities of suita the enginee item num from ecificati on and inf grading y and placem sp and cspa a spcsp or nd any other ty d by the cont be manufact he requiremen same materia table terialfabrica materia cs aash ast ast ast aash ast ast aash cs ave ends re o aluminum co csa gnum .
per num. ined from with able backfill m r additional m a source ap ions frastruc ment of alum a having an e r spcspa s type of metal p ractor .
tured of alum nts of table num al as the pipe .
num ation standa al standard sa gnum hto mnum tm bnum tm bnum tm bnum hto mnum tm bnum tm bnum hto mnum sa gnum corrugated t oatings or gal hin the work s material are n backfill shal pproved by th cture minum coated equivalent dia structural plate pipe .
minum coated num. . ards fa a a a a a a to annular co lvanized steel site as approv not available l be importe e engineer .
corrugated ameter greate e arches alum steel alumin abrication st csa gnum astm anuma astm bnumb astm bnumb astm bnumb astm bnumb astm bnum astm bnumb csa gnum orrugations f l shall be grou ved by the en within the wo ed by the co item num page num metal pipe r than num minum alloy num alloy or andard num anumm bnumm bnumm bnumm bnumm numm bnumm num for coupling und smooth ngineer .
ork site as ontractor in me pag num num etal pipe l ge num num submit .num the cont .num .num .num .num .num the certi deta .num the mate .num if th shal adva .num sub num const .num the spec .num the sele .num the grad .num exca draw .num .num the .num pipe .num bac num .num no eng foun large ttals contractor s taining but no stations of p general layou length and w itemized supp contractor s ification that th ailed in the co contractor s erial from with e source of th ll submit the p ance of obtain mittals are req ruction contractor s cifically directe engineer sha ected locations contractor s des for the wo avation shall b wings num to if overexcav overexcavati compacted to pipe sections es shall be as kfill shall be p num to num. backfill shall ineer includ ndation mater departm shall submit t limited to th pipes name ut showing pip weight mass ply list .
shall submit i he materials to ontract docum shall submit hin the work s he supply of t proposed sou ning backfill m quired in acco shall carry o ed by the eng all provide co s or as may be shall be respo ork as shown o be carried out o num or as vation occurs on with an ap o num of the m s shall be joine ssembled and placed and sh be placed in ing but no rials .
sta ment of tr gradin in accordan e following inf es of waterco pe and appurt of individual s n advance of o be supplied ments .
upon reques site .
the backfill ma rce in writing aterial from th ordance with a ut the work gineer .
ontrol points in e required .
onsible for the on the plans .
t in accordanc s specified in t the contrac pproved back maximum dry ed in a straigh dor erected a haped to the n the excava limited to th andard s ransport ng ce with item formation ourses and tenances sections and f the commen for the fabric st the propos aterial is locat g for the appr he proposed s any crossrefe as indicated n the field to e layout and ce with num the contract d ctor shall at kfill material p density .
ht line using st s shown on th lines and gra tion until the e dimension specifica tation an m num shop dti contract ncement of th cation meet th sed source o ted outside th roval of the e source .
erenced item f d in the cont provide vertic maintenance and to the lim documents .
hisher own e placed in acc tandard indust he manufactu ades as indica excavation ns of excava ations nd infras drawings for number and d he work the he specified re of the supply he work site engineer at le forming part o tract docume cal and horizo e of control fo mits as indicate expense rep cordance with try methods .
urers drawing ated on stan has been ap ation and the tructur item num january num each culver description manufacturer equirements a of the backf the contracto east num days f this item .
ents andor a ontal control or all lines an ed on standar pair and fill th item num an gs .
dard drawing pproved by th e character o re num num rt rs as fill or in as at nd rd he nd gs he of depa meta janua num .
num num artment al pipe lar ary num num .num ma .num bac ram .num bac ma .num backfill and sha .num no traff cover i been p .num shoring work s .num the co structu measure .num the qu supplied .num the the basis of .num paymen identifie .num the ow stan of trans rge aterial over num ckfill shall be mmertype co ckfill shall be aximum dry de ing of metal all never exce fic or constru ndicated on s laced .
g bracing sh hall be emplo ontractor shal re in accorda ment for p uantity to be d and placed e measureme connection to payment nt for work un ed under the c wner shall mak ndard sp portatio num mm in size s placed in lift mpactors and e compacted ensity .
pipe shall pro eed num mm i ction equipm standard dra heeting pump oyed maintain l construct m ance with item payment measured fo in accordance ent shall be ta o the foundatio nder this item contract .
ke partial paym ecificati on and inf grading shall not be p ts of not mor d not more tha in accordan oceed simulta in differential ent shall be p awings num ps temporary ned and remo maintain and r m num. r payment sh e with this item ken along the on .
shall include ment for meta ions frastruc laced within num re than num m an num mm in nce with item aneous and e elevation .
permitted to p to num an y roads and oved by the c remove tempo hall be the nu m. e invert of the a separate un al pipe in acco cture num mm of the mm in thickne n thickness fo m num to a m evenly on bot pass over the ndor in the c or bridges th contractor .
orary constru umber of line pipe or the b nit price for ea ordance with num e culvert .
ess for vibrato or vibratory ro minimum of num th sides of th e culvert until contract docu hat are neces ction detours ear metres of bottom edge o ach size of me num .
item num page num ory plate or ollers .
num of the he structure the backfill uments has ssary to the around the f metal pipe of an arch at etal pipe as depa subd janua num num num num artment rain ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num subdra contrac .num ga req .num pv per .num co fnum .num all elbo .num geotex .num free dr submitta .num the co the wo requirem .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num a trenc with ge free dra .num rock e num .
.num the sub .num the su coupler recomm .num the stan of trans tion em consists o s erials shall be ain pipe shall ct documents lvanized csp quirements of c pipe and rforated as pe rrugated poly num. ows caps and xtile shall be t raining backfi als ontractor shall ork the ma ments .
tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ch shall be ex otextile of a w aining backfill w ncountered w bdrain pipe sh ubdrain shall rs compatible mendations .
e contractor s ndard sp portatio f the supply a e supplied by be num mm s and shall m p and appurt cancsa gnum appurtenanc er cancsa b yethylene pipe d reducer sec type nnum in ac ll shall be sup submit to the nufacturers red in accorda all carry out t by the engine xcavated to de width sufficien with a minimu within the limit hall be installe be installed e with the shall be respo ecificati on and inf grading and installatio the contracto andor num m meet the follow tenances sha num or ces shall be bnum claus e and appurte ctions shall ma ccordance wit pplied in acco e engineer at certification t ance with any the work as er .
epths as indic nt to fit the bo um overlap of ts of the exca d as indicated as a contin pipe supplie onsible for all ions frastruc on of subdrain or .
mm diameter wing all be galvani e dr num co se num or enances conf atch the grad th num. ordance with num least num days that the ma crossreferen indicated in cated in the c ottom and side num mm .
avation shall b d on standard nuous line w ed and in a cutting and f cture n pipe .
r perforated p ized steel ma nforming to forming to as de and quality num. s in advance aterials suppl nced item form the contrac contract docu es and after be excavated d drawing num with all joints ccordance w fitting of pipes pipe as spec anufactured t cancsa b stm fnum an y of the pipe s of the comme ied meet th ming part of th ct documents ments and sh backfilling th in accordanc num. being const with the man s in the work .
item num page num cified in the to meet the bnum and ndor astm supplied .
encement of e specified is item .
s andor as hall be lined e top of the ce with item tructed with nufacturers .
su pag num num num bdrain ge num num .num .num the .num .num the .num the emb the p num measu .num the insta .num num basis o .num pay pipe the contract in accordanc ends of each where the su make an ope indicated on s trench shall material ex bankments or property of the rement fo quantity to alled in accor the measure continuous s of payment ment for wor e as identified departm tor shall cut h ce with num. h continuous ubdrain is to b ening in the c standard draw be backfilled xcavated from r if it is consid e contractor a or payment be measured rdance with th ement shall be ection of insta t rk under this d under the c sta ment of tr gradin holes in catch line of subdra be connected catch basin at wing num. to match the m the trench dered by the e and shall be d t d for payment his item .
e taken along allation .
item shall inc contract .
andard s ransport ng h basins whe ain shall be ca to a precast c t the required surrounding g h shall be engineer to be isposed of ou t shall be the g the centrelin clude a separ specifica tation an n required at apped as req catch basin t d elevation a grade .
spread on t e unsuitable f utside the wor e linear metre ne of the pipe rate unit pric ations nd infras t the required quired .
the contracto and make the the foreslop for such use rk site .
es of subdrain e from end to ce for each si tructur item num january num d elevation an r shall careful connection a pes placed it shall becom n supplied an o end for eac ze and type o re num num nd lly as in me nd ch of depa subd janua num num num num artment rain outle ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num subdra subdra .num ga req .num pv .num co .num geotex .num pipe zo .num free dr submitta .num the co the wo requirem .num submit constru .num the co specific .num the co aggreg .num the su .num the su tsectio recomm .num the stan of trans et tion em consists o s erials shall be ain outlet pip in pipe suppli lvanized csp quirements of c pipe shall b rrugated poly xtile shall be t one material s raining backfi als ontractor shall ork the ma ments .
tals are requi ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor sha gate subbase bdrain outlet ubdrain outle ons compatib mendations .
e contractor s ndard sp portatio f the supply a e supplied by e shall be n ed and instal p and appurt cancsa gnum be dr num con yethylene pipe type nnum in ac shall conform ll shall be sup submit to the nufacturers red in accord all carry out t by the engine all construct t . shall be cons et shall be in ble with the shall be respo ecificati on and inf grading and installatio the contracto onperforated led under item tenances sha num or nforming to ca e and appurte ccordance wit to the require pplied in acco e engineer at certification t dance with an the work as er .
he subdrain structed as de nstalled with pipe supplie onsible for all ions frastruc on of subdrain or .
d pipe of a m num. all be galvani ancsa bnum enances confo th num. ements of num ordance to the least num days that the ma y crossrefere indicated in outlet structu etailed in stan all joints be ed and in a cutting and f cture n outlets .
size type an ized steel ma num or orming to as num. e requirement s in advance aterials suppl enced item fo the contrac ure in advan ndard drawin eing construc accordance w fitting of pipes nd quality to anufactured t tm fnum .
ts of num. of the comme ied meet th orming part of ct documents nce of any pl g num. cted with co with the man s in the work .
item num page num match the to meet the encement of e specified f this item .
s andor as acement of ouplers and nufacturers .
su pag num num num bdrain out ge num num .num mat sub .num .num .num .num if th back site .num num measu .num the insta num basis o .num pay pipe tlet erial excavat bgrade .
pipe zone a item num to up to num mm trench backf num of its ma the trench sh he material ex kfill it shall be .
replacemen engineer .
rement fo quantity to b alled in accor of payment ment for wor e as identified departm ted from the and trench a minimum of m below subg fill shall be pla aximum dry d hall be backfi xcavated from ecome the pro t backfill ma or payment be measured rdance with th t rk under this d under the c sta ment of tr gradin outlet trench backfill shall f num of its m grade .
aced in num m density within lled to match m the trench operty of the terial shall b t for payment his item .
item shall inc contract .
andard s ransport ng h shall be us be placed maximum dry mm lifts in acc n the last num the surround is considere contractor an be obtained f shall be the n clude a separ specifica tation an sed for backf in num mm density from cordance with mm below s ding grade .
ed by the en nd shall be di from the wo number of su rate unit pric ations nd infras fill above the m lifts in acc m the base of h item num to ubgrade .
gineer to be isposed of ou rk site as d ubdrain outlet ce for each si tructur item num january num e pipe zone t cordance wit the excavatio o a minimum o unsuitable fo utside the wo irected by th s supplied an ze and type o re num num to th on of or rk he nd of depa conc janua num num artment crete pipe ary num descript .num this ite diamete material .num all pipe .num all rein anum .num pipe of centre protrud .num pipe m the pipe weir .
.num tension specific .num teeba the con .num tee doc .num we eng bee .num .num .num backfill .num cla .num cla .num bac .num if s det acc st of trans tion em consists of er id of num s e materials sha nforced concre .
num mm an of gravity an e beyond the ade with ellipt e and for pipe n rodbar ass cally identified se sections e ntract docume ebases shall cuments the eirsbaffles sha gineer and m en reached .
when drilled shall be drill epoxy or acr reinforceme material shal ass a shall b ass b shall b ckfill material sufficient quan termined by cordance with tandard portatio f supply and in num mm or less .
all be supplied ete pipe sha nd num mm n nd shall be e inside wall of tical reinforce e having baffl semblies shall in the contra elbow section ents .
be fabricated catch basin s all be reinforc moist cured fo d holes and d led to a minim rylic adhesive ent shall be pl l meet the req e used for bac e used for bac shall be obtai ntities of suita the enginee item num from specific on and inf grading nstallation of a d by the cont ll meet the r nominal id sh quipped with f the pipe .
ement shall ha les and weirs l be supplied act documents ns andor othe d such that w shaft on the te ced and secur or a minimum dowels are us mum depth of such as epco aced in both f quirements of ckfilling num ckfilling concr ined from with able backfill m r additional m a source ap cations frastruc all reinforced ractor .
requirements all have a min a tapered co ave the lift hol such that it as indicated ts .
er appurtenan when installed eebase is ve red to the pip of num hours sed to attach f num mm and on anum or appr faces of weirs f table num. mm and num rete pipes num hin the work s material are n backfill shal pproved by th cture concrete pipe of cancsa nimum num mm oncrete or ru le located so is centred ove in standard nces shall be at the slope rtical .
pe invert by a or until num h weirsbaffles d the dowels s roved equivale s baffles and num mm diamete num mm or small site as approv not available l be importe e engineer .
e having a nom a anum and m diameter lift ubber plug tha as to establis er the top of t drawing num supplied as indicated in t method appro of design s s to the inver shall be secu ent .
cutoff walls .
er concrete pip er in diameter ved by the en within the wo ed by the co item num page num minal inside d cancsa t hole at the at does not sh the top of the baffle or num for pipes indicated in he contract oved by the strength has rt the holes ured with an pes .
r. ngineer .
ork site as ontractor in co pag num num oncrete pip ge num cla a b num submit .num the supp .num .num the mate .num if the shal adva .num sub num const .num the spec .num the sele .num the wor .num tren on s .num .num the up g pe ass a clas unco not m b clas num ttals contractor s plied meet the if fish weirsb each culvert contractor s erial from with e source of th ll submit the p ance of obtain mittals are req ruction contractor s cifically directe engineer sha ected locations contractor sh rk .
nch excavatio standard draw if overexcav overexcavat compacted to pipe section grade with be departm s a backfill oated particles more than num s b backfill retained on th shall submit e specified req baffles are spe in accordance shall submit hin the work s he supply of th proposed sou ning backfill m quired in acco shall carry o ed by the eng all provide co s or as may be hall be respon on shall be ca wings num t vation occurs ion with an ap o num of the s shall be join ll end up grad sta ment of tr gradin t backf shall be a w s free of lump retained on shall be a we he num mm si upon reques quirements as ecified for a c e with num. upon reques site .
he backfill mat rce in writing aterial from th ordance with a ut the work gineer .
ontrol points in e required .
nsible for the arried out in to num or a the contrac pproved back maximum dry ned in a straig de .
andard s ransport ng table num fill classificat descripti well graded g ps of clay or o the num mm s ell graded gra eve and not m st the manuf detailed on th culvert the c st the propos terial is locate g for the appr he proposed s any crossrefe as indicated n the field to layout and m accordance w as specified in ctor shall at kfill material p y density .
ght line using specifica tation an tion on ranular mate other deleterio sieve and not anular materia more than num facturers cer he contract d contractor sha sed source o ed outside of th roval of the e source .
erenced item f d in the cont provide vertic maintenance of with num an n the contract hisher own e placed in acc g standard ind ations nd infras rial composed ous material t more than num al having not dust .
rtification that documents .
all submit sho of the supply he work site engineer at le forming part o tract docume cal and horizo f all lines and nd to the limit t documents .
expense rep cordance with dustry method tructur item num january num d of clean and having num dust .
more than t the materia op drawings fo of the backf the contracto east num days f this item .
ents andor a ontal control d grades for th ts as indicate .
pair and fill th item num an ds proceedin re num num als or fill or in as at he ed he nd ng depa conc janua num num artment crete pipe ary num .num the ma .num wh spe .num tension the con .num all othe .num pip the .num backfill to num .num if th pla .num no bac enginee materia .num ma .num bac ram .num bac ma .num backfilli and sha .num no traff backfill has bee .num shoring work s .num the co accorda measure .num the qu concret .num the st of trans aximum joint g here the joint ecified toleran n rodbar ass ntract docum er appurtenan pe sections w e transverse d shall be plac num. he pipe shall ced and shap kfill material s er including b als .
aterial over num ckfill shall be mmertype com ckfill shall be aximum dry de ing of concret all never exce fic or constru cover indicat en placed .
g bracing sh hall be emplo ontractor shal ance with item ment for p uantity to be te pipe supplie e measureme tandard portatio gap between t gap exceed nce .
semblies sha ents .
nces shall be with weirs or b direction .
ced and shape have an indu ped as noted in shall be placed but not limited mm in size sh placed in lift mpactors and e compacted ensity .
te pipe shall p ed num mm in ction equipm ted on standa heeting pump yed maintain l construct m m num .
payment measured fo ed and installe ent shall be tak specific on and inf grading any two conc ds num mm se ll be installed installed as in baffles shall b ed to lines an uced trench c n the contract d in the excav d to the dimen hall not be pla ts of not mor not more than in accordanc proceed simult n differential e ent shall be ard drawings ps temporary ned and remov maintain and r or payment sh ed in accordan ken along the cations frastruc crete pipe sec ections shall d as indicated ndicated in th be installed w nd grades as i constructed ov ct documents .
vation until the nsions of exca aced within num re than num m n num mm in t ce with item taneously and levation .
permitted to num to num y roads ando ved by the co remove suitab hall be the n nce with this it invert of the p cture ctions shall be be removed d in standard he contract do with the weir indicated on s ver it under it e excavation h avation and th num mm of any c mm in thickne thickness for v num to a m d evenly on bo pass over the num andor in or bridges tha ontractor .
ble temporary number of line tem .
pipe .
e num mm .
d and reset to d drawing num ocuments .
baffle tops h standard draw tem num back has been appr e character o concrete pipe ess for vibrato vibratory roller minimum of num oth sides of th e concrete pi the contract at are necess y construction ear metres o item num page num o meet the num and in horizontal in wings num kfill shall be roved by the f foundation e. ory plate or rs .
num of the he structure pe until the documents sary for the n detours in of reinforced co pag num oncrete pip ge num num basis o .num pay conc .num the store .num pe of payment ment for wor crete pipe as owner shall ed at the wor partial payme suppliers yar departm t rk under this identified und make partia k site .
ent shall be m rd .
sta ment of tr gradin item shall inc der the contra al payment in ade for specia andard s ransport ng clude a separa act .
accordance alized reinforc specifica tation an ate unit price with num f ced concrete p ations nd infras e for each siz for reinforced pipe acceptab tructur item num january num ze of reinforce concrete pip bly stored at th re num num ed pe he depa conc janua num num artment crete pipe ary num descript .num this ite diamete material .num all pipe .num pipe sh .num all pipe .num appurte without docum .num ten .num tee cat .num dow .num the .num nonsh .num for liftin .num pip cen pro .num pip equ .num pip est the .num weirs b .num backfill .num bac .num if s det acc stan of trans large tion em consists of er id greater s e materials sha hall meet the r es shall be sup enances whic steel inserts ent and shop nsion bar asse ebases shall ch basin shaf wels for attac e concrete for rink grout sha ng devices the pe up to num ntre of gravity otrude beyond pe of num m uivalent of suf pe made with ablish the top top of the we baffles and cu material shal ckfill material s sufficient quan termined by cordance with ndard sp portatio f the supply a r than num m all be supplied referenced ma pplied with ga ch may includ baffles and drawings .
emblies shall be fabricated ft on the teeb ching cutoff w r precast weirs all conform to e following sh mm diamete y of the pipe the inside wa mm diameter fficient capac elliptical rein p of the pipe a eir or baffle .
utoff walls sha l be class a shall be obtain ntities of suita the enginee item num from ecificati on and inf grading and placemen mm .
d by the cont anufacturing s skets confine de tension bar dor bevelled be as shown d such that w base is vertica walls to pipe s s baffles and astm cnum all apply r shall have a e section wit all of the pipe and larger s city to handle nforcement sh and for pipe h all be made w per num. ned from with able backfill m r additional m a source ap ions frastruc nt of all reinfor ractor .
standards .
ed o ring wi r assemblies ends shall b in standard d when installed al .
shall be num m cutoff walls num. a formed lift h h tapered co or shall be th shall use da and place pip hall have the having weirs o with the same c in the work s material are n backfill shall pproved by the cture rced concrete th lubricant o teebases cu be supplied as drawing num at the slope deformed re shall have an ole minimum oncrete or rub e system des ayton superio pe sections .
e lift hole or l or baffles suc concrete requ site as approv not available l be importe e engineer .
e pipe of a nom or single offse utoff walls w s shown on th .
shown on the inforcing stee air content of m num mm diam bber plug tha scribed in num. or swift lift s lift anchorage ch that it is ce uirements as th ed by the eng within the wo ed by the co item num page num minal inside t type .
weirs with or he contract e plans the el bars .
f num to num. meter at the at does not .num .
systems or e located to entered over he pipe .
gineer .
ork site as ontractor in co pag num num oncrete pip ge num num submit .num the cont .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num the follo .num .num .num .num thre diam .num the conc .num the the .num the mat .num if th con num d .num sub num const .num gen .num pe large ttals contractor s taining but no stations of p general layou length and w joint details details of rein wire sizes for details of rein concrete des production sc method of att pipecar de the contract d .num pipecar contract lap lengths a contractor sh owing all pipes num all pipes less all pipe desig eeedge bear meter .
proposed mix crete producti manufacture contract doc contractor s erial from with he source of ntractor shall s days in advan mittals are req ruction neral the contract specifically di departm shall submit t limited to th pipes name ut showing pip weight mass nforcing steel cages and st nforcing steel f sign strength chedule taching concre sign input and documents fo r design inpu documents .
and welding pr hall submit in num mm id and s than num m gns that are n ring test resu x proportions on is due to s ers certificatio cuments shall shall submit hin the work f the supply submit the pro nce of obtaini quired in acco tor shall carry rected by the sta ment of tr gradin in accordan e following inf es of waterco pe and appurt of individual s for each ind tirrups for weirs baff age of test an ete weirs and d output inclu or pipes num ut shall be in rocedure for p n accordance d larger mm id of a cla not listed in th ults shall be s design sha start .
on that the su be submitted upon reques site .
of the back oposed sourc ng backfill ma ordance with a y out the wo engineer .
andard s ransport ng ce with item formation ourses and tenances sections ividual cage fles and cutof nd shipping str d baffles to p uding printouts nummm id accordance pipes numm with item num ass higher tha e design tabl submitted upo all be submitte upplied mate d upon reques st the propos kfill material ce in writing aterial from th any crossrefe rk as indicate specifica tation an m num shop dti contract including bar ff walls rength pipe s of outputs fo with the sup mm id .
num two sets o an numd and es in cancs on request fo ed to the engin rials meet the st. sed source o is located o for the appro he proposed s erenced item f ed in the con ations nd infras j drawings for number and d r spacing bar or load cases a pplement to it of design calcu d sa anum .
or pipes less neer at least num e specified re of the supply outside the w oval of the eng source .
forming part o ntract docum tructur item num january num each culver description r yield strengt as indicated o tem num of th ulations for th than num m num days befor equirements o of the backf work site th gineer at lea f this item .
ents andor a re num num rt h on he he m re of fill he st as depa conc janua num .
num pipe d m num num artment crete pipe ary num num .num eac .num the sup .num the ma .num the to t .num the .num the pla .num .num .num pipe de .num for ca pip .num the to t .num .num pip suc diameter mm to num c c num a stan of trans large ch pipe sectio e engineer sh pplied under th e contractor s anufacture to a e engineer sh the plans sho e manufacture e manufacture nt to accomm the office s chair adequ approximate convenient services sha esign fabric r pipe with an ancsasnum b pecar as pe e pipe reinforc the governing if the area reinforcing s cl.num pe design and ch that specifi reinforc applicable standards csa anum csa anum csasnum astm cnum ndard sp portatio on shall be clea hall have the r his item .
shall notify the allow for sched hall have the a op drawings or er shall provid er shall provid modate the eng space shall be uate lighting ely numºc .
telephone all also be pro cation n id of num y the direct er the contrac cing area and pipecar ou of reinforcing specified in pi to ensure it is d fabrication s ied installatio ced concrete additiona csa anum air content csa anum air content corrosion in ecificati on and inf grading arly labeled w right to inspec e engineer at duling of the o authority to ord r specification e safe workin de regular an gineer .
e clean and f and ventilatio internet facs vided .
mm or greate design met ct documents d spacing for p utput .
g specified b pecar the s less than the shall be in ac n tolerances a table num e pipe desig al standards concre num and anum e of num to num .
num and anum e of num to num ca nhibitor at a ra ions frastruc with nbdti o ct the manufa least num days owners inspe der production ns .
g conditions f nd practically furnished with on and heati simile photo er the pipe s thod using t . pipe with an id by the manu area must be e maximum al ccordance wit are attainable num n and fabric requirement ete exposure clas exposure clas alcium nitrite ate of num lm³ cture on the inside .
acture of any p before comm ection .
n to stop if the for the engine located office h a suitable s ng to provide ocopy mail shall be analy the most rec d of num mm facturer is g e verified per c llowable reinfo th table num e. cation requi ts for dura ss cnum until of num ss cnum ³ .
until of num pipes and app mencing any p e work does eer .
e space at the standard offic e a room tem and messag yzed in acco cent software m or greater sh reater than t csa snum c orcing area .
num and table rements ation of moist min .
concrete num mpa is attain min .
concrete num mpa is attain item num page num purtenances phase of the not conform e fabrication ce desk and mperature of ge handling rdance with version of hall conform the area of commentary num and curing e strength ned .
e strength ned .
co pag num num oncrete pip ge num pipe dia num m num m num .num form .num .num .num .num .num num .num curi .num .num .num .num .num pe large requirement ameter circ pip mm num m mm num m ms forms shall b forms shall b forms shall b permitted .
permanently made of stee the minimum entire depth w ing and prote moist curing per table num artificially ac anum and th .num the conc that ens concrete .num during t temperat for the next exceed numoc .num the temp steam radia initial set sha applied direc the exposed curing period than numoc fro departm ts for reinfo cumferential s pe mm min .
num m mm num mm be a configura be clean and f be complete exposed shar l plastic or cl m cover over f with an approv ction of conc of the concr num. ccelerated cu e following crete sections sures full circ sections with he initial cur ture shall be k t stage of cu c per hour to perature diffe ant heat or for all provide ex ctly to the con d surfaces of d. water app om the concre sta ment of tr gradin table num rcing steel c appurte concre steel w w mm num num tion to ensure free of mortar and inspected rp edges shal ear straightg form snaptie ved cement gr rete rete sections ring of the c s shall be ma culation of t h a minimum ring period t kept at approx ring the enc a temperature rential within rced air used xcess moistur crete forms o the concrete lied for this p ete temperatu andard s ransport ng num cover for rein enances te cover ove weirs baffle walls footing num mm num mm num mm num mm e compliance w prior to applic d by the eng l be chamfere rained wood p s shall be num rout mix per num shall be carr concrete sect intained on th thoroughly sa loss of moistu typically num to ximately numoc closure tempe e between num the enclosure for accelerate e for proper h or cylinders .
e shall have a purpose shall ure and in no specifica tation an nforced conc r reinforcing es cutoff s m m with the allow cation of form ineer before ed with triangu placed on the num mm and the num. ried out in ac tions shall be he casting be aturated air ure and heat .
o num hours af c. erature shall num and numoc .
e shall not ex ed curing sha hydration of th an excess of have a temp o case shall ex ations nd infras j crete pipes steel slope of beve num mm num m num mm num m able tolerance coating .
placing of co ular fillets num side exposed e voids shall b ccordance wit e in accorda ed in an appro andor steam fter casting be raised at xceed numc .
all not be app he cement a f moisture du perature that v xceed numoc .
tructur item num january num eled ends mm mm es .
ncrete shall b mm by num mm d to concrete .
be filled to the th csa anum .
ance with cs oved enclosur m around th the enclosur t a rate not t plied before th nd shall not b uring the entir varies no mor re num num be m eir num sa re he re to he be re re depa conc janua num .
num num artment crete pipe ary num num .num the the dev .num wh be .num cu hou the .num finishin .num all acc .num .num .num .num imm cle def .num .num all .num pipe le .num bef ma pre .num for .num stan of trans large e contractor e entire curing vice per lengt hen a concret lowered at a lvert sections urs in warm t e outside air te ng of concret surfaces of t cordance with all surface v removal of t grout mix of incorporate all objection be totally rem if the concre finish the designated p mediately afte arly marked a fect .
the contrac .num cement .num all defe adjacen ridges occurr ess than num fore delivery anufacturer sh esence to dete r pipes up to c the enginee produced for dload spec num mm crac occurs first .
ndard sp portatio manufacturer g period by m th of the curin te section has a rate of numoc s shall not be emperatures emperature .
te surfaces the precast c h the following voids larger t the formwork f cement and a latex bondi nable fins pr moved to the ete surface do contractor s portions or a er the remova and the contr ctor shall subm t washes of a cts shall be t surface .
ring at junctio num mm in diam of pipe sec hall perform ermine the loa class numd th er shall select r the contract cified for the s ck develops or ecificati on and inf grading r shall provid means of app ng enclosure t s reached its per hour to t e exposed to following cur concrete secti g han num mm i k shall be fille d fine sand fro ng agent .
ojections off engineers s oes not adeq shall as dire ll of the concr al of forms an ractor shall no mit a repair p ny kind shall finished smo ns of form pa eter fabrica ctions and o dload testin d to produce a he following a at random on t or supplied f size and class r a load num g ions frastruc e a continuo proved accura to record the required stre the ambient a o freezing tem ring and coo ions shall rec n diameter a ed to their en om the same fsets streaks satisfaction .
uately fulfill th ected by the rete and repl ny part of the otify the engi procedure for not be used .
ooth uniforml anels shall be ation testing on at least num ng threeed a num mm crac pplies ne pipe section from stock .
if n s of pipe teste reater than th cture ous record of ate automatic temperature .
ength the enc air temperatur mperatures u oled at not mo ceive an ord nd cavities o ntire depth w e source as u s or other sur he requireme e engineer lace with new work which d ineer of the lo approval .
y colour mat ground smoo g num days notic dge bearing ck .
n per size and no num mm cra ed further loa he specified lo curing tempe c recording de losure tempe re .
until they hav ore than numoc dinary surfac or holes visib with an approv used in the co rface imperfe ents for ordin entirely remo w concrete .
displays defe ocation and e tched and flu oth .
ce to the en test in the d class from a ack has deve ad shall be ap oad is reached item num page num eratures for evices one erature shall ve dried num per hour to e finish in le upon the ved cement oncrete and ctions shall ary surface ove certain ects shall be extent of the sh with the ngineer the engineers mong those loped at the pplied until a d whichever co pag num num oncrete pip ge num num .num .num .num .num .num num .num pipe .num .num pe large .num the man sections strength .num in the ev verificatio tested to for pipes of a .num the thre mm crack .num three re suppliers loads the specimen .num the three load plus required .num if a plant of the sa providing to review have bee after the des used to deter all specimens during produ marked tes during produ every num mnum o .num for conc tests sha e num mm in all work shal sampling te accordance w .num a streng additiona .num for dryc strength t departm ufacturer sha the word t the word re vent of disag on of the num its ultimate st a class higher eeedge bear k and the ultim epresentative s dloading te e manufacture ns from fulllen e test specime s num and to limits to verify has previous ame pipe from g a submittal s wed shop dra en taken to the ign has been rmine accepta s tested to ulti ction one furt sted .
ction quality of concrete pla rete placeme ll be carried o diameter and l be carried o st cylinders a with csa anum th test is defi al cylinders bro cast precast c test shall be ta sta ment of tr gradin ll clearly mark tested and eject .
greement betw mm crack on trength at the than numd th ring test shall mate load to pipe specim est equipmen er shall cast t ngth sections .
ens shall be te ultimate stre y the design of sly verified a d m that design showing verifi awings mix de e ultimate load verified tests ance of the pip mate strength ther test spec control testin aced .
nts under num out per half da d larger man ut in the prese and air conte .num. ned as a min oken at earlier oncrete sectio aken on every andard s ransport ng k on the inside d on section ween the ma n a culvert se contractors e he following a l be performe verify the des mens shall be t can not test three shorter ested to dloa ength .
all of t f the pipe .
design for a sp without unde cation .
the s esign and th d. s in accordan pe .
h shall be mar cimen shall be g and test sa mnum a minimu ays production ufacture te ence of the en ent tests sha nimum of num cy r dates for pro ons air conte y second secti specifica tation an e of test secti s that failed anufacturersu ection being t expense .
applies ed to determin sign .
e tested prio fulllength pip specimens fo ad developme the specimen pecific pipe th ergoing the ve ubmission sh ree threeed nce with claus rked reject e tested to dl ampling per num um of one set n. esting ngineer .
ll be perform ylinders broke oduction purpo ent shall be te ion .
ations nd infras j ions the follow or were test upplier and th tested that s ne the load to or to full pro pe sections to or testing rath ent of a num m s shall meet hat plant may erification pro all include bu dge bearing te se num of csa a t. load to dload num shall be t of cylinders a med by the m en at the spec oses .
sted on every tructur item num january num wing on all te ted to ultimat he engineer section may b o produce a num duction .
if th o the specifie her than cuttin mm crack to d or exceed th y produce mor ocess again b ut is not limite est results th anum shall b d plus num an carried out fo and air conte manufacturer cified age wit y section and re num num est te in be .num he ed ng d he re by ed at be nd or nt in th a depa conc janua num num num num artment crete pipe ary num num .num .num .num weirs a .num eac tran .num eac by .num co and .num wh dril adh .num bevelle .num bev .num the con hou .num saw .num a s pla .num placem .num the sele .num the the .num exc sta .num .num pip .num pip gra as stan of trans large for wetcast every section if superplas of the super and baffles ch weirbaffle nsverse direct ch weirbaffle a method app ncrete for wei d shall be moi hen drilled hol led to a minim hesive such a ed end section velled ends sh e bevel shall ncrete .
cappin urs .
wcut bevels s slurry coat of e ced .
ment e engineer s ected location e contractor s work as show cavation shall andard drawin if overexcav overexcavat and compac pes shall be pl pe sections sh ade with bell e recommended ndard sp portatio t precast conc n. ticizers are a rplasticizer .
e shall be pos tion when the shall have tw proved by the irs and baffles ist cured for a es and dowel mum of num s epcon anum o ns hall be constru be capped w ng concrete s shall be rough engineerapp hall provide c ns or as otherw shall be respo wn on the pla l be carried o ngs num to num vation occurs tion with an a cted to num of aced as show hall be joined i end up grade .
d by the lifting ecificati on and inf grading crete sections dded the air sitioned unde pipe is install wo rows of rei engineer .
s shall match a minimum of num s are used to mm and the or approved eq ucted as show with concrete shall be finish hened before b roved bonding control points wise required .
onsible for the ans .
out in accorda num or as sp the contract approved bac f the maximum wn on the plan in a straight lin each pipe se g device manu ions frastruc air content a r content test er the lifting d led .
inforcement a the concrete num hours .
attach weirs dowels shall quivalent .
wn on the plan matching the hed smooth a being capped g agent shall s in the field .
e layout and m ance with num pecified in the tor shall at h ckfill material m dry density .
ns andor shop ne using stan ection shall be ufacturer .
cture and one streng shall be perf device so the and shall be s of the pipe in baffles to the l be secured ns or shop dra e colour and c and moist cur .
be applied be for vertical a maintenance o num and to th contract doc isher own ex placed in ac p drawings .
ndard industry e set into place gth test shall formed after t e top is horizo secured to the n colour and c invert the ho with an epox awings .
consistency o red for a min efore capping and horizonta of all lines and he limits as in cuments .
xpense repair ccordance wit y methods pro e and position item num page num be taken on the addition ontal in the e pipe invert consistency oles shall be xy or acrylic of the pipes imum of num concrete is al control at d grades for ndicated on r and fill the h item num oceeding up ned together co pag num oncrete pip ge num num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num pe large the maximum diameter and .num where th meet the precast cuto the elevations from the plan .num an inlet c placed p satisfactio contracto .num following the wall section im .num with the prefabrica .num the num m adhesive sections of c the inlet or ou gaskets shal pipe sections transverse dir length of the w all other appu lifting anchor backfill shall num to num .num if the pipe placed an no backfill sh engineer inc foundation m .num material o .num backfill s rammert .num backfill s maximum departm m joint gap b d num mm for p he joint gap ex specified tole off walls under s and offsets ns as directed cutoff wall or h per num on of the en or shall make g placement a shall be butt mmediately se end section ated holes as m dowels sh e such as epco concrete pipe utlet end of the l be installed p s with weirs or rection with a weir .
urtenances sh r recesses sha be placed an num. e shall have a nd shaped as hall be placed cluding but n aterials .
over num mm in hall be placed type compacto shall be comp m dry density .
sta ment of tr gradin between pipe ipes of num m xceeds the ab erance at the r this item or shown on the d by the engin headwall shal to ensure th ngineer .
if the necessary co and backfilling tered with a et into place o in place the guides to a n all be inserte on anum or an a marked as ha e installed culv per the pipe m r baffles shall a maximum in hall be installed all be entirely nd shaped to an induced tre noted in the c d in the excav not limited to n size shall no d in lifts of no ors and not m pacted in acc andard s ransport ng sections sha mm diameter bove tolerance contractors e castinplace e plans andor eer .
l not be place hat the inlet e e pipe fails to orrections at h of a precast num mm layer n it .
contractor sh ominal depth ed and secure pproved equiv aving been tes vert .
manufacturers be installed w stalled toleran d as shown o grouted in wit lines and gra nch construct contract docu vation until th the dimensio ot be placed w ot more than num more than num cordance with specifica tation an all be num mm and larger .
es sections sh expense .
headwalls un r shop drawin ed until enough end section l o line up with isher expens cutoff wall th r of nonshrin hall drill num m of num mm in red into place valent .
sted for dloa s instructions .
with the weir o nce of num ver n the plans .
th nonshrink ades as indic ted over it und uments .
he excavation ons of excav within num mm num mm in thi mm in thickne item num to ations nd infras j m for pipes u hall be remov nder item num ngs or if site c h culvert secti ine up with t h the wall as se .
he top prefor k grout and t mm diameter h to the top of th e using an ep ading shall be or baffle top h rtically over th grout .
cated on stan der item num n has been ap vation and th of any concre ickness for vib ess for vibrato o a minimum tructur item num january num p to num m ed and reset t shall be set conditions diffe ions have bee the wall to th s specified th rmed surface the culvert en holes using th he wall .
poxy or acryl e placed only horizontal in th e full horizont ndard drawing backfill shall b pproved by th e character o ete pipe .
bratory plate o ory rollers .
of num of th re num num m to at er en he he of nd he lic at he tal gs be he of or he depa conc janua num .
num num artment crete pipe ary num num .num bac stru .num no bac doc .num sho wo .num the the measure .num the qu concret .num the basis of .num paymen concret .num the ow stan of trans large ckfilling of co ucture and sh traffic or cons ckfill cover in cuments has oring bracing ork shall be em e contractor s pipe and app ment for p uantity to be te pipe supplie e measureme payment nt for work u te pipe as ide wner shall mak ndard sp portatio oncrete pipe all never exce struction equi ndicated on been placed .
g sheeting pu mployed main shall construc purtenances a payment measured fo ed and placed ent shall be tak under this item entified under t ke partial paym ecificati on and inf grading shall proceed eed num mm in pment shall b standard dr umps tempor ntained and re ct maintain a as required in a or payment sh d in accordanc ken along the m shall include the contract .
ment for reinfo ions frastruc d simultaneou n differential e be permitted to rawings num rary roads and emoved by the and remove te accordance w hall be the n ce with this ite invert of the p e a separate orced concret cture us and even elevation .
o pass over th num to num dor bridges th e contractor .
emporary con with item num. number of line em .
pipe .
unit price fo te pipe in acco nly on both s he concrete p andor in th hat are neces nstruction deto ear metres o or each size o ordance with num item num page num sides of the pipe until the he contract ssary for the ours around of reinforced of reinforced num .
depa preca janua num num artment ast concr ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num concre .num exp .num air .num interior recomm .num exterio with pri .num the ca .num the .num the nitr .num the pro .num .num .num dowels bars .
.num reinfor conform .num we on .num weirsb enginee .num wh dril acr .num re .num the stan of trans rete box cu tion em consists o s erials shall be ete shall meet posure class content shall r water tight mendations o r joint wrap s mers recomm lcium nitrite c e dosage rate e corrosion in rite by weight o e calcium nitr ovided to the e acceptable computerize verification s s for attachme rcing steel sh ming to astm elding of reinf the contract baffles shall b er and moist c hen drilled hol led to a minim rylic adhesive inforcement s e concrete for ndard sp portatio ulvert f the supply a e supplied by t the requirem shall be cx be num to num. joint seal sh or approved e shall be num mended by the corrosion inhib shall be num l nhibiting calciu of solution .
rite shall be a engineer for th verification s d batch plants shall be provid ent of cutoff w hall be rebar m anum anum forcing steel documents .
be reinforced cured for a mi es and dowel mum depth o such as epco shall be placed r precast weir pecificat on and inf grading and placemen the contracto ments of csa l. hall be rubr equivalent .
mm wide co e manufactur bitor shall con mnum .
um nitrite adm added at the he quantity of shall include s or printouts f ded on the del walls to beve conforming to anum and anum including tack d and secure inimum of num s are used to of num mm a on anum or appr d in both face rs baffles and tions frastruc nt of precast c or .
anum and c rnek size p onwrap cons rer .
nform to the fo mixture shall c concrete rea the calcium n but is not n from compute livery slip .
lled ends sha o num ando num. k welding is ed to the cu hours .
attach weirs and the dowe roved equivale s of weirs ba d cutoff walls cture concrete box sa anum .
per joint sea seal csnum ollowing contain betwe ady mix plant nitrite added to necessarily li erized admixtu all be num m de or welded de prohibited un ulvert by a m baffles to the els shall be se ent .
affles and cuto s shall have a culvert sectio l manufactur or approved een num to num and verificati o each batch o mited to prin ure dispensing eformed reinf eformed steel nless otherwis method appro invert the ho ecured with a off walls .
an air content item num page num ons .
rers written equivalent num calcium ion shall be of concrete .
ntouts from g units .
forcing steel l wire fabric se indicated oved by the oles shall be an epoxy or of num to num .
pr pag num num ecast con ge num num .num .num non .num leve man .num .num liftin capa .num rigi suffi .num .num rein mini .num side .num bac .num .num num submit .num the conc .num .num .num ncrete box weirs baffle culvert .
nshrink grout elling sand sh nufactured cru sand includ tested in acc ng anchorage acity for hand d sheets bo icient durabili the supplied culvert .
nforcing supp imum of num m e form spacer kfill material s backfill mate if sufficient q determined b accordance w ttals contractor s crete box culv station of cul general layo length and w departm x culvert s and cutoff shall conform hall be clean usher dust ob ing crusher d ordance with grad a sie num .
num num num num num num e devices sha dling and plac oards plywoo ty so as to all d rigid sheets ports shall b mm of cover .
rs shall be ma shall be class rial shall be o quantities of s by the engin with item num shall submit vert containin lvert name of ut showing al weight mass st ment of tr gradin walls shall b m to astm c nonplastic btained from c dust shall me astm cnum t ding require astm ve size .num mm num mm num mm num mm num µm num µm num µm all be dayton cing the culve od sheet me low adjacent s shall be of be made of ade entirely o s a per num. obtained from suitable backf neer addition from a sourc in accordan ng but not limi f watercourse ll box culvert of individual tandard ransport ng be made with num. free of delete crushing bedr eet the gradin .
table num ements for l superior swif ert sections .
etal or simila culvert sectio f a length to plastic stain f plastic or en .num. within the w fill material ar nal backfill s ce approved b nce with item ted to the fol e and dti co sections and sections specifica tation an the same co erious materia rock .
ng limits as s levelling san percent pas num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num ft lift system ar for placin ons to slide in o extend bey nless steel o ntirely of stain work site as ap re not availab shall be impo by the engine m num shop lowing inform ontract numbe appurtenanc ations nd infras oncrete requir als and shall hown in tabl nd ssing num num num num num s or equivale ng under join nto place .
yond each si or galvanized nless steel .
pproved by th ble within the orted by the eer .
drawings for mation er and descrip ces tructur item num january num rements as th be a natural o e num whe nt of sufficie nts shall be o de of the bo d steel with he engineer .
e work site a contractor r each preca ption re num num he or en nt of ox a as in st depa preca janua num .
num num artment ast concr ary num num .num joi .num pro .num loc be .num loc .num bar .num item .num det .num co .num tw .num loc .num bo on .num .num the pro days b .num the .num the em .num the co certifica .num the co materia .num if the so shall su advanc .num submitt constru .num genera .num the spe .num the res cu .num .num .num stan of trans rete box cu nt details inc oposed constr cation and typ cut for lifting cation of reinf r schedules fo mized supply tail showing y ncrete design wo sets of des cation of man oxcar design the contract boxcar de contract do oposed mix p efore concret e contractor s e contractor mployed for the ontractor shal ation that the m ontractor sha al from within t ource of the s ubmit the prop ce of obtaining tals are requir ction al e contractor ecifically direct e contractor spect to fabri lvert sections reinforcing num mm .
at joints the end of the b for circumfe mm and the ndard sp portatio ulvert cluding gap g ruction joints pe of inserts a anchors forcing steel or all reinforci list year of fabrica n strength ag ign calculatio nufacturing pla n input and o documents .
esign input s ocuments .
roportions de te production shall submit a shall submit e curing and p l submit in a materials to b ll submit upo the work site supply of the posed source g backfill mate red in accorda shall carry ou ted by the eng shall comply ication trans s. steel bars or e minimum co ell and spigot erential steel maximum co pecificat on and inf grading gasket conne if sections n and lift device ing steel ation embedd ge of test form ns and ant .
utput includi hall be in acc esign shall b is due to star a production s t to the engi protection of t dvance of the e supplied for on request t . backfill mater in writing fo erial from the p ance with any ut the work a gineer .
y with the req sportation sto r wire mesh s oncrete cover t. in the bell an oncrete cover tions frastruc ection plates a ot cast mono es including l ded in the hea m removal str ng printouts o cordance with be submitted rt .
schedule to th neer the pro the precast c e commencem r the fabricatio the proposed rial is located or the approva proposed sou crossreferen as indicated i quirements of orage and d shall have a m r shall be num nd spigot the r shall be num m cture and waterproo lithically location wher adwalls rength and sh of outputs for h the supple to the engine he engineer .
oposed metho concrete secti ment of the w on meet the s source of th outside the w al of the engi urce .
nced item form in the contra f csa anum elivery of the minimum con mm for all lo e minimum co mm .
ofing re rebar ando hipping streng r load cases a ement to item eer for review od and sequ ons .
work the ma pecified requi he supply of work site the neer at least ming part of th act documents and astm e precast co ncrete cover o ongitudinal ste oncrete cover item num page num or mesh will gth as indicated m num of the w at least num ence to be nufacturers irements .
the backfill e contractor t num days in is item .
s andor as cnum with oncrete box of num mm eel from the shall be num pr pag num num ecast con ge num num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num .num culv .num .num .num ncrete box all aspects o be to the sati manufacture been reviewe .num the eng manufac and deta the contract advance of t inspector can .num the eng and the drawings .num the man the manufac plant to acco .num the offic adequate approxim .num convenie services shop drawin the plans bu those indicat the cured cu mm or less unit to ensur waterproofin vert design box culvert d worstcase lo .num earth fill factor of the live load box culvert d the latest ed association .
departm x culvert of precast con isfaction of th of the box c ed by the eng ineers written turer of the r ails of fabricat tor shall ensu he commenc n be schedule ineer shall h authority to o s or specifica nufacturer sha cturer shall pr mmodate the ce space sha e lighting an mately numc .
ent telephon shall also be gs may show ut the inside ed on the pla ulvert section and the joints re proper fit a ng if required design shall b oading of eith material shal num. ing shall conf design shall b dition of the st ment of tr gradin ncrete work sh e engineer .
culvert section gineer .
n notice of rev responsibility ion in accorda ure that the m cement of any ed .
ave the right order the wo ations .
all ensure that rovide regular e engineer .
all be clean a nd ventilation e internet f provided .
w a design w dimensions ans .
ns shall be fitt s so fitted sh t the work si shall be carr be in accorda er num m of ea l have a desig form to clnum be carried ou boxcar so tandard ransport ng hall comply w ns shall not co view of the s for correctne ance with num manufacturer y phase of the to inspect th ork to stop if t safe working r and practica and furnished n and heatin facsimile ph ith wall and s id of the sp ed horizontal hall be sequen te .
ried out in acc ance with the arth fill or finis gn density of num live loading ut using the c oftware spon specifica tation an with csa anum .
ommence un hop drawings ess of dimen num. notifies the e e manufactur he manufactu it does not c g conditions e ally located of d with a suita ng to provid hotocopy ma slab thickness pan and the lly at the plan ntially numbe cordance with e latest editio shed grade p num tmnum and g. chbdc des sored by the ations nd infras .num and csa a ntil the shop d s shall in no w nsions size o engineer at le re so that the ure of the pre conform to th exist for the e ffice space at able office de e a room te ail and mess ses different rise shall no nt to a gasket ered on the o h item num. ons of canc lus num m of e d a soil struct sign option co e american c tructur item num january num anum and sha drawings hav way relieve th of componen east num days e dtiassigne ecast section e plans sho engineer .
the fabricatio esk and cha emperature o sage handlin from those o ot be less tha free gap of num outside of eac csasnum for th earth fill .
ture interactio ontained with concrete pip re num num all ve he ts in ed s op on ir of ng on an num ch he on in pe depa preca janua num num num artment ast concr ary num .num forms .num for .num for .num for per .num per mm con .num the ent .num materia .num sam acc .num .num .num .num .num curing .num mo unt .num art anum .num .num .num .num stan of trans rete box cu rms shall be o rms shall be c rms shall be c rmitted .
rmanently ex m made of st ncrete .
e minimum co tire depth with al testing mpling test c cordance with a strength te additional cy for drycast strength test for wetcast every section if superplas of the super and protectio oist curing of til the design s ificially accel num and the fo the concret that ensure concrete sec during the temperature for the next exceed numc .num the tem steam radia the initial se shall not be ndard sp portatio ulvert of a configura clean and free complete and posed sharp teel plastic over over form h an approved cylinders and h csa anum .
st is defined a ylinders broken precast concr t shall be take t precast conc n. ticizers are a rplasticizer .
on of concrete the concrete strength is re erated curing ollowing te sections sh es full circula ctions with a initial curing e shall be kep t stage of cur c per hour to mperature diffe ant heat or fo et shall prov applied direc pecificat on and inf grading ation to ensure e of mortar pr d inspected by edges shall or clear strai m snapties s d cement gro d air content as a minimum n at earlier da rete sections n on every se crete sections dded the air e sections sha ached .
g of the conc hall be mainta ation of thor minimum loss period typi t at approxim ring the encl o a temperatu erential within orced air used vide excess m ctly to the con tions frastruc e compliance rior to applica y the enginee be chamfered ightgrained w shall be num mm ut mix per num tests shall b m of num cylinders ates for produc air content sh econd section .
air content a r content test all be carried crete section ained on the c roughly satur s of moisture ically num to num mately numc .
osure temper ure between num n the enclosu d for accelera moisture for p ncrete forms o cture e with the allow ation of form c er before plac d with triangu wood placed m and the vo num. be performed s broken at the ction purposes hall be tested .
and one streng shall be perf d out in accor ns shall be in casting bed in rated air and and heat .
hours after rature shall b num and numc .
re shall not ex ated curing sh proper hydra or cylinders .
wable toleran coating .
cing of concre ular fillets num on the side oids shall be f by the man e specified ag s. on every sect gth test shall formed after t rdance with c n accordance n an approved dor steam a casting the be raised at a xceed numc .
hall not be app tion of the ce item num page num nces .
ete shall be num mm by num exposed to illed to their ufacturer in ge with tion and a be taken on the addition csa anum e with csa d enclosure around the e enclosure a rate not to plied before ement and pr pag num num num ecast con ge num num num .num finis .num .num .num .num num .num culv .num ncrete box .num the exp entire cu no more .num the con for the devices .num when a shall be l .num culvert s num hours hour to th shing of conc all surfaces accordance w .num all surfac removal grout mix incorpora .num all object totally rem .num if the con finish t designate immediately clearly marke defect .
.num the cont .num cem .num all d adjac all ridges occ exposed end coating to pre vert placemen excavation s documents .
.num if overex the over num and departm x culvert osed surface ring period .
w than numc fro ntractormanuf entire curing one device p concrete sec lowered at a sections sha s in warm tem he outside air crete surfaces of the precas with the follow ce voids large of the formw x of cement a ate a latex bon tionable fins moved to the ncrete surface he contracto ed portions o after the remo ed and the co tractor shall s ent washes o efects shall b cent surface .
curring at junc ds of lifting d event rusting .
nt shall be carrie xcavation occ rexcavation w compacted t st ment of tr gradin es of the con water applied om the concre facturer shall g period by per length of th ction has reac rate of numc all not be exp mperatures fo r temperature s st concrete se wing er than num m work shall be and fine sand nding agent .
projections o engineers sa e does not ad or shall as or all of the con oval of forms ontractor sha ubmit a repair of any kind sha be finished s ctions of form evices that h . ed out in acc curs the con with an appro to num of the tandard ransport ng ncrete shall h d for this purp ete temperatu provide a co means of a he curing enc ched its requ per hour to t posed to free ollowing curing e. ections shall m in diamete filled to their d from the sa offsets streak atisfaction .
dequately fulf directed by ncrete and re any part of t ll notify the e r procedure fo all not be used smooth unifor m panels shall have been cu cordance with ntractor shall oved backfill m maximum dr specifica tation an have an exce ose shall hav ure and in no ontinuous rec approved acc closure to rec ired strength the ambient a ezing tempera g and cooled receive an er and cavities r entire depth ame source a ks or other su fill the require the enginee eplace with ne the work whi engineer of th or approval .
d. rmly colour m be ground sm ut off shall be h num and a at hisher o material plac ry density .
ations nd infras ess of moistu ve a temperat o case shall ex cord of curing curate autom cord the tempe the enclosur air temperatur atures until th d at not more ordinary sur s or holes vi h with an app as used in the urface imperfe ements for or er entirely re ew concrete .
ch displays d e location an matched and mooth .
e painted with as specified i own expense ce in accorda tructur item num january num ure during th ture that varie xceed numc .
g temperature matic recordin erature .
re temperatur re .
hey have drie e than numc pe rface finish isible upon th proved ceme e concrete an ections shall b rdinary surfac emove certa defects shall b d extent of th flush with th h an approve n the contra repair and f ance with ite re num num he es es ng re ed er in he nt nd be ce in be he he ed ct fill m depa preca janua num .
artment ast concr ary num num .num fol off sec .num wit pre .num the adh .num the and are .num a r und ma .num pre ma .num .num cu up rec .num the acr .num .num .num afte with .num joi with .num .num bac do .num no eng fou .num .num stan of trans rete box cu lowing placem wall shall be ction shall be th the end se efabricated ho e num m dow hesive such a e contractor s d raked or sc ea of the culv rigid sheet sh der each joint aterials are pre ecast concret anufacturers s deviation fr written autho lvert sections grade .
eac commended b e maximum j ross the joint w sections se specified ga sections wh er satisfactor h nonshrink g nt seal and e h the manufa joint seal sh ckfill shall be cuments .
backfill shall gineer includ ndation mate material ove backfill shal or rammert rollers .
ndard sp portatio ulvert ment and bac e buttered w immediately ection in plac oles as guides wels shall be as epcon anum o shall place a creeded to p vert .
hall be instal t of the culve evented from te box culver shop drawing rom the man orization of th s shall be join h culvert se by the manufa oint gap betw with the secti et to a joint g ap .
hich can not be ry placement grout .
exterior wrap cturers spec hall be placed e carried out be placed in ding but not erials .
er num mm in s ll be placed in type compac pecificat on and inf grading ckfilling of the with a num mm set into place ce the contr s to a nomina inserted and or an approve minimum thic provide a unif led flush with rt sections s entering and rt sections sh gs .
ufacturers sh he engineer .
ned in a straig ection shall acturer of the ween any two ons in straigh gap greater t e reset as num of the culve material and ifications .
d around the e in accordan the excavati limited to the ize shall not b n lifts of not m ctors and no tions frastruc e cutoff wall m layer of no e on the cuto ractor shall d al depth of num d secured in ed equivalent ckness of num form bedding h the bed lev uch that whe d contaminatin hall be erecte hop drawings ght line using be set into lifting device o box culver ht alignment .
than num mm num shall b ert sections th d appurtenan entire joint .
nce with num on until the e e dimensions be placed wit more than num t more than cture the top horiz onshrink grou off wall .
drill num mm d num mm into the nto place usi t. mm of bed le g surface ov velling mater n sections are ng the joint .
ed in the seq s shall not b g industry me place and .
rt sections sh shall be rem be rejected .
he lifting hoo nces shall be .num and as sp excavation ha s of excavatio hin num mm o num mm in thic num mm in zontal surface ut and the be iameter holes e top of the w ng an epoxy evelling sand er the entire rial surface a e joined sand quence indica e permitted w ethods with t positioned to hall be num mm moved and re k pockets sh installed in a pecified in th as been appro on and the c of the culvert kness for vib thickness fo item num page num e of the cut evelled end s using the all .
y or acrylic compacted foundation and centred d and other ated on the without the he bell end ogether as m uniformly eset to the all be filled accordance he contract oved by the character of t. ratory plate or vibratory pr pag num num num ecast con ge num num .num .num .num num measu .num the box .num num basis o .num pay conc .num the ncrete box .num backfill s maximum backfilling of culvert and s no traffic or minimum of of crossing .
shoring brac the work sha rement fo quantity to b culvert suppl the measure end section to of payment ment for wor crete box culv owner shall departm x culvert shall be comp m dry density .
f box culverts shall never ex equipment s num mm of b cing sheeting all be employe or payment be measured f ied and place ement shall b o end section t rk under this vert as identif make partial st ment of tr gradin pacted in acc .
s shall procee xceed num mm shall be allow backfill mater g pumps tem ed maintaine t for payment s ed in accordan e taken along .
item shall in fied under the payment for p tandard ransport ng cordance with ed simultaneo m in differenti wed to cross rial has been mporary road ed and remov hall be the nu nce with this it g the inside b nclude a sepa contract .
precast concre specifica tation an h item num to ous and even al elevation .
s over the in placed over ds andor brid ved by the co umber of linea tem .
bottom centre arate unit pri ete box culve ations nd infras o a minimum nly on both sid nstalled box c the box culv dges that are ntractor .
ar metres of pr eline of the bo ce for each s ert in accordan tructur item num january num of num of th des of the bo culvert until vert in the are necessary fo recast concret ox culvert fro size of preca nce with num .
re num num he ox a ea or te m ast num .
depa foun janua num num num num artment dation exc ary num descript .num this ite and pla .num founda num .
a b c material .num none id submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num excava num unles .num for ind excavat .num the co comple .num the co .num shoring work s .num excava .num excava enginee .num for and .num ma sha stan of trans cavation tion em consists o acement of ma ation excavat foundation e foundation e foundation e s dentified .
als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ation shall be c ss otherwise in uced trench lo tion to the dim ontractor shall te for the wor ontractor shall g bracing sh hall be emplo ated materials ated materials er and as follo r embankmen dor num. aterial identifie all be disposed ndard sp portatio of excavation aterials within tion is classifi definition excavation of excavation of excavation of red in accorda all carry out t by the engine carried out to ndicated in the ocations to b mensions indic not commenc rk area involve immediately n heeting pump yed maintain that meet the s not required ows t construction ed by the eng d of in accorda ecificati on and inf grading n necessary f n the work si ed by the typ table of foundatio common mat unclassified m solid rock as ance with any the work as er .
the dimension e contract do be completed cated in the co ce any excava ed .
notify the eng ps temporary ned and remov e requirements d or unsuitab n within the wo ineer as wast ance with item ions frastruc for the constr te or disposa pes of mater num on excavatio terial as defin material as de defined by it crossreferen indicated in ns as indicate ocuments .
under item num ontract docum ation until the ineer when be y roads ando ved by the co s of num sha ble for backfil ork site and p te shall becom m num .
cture ruction ando al outside the rial encounter on by type ned by item num efined by item tem num nced item form the contrac ed on standard num the cont ments .
e owners initia edrock or bou or bridges tha ontractor .
all be used as l shall be uti placed in acco me the prope or removal of work site .
red as indicat num m num ming part of th ct documents d drawings num tractor shall c al crosssectio ulders are enco at are necess backfill .
lized as direc ordance with num erty of the con item num page num structures ted in table is item .
s andor as num to num carry out the on survey is ountered .
sary for the cted by the num num ntractor and fo pag num num undation e ge num num .num .num whe to en .num .num .num .num .num .num whe cut i from .num .num .num the .num no b exca exca .num the loos num measu .num the acco .num the con .num if fo shal befo .num excavatio all overhaul s ere foundation nsure that any the contracto any pipe det owner .
salvageable nearest dti m unsalvageab disposed of o the contrac damage is the ere the finish in a straight li m the underlyin the contract use in emban any existing subgrade ma contractor sh backfill materi avation has b avation and th bottom of the se rock and so rement fo quantity to ordance with t volume shall ntract docume oundation exc ll be removed ore any blastin boulders sha before dispos departm n shall be subjec n excavation i y existing pipe or shall notify termined by pipe shall be maintenance d le pipe and outside the wo tor shall be e result of the ed grade is t ne to a straig ng material .
or shall break nkment constr aggregate b aterials for reu hall notify the al formwork een approved he nature of th e foundation e oil .
or payment be measured this item .
be calculated ents .
cavation types d sufficiently to ng or excavatio all be excavat sal .
sta ment of tr gradin ct to the appro involves remo e is not damag the engineer the engineer reused in th depot .
waste shall b ork site .
responsible t contractors the same as t ht edge on ea k down the pa ruction .
basesubbase use under num engineer afte pipe or other d by the engin he foundation excavation for t d for paymen d from the dim s a and c o allow the e on of the bedr ted when enc andard s ransport ng oval of the eng oval of existing ged during exc prior to expos r to be salvag he work site become the p to replace th actions as de the existing p ach side of th vement piece e shall be ex num at the wor r the excavati r structures s neer including materials .
r footings foun nt shall be the mensions sho have been te ngineer to tak rock takes pla countered and specifica tation an gineer .
g culverts th cavation and sing any exist geable shall or transporte property of th e pipe which etermined by t pavement surf he trench or h es to a size sm xcavated and rk area .
on is complet shall be place g but not limit nded on solid e number of own on the st endered any ke measurem ace .
d separated fo ations nd infras he contractor is salvaged fo ting pipe .
remain the p ed by the co he contracto h is damaged the engineer .
face the pav hole and remo mall enough to stockpiled s ted .
ed in the exca ted to the dim d rock shall be cubic metres tandard draw y overlying co ments of the b or the engine tructur item num january num shall take car or reuse .
property of th ontractor to th r and shall b d where suc vement shall b oved separate o be suitable fo separately fro avation until th mensions of th e cleaned of a s excavated ings andor th mmon materi bedrock surfac eer to measur re num num re he he be ch be ely or m he he all in he al ce re depa foun janua num artment dation exc ary num basis of .num paymen as iden .num the ove num num stan of trans cavation payment nt for work un tified under th erhaul of mate num andor num ndard sp portatio nder this item he contract .
erial as appro as applicable ecificati on and inf grading m shall include oved by the e e. ions frastruc e a separate u ngineer shall cture unit price for be paid for in each type of n accordance item num page num excavation with items depa back janua num num num num artment kfilling ar ary num descript .num this ite material .num suitable of num .num cla mm .num cla mm .num addition with ite submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num backfilli num u .num if the s specific .num no bac enginee materia .num ma .num bac ram .num bac ma .num only co .num backfilli shall ne stan of trans ound stru tion em consists of s e material obt num shall be use ass a backfil m in diameter a ass b backfi m or smaller in nal backfill m num .
als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ing to be carr unless otherw structure bein c backfilling re kfill material s er including b als .
aterial over num ckfill shall be mmertype com ckfill shall be aximum dry de ompactors rec ing of structur ever exceed num ndard sp portatio uctures f the placeme tained from th ed for backfillin ll shall be use and concrete ll shall be use n diameter .
if authorize red in accorda all carry out t by the engine ried out to the wise indicated ng backfilled quirements a shall be placed but not limited mm in size sh placed in lift mpactors and e compacted ensity .
commended b res shall proce num mm in diffe ecificati on and inf grading nt of backfill m he excavation ng around str ed for backfilli box culverts .
ed for backfill ed by the ance with any the work as er .
e lines and gr in the contrac is to be cons as noted in the d in the excav d to the dime hall not be pla ts of not mor not more than in accordanc y the pipe ma eed simultane erential elevat ions frastruc material aroun within the wo ructures .
ing metal culv ing catch bas engineer crossreferen indicated in rades as indic ct documents structed with e contract doc vation until the ensions of exc aced within num re than num m n num mm in t ce with item anufacturer sh eously and eve tion .
cture nd a structure ork site and m verts pipes sins footings shall be su nced item form the contrac cated on stan s. an induced t cuments sha e excavation h cavation and num mm of any s mm in thickne thickness for v num to a m hall be used w enly on both s e. meeting the re concrete pipe and concrete upplied in ming part of th ct documents ndard drawin trench design ll apply .
has been appr the nature of structure .
ess for vibrato vibratory roller minimum of num within num m of m sides of the st item num page num equirements es over num e pipes num accordance is item .
s andor as gs num to n additional roved by the f foundation ory plate or rs .
num of the metal pipes .
tructure and ba pag num num num ackfilling a ge num num .num no t cove been .num sho wor num measu .num the arou .num the con num basis o .num pay .num ove the e around st traffic or cons er indicated o n placed .
oring bracing rk shall be em rement fo quantity to und a structur volume shall ntract docume of payment ment for work erhaul of suita engineer sha departm tructures struction equip on the standa sheeting pu mployed maint or payment be measured re carried out be calculated ents .
t k under this ite able material o all be paid in a sta ment of tr gradin pment shall be rd drawings umps tempor tained and rem t d for paymen in accordance d from the dim em shall be at obtained from accordance wi andard s ransport ng e permitted to num to num rary roads an moved by the nt shall be th e with this item mensions sho t the unit pric m the excavati th items num specifica tation an o pass over th num andor in th ndor bridges e contractor .
he volume in m. own on the st ce .
ion within the num num andor ations nd infras he structure u he contract d s that are nec cubic metres tandard draw e work site a r num as appli tructur item num january num until the backf documents ha cessary for th s of backfillin ings andor th as approved b cable .
re num num fill as he ng he by depa back janua num num num num artment kfill for st ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num it shall unless t .num backfill indicate class a b submitta .num the co enginee .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the co .num the co at any t .num ra effe .num no an stan of trans tructures tion em consists of s erials shall be be the respo the source of for structure ed in table num class a uncoated more than class b retained o als ontractor sha er at least num tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall ontractor shal time during th ndom sample ects of the ch work shall b approval is re ndard sp portatio s f supplying ba supplied by t onsibility of th the materials es shall satisf num. backfill shal particles free n num retained backfill shall b on the num mm all submit the days in adva red in accorda all carry out t by the engine supply the sp ll advise the he course of t es shall be t ange .
be undertaken eceived from ecificati on and inf grading ackfill obtained he contractor e contractor is specified in fy the require table backfill for d ll be a well of lumps of c d on the num m be a well grad m sieve and n e proposed b ance of obtain ance with any the work as er .
pecified mater engineer imm he work .
taken and tes n by the con the engineer ions frastruc d from outside r. to provide th n the contract ements for the num r structures description graded granu clay or other d mm sieve and ded granular m ot more than backfill source ing material fr crossreferen indicated in rials to the w mediately of a sts conducte tractor in the r. cture e the work sit he pit andor t documents .
e material typ ular material eleterious ma d not more tha material havin num dust .
e in writing rom the propo nced item form the contrac work area .
any changes ed by the en e area of the c te .
quarry source pe and the g composed o aterial and ha an num dust .
ng not more th for the appr osed source .
ming part of th ct documents in the source gineer to det changed con item num page num e for supply gradation as of clean aving not han num roval of the is item .
s andor as e materials termine the ditions until ba pag num num ackfill for ge num num measu .num the acco num basis o .num pay iden r structur rement fo quantity to b ordance with t of payment ment for wor ntified under th departm res or payment be measured this item .
t k under this it he contract .
sta ment of tr gradin t for payment tem shall incl andard s ransport ng shall be the ude a separa specifica tation an number of to ate unit price ations nd infras j onnes of bac for each clas tructur item num january num kfill supplied s of backfill a re num num in as depa induc janua num num num num artment ced trench ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num backfill uncons .num the .num bal submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num the co embank indicate .num the co to the s .num the em .num the num .num the co .num if th sup stan of trans h tion em consists o s erial shall be s material shal olidated fashi e engineer ha led hay or str als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shal kment constru ed in the cont ontractor shall specified dime e material e bankment .
e excavation num in width o ontractor shall he trench wall pply and insta ndard sp portatio f the construc supplied by th ll be a lightwe on .
as approved t aw shall be b all carry out t by the engine l construct th uction have b ract documen excavate a tr nsions and de excavated fro shall have on each side .
excavate the ls show signs ll shoring to m ecificati on and inf grading ction of an ind e contractor .
eight product o the backfill m tab approved b prod saw wood rubber t expanded loose ha broken up to a the work as er .
e induced tre been complet nts .
rench in the e epth as indica om the trenc a tolerance trench such t of sloughing maintain the tre ions frastruc duced trench .
of a consisten aterials listed ble num backfill mater duct wdust d chips tire chips polystyrene ay or straw a loose condit indicated in ench only afte ted to the sp mbankment s ated in the con ch shall be e of num hat the sides it shall be th ench walls in a cture .
nt nature and d in table num rials tion before pla the contrac er the installa pecified eleva surface along ntract docume incorporated mm in dept of the trench s e contractors a vertical state d supplied in a num for use in acement in th ct documents ation of the p ation and dim the centreline ents .
d into the th and a to stand verticall s responsibilit e. item num page num a loose dry the work .
he trench .
s andor as ipe and the mensions as e of the pipe surrounding olerance of ly .
ty to design ind pag num num num duced tren ge num num .num the .num .num .num the item num measu .num the cons .num num basis o .num pay nch trench shall b the contracto if shored the contractor s m over the ind rement fo quantity to b structed in acc the volume s of payment ment for work departm be completely or shall not lea contractor sh hall place a m duced trench p or payment be measured cordance with shall be calcu t k under this ite sta ment of tr gradin backfilled wit ave any of the hall remove th minimum of num prior to permitt t for payment s h this item .
ulated from th em shall be at andard s ransport ng h the approve e trench open he shoring from num mm of em ting constructi shall be the v e dimensions t the unit pric specifica tation an ed material wh at the end of m the trench a mbankment m ion traffic to u volume in cub s shown in the ce .
ations nd infras hich shall not b any days op after backfilling aterial under se the work a bic metres of e contract do tructur item num january num be compacted peration .
g. r the applicab area .
induced trenc ocuments .
re num num d. ble ch depa chain janua num num num artment n link fenc ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num chain li .num cha .num the fen type num .num the .num posts a indicate .num lin .num ter and fab .num top with .num all nuts .num concre .num concre waterpr standa .num the co indicate submitta .num the co certifica recomm .num submitt stan of trans ce tion m consists of s erials shall be ink fence and ain link fence nce fabric sha class a styl e top selvedge and rails sha ed on standar e posts shall b rminal gate e d a minimum ric to the post p rails shall be h sleeves that s bolts parts a te shall meet te form tubes roof glue and rd drawing num ontractor shall ed in the stan als ontractor shall ation that the mended proce tals are requir ndard sp portatio f supply and in supplied by t appurtenance gates and fitti all be chain lin le num grade num. e of the fabric all be schedu rd drawing num be num mm od end corner a num kgm m ts and bands e num mm od t allow for con and fittings sh the requireme s shall be coa d supplied with num. supply all oth dard drawing l submit in a materials sup edures for ins red in accorda ecificati on and inf grading nstallation of c he contractor es shall meet ings shall mee nk num mm m shall be twist ule num scale num and as fo d num mm wal and straining mass supplie for attaching num mm wall t traction and e all be hotdipp ents of item num ated spiral wo h a minimum her appurtena gs num and num dvance of the pplied meet th stallation and ance with any ions frastruc chain link fenc r. the requireme et the requirem mesh construc ted and the bo free hotdipp ollows l thickness an posts shall b ed with stretch the braces .
thickness and expansion at t ped galvanize num and csa ound wood fi length of num ances and mis num. e commencem he specified r instructions f crossreferen cture ce and gates .
ents of canc ments of can cted of num mm ottom selvedg ped galvanize nd a minimum be num mm od hing bands an d a minimum num the top rail join ed steel or alu a anum expo ibre paper bo num m and of a scellaneous m ment of the w requirements for handling .
nced item form cgsb num a ncgsb num m steel wire e shall be knu ed tubular ste num kgm ma d num mm wa nd bars for a num kgm ma nts .
uminum alloy .
osure class f oard manufact diameter as i metals as requ work the ma and the man ming part of th item num page num and num .
num. galvanized uckled .
eel pipe as ass .
all thickness ttaching the ss supplied num. tured with a ndicated on uired and as anufacturers nufacturers is item .
ch pag num ain link fe ge num num const .num the spec .num all w .num prio mino the p .num all fe .num all p conc .num .num .num all c .num if po draw .num line .num .num a co strai .num top reco .num term betw .num the term is di .num leng syst .num ence ruction contractor s cifically directe work shall be r to the const or ground und proper constru ence grades s posts installed crete form tub any void spac than num of backfill prior t if the void is g shall be remo post shall be concrete shall osts are place wing num. e posts shall b if an obstruct adjacent post more than num m orner post sha ining post at c rails braces ommended pro minal posts s ween the gate fence fabric s minal posts and storted .
gths of fabric tem such that splicing by ov departm shall carry o ed by the eng carried out in ruction of the dulations gre uction of the fe shall be subjec d in soil shal be forming the ce that results the od of th to placing the greater than num oved and the repositioned t be placed in a ed in solid roc e placed verti tion or major t the post ma m. all be installed changes in ele s and appurte ocedures .
shall be brace corner or en shall be instal d stretched tig shall only be a continuous verlap shall no sta ment of tr gradin ut the work gineer .
accordance w chain link fen ater than num ence in its req ct to the appro l be centred boundary of t s between the e concrete fo concrete .
num of the od hole shall be to meet num accordance w ck then the fo cally and in li ground elevat ay be placed d wherever the evation of mo enances shal ed by a centr d post and the led on the ou ghtly and unifo joined by sp diamond mes ot be permitted andard s ransport ng as indicated with the stand nce the contra m vertical in quired location oval of the en and vertically the excavated e concrete form orm tube shal d of the concre backfilled wit num or num. with num. ootings shall ine at a unifor tion difference not less than e fence line ch re than num. l be installed re rail of the e adjacent pos tside of the lin ormly but not t licing using t sh pattern resu d. specifica tation an d in the cont dard drawings ractor shall rem a num m length n. ngineer .
y embedded d hole formed m tube and th l be backfilled ete form tube th compacted num. be constructe rm spacing no e prevents pla num m from th hanges direct d in accordan same materi st. ne posts and to such a deg the manufactu ults .
ations nd infras tract docume s num and num move any deb h which woul in the concre by augering .
e excavated h d with well co then the con excavated m ed as indicate ot exceeding num acing a post a he next post tion by more t nce with the ial and size a top rail contin ree that the d urers approve tructur item num january num ents andor a num. bris and corre d interfere wit ete placed in hole that is les ompacted san crete form tub material and th ed on standar num m. at num m from a and in no cas than num and manufacturer as the top ra nuous betwee iamond patter ed splicing wir re num num as ect th a ss nd be he rd an se a rs ail en rn re depa chain janua num num num artment n link fenc ary num .num at all e stretchi procedu .num the bo pattern measure .num the qu includin .num the len section basis of .num paymen stan of trans ce end corner an ng bar and ures .
ottom tension fastened to t ment for p uantity to be m ng gates if any ngth shall be of fence .
payment nt for work un ndard sp portatio nd gate posts stretching b wire shall be the fabric by a payment measured for y supplied an taken along t nder this item ecificati on and inf grading s the fabric sh bar bands as e strung tight a twisted wire o payment shal nd installed in the top of the shall be at the ions frastruc hall be broken s indicated i t on the outs or enclosed in ll be the numb accordance w e fence from t e unit price .
cture n and secured n the manuf side of the lin n a fabric knuc ber of linear m with this item .
terminal post d to the posts facturers rec ne posts at th ckle .
metres of chai to terminal p item num page num s by a steel commended he diamond in link fence post of each depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of fen ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num all post .num the dis adjacen .num the res .num all mat outside measure .num the qu disman basis of .num payme stan of trans nce tion em shall cons ls dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b t holes shall b smantling and nt and surrou e contractor s sulting from th terials and wa e the work sit ment for p uantity to be ntled and hand payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio ist of the rem all carry out t by the engine be backfilled a d removal sh nding area .
shall be respo his work .
aste shall be te .
payment measured f dled in accord nder this item ecificati on and inf grading oval of all typ the work as er .
and tamped a hall be carried onsible at his come the pro for payment s dance with th m shall be at t ions frastruc pes of fencing indicated in and graded to d out in a ma sher own exp operty of the shall be the is item .
the unit price cture g. the contrac o match the su anner so as pense for an contractor a number of l e. ct documents urrounding gr to avoid dam y repair of su and shall be d inear metres item num page num s andor as rade .
mage to the uch damage disposed of s of fencing depa appli janua num num num num num num artment ication of ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num water agencie .num when a permit c submitta .num the co the wat constru .num the co specific .num water s amount .num for dire .num for .num to .num the co measure .num the qu and app .num the ca work e the load .num for basis of .num paymen applicat stan of trans water tion em consists of ls erials shall be shall be obt es and shall b applying for a covers extract als ontractor shall ter and the ce ction ontractor sha cally directed b shall be appli ts and at such r dust control ected through r compaction cool a newly ontractor shall ment for p uantity to be m plied in accord pacity load s either by weig ds applied the r the purposes payment nt for work un tion as identif ndard sp portatio f the supply an e supplied by t tained from a be free of any a permit for w tion of water f submit upon rtification of th all carry out t by the engine ed by equipm h times as req any time tha the work site of soils or agg placed aspha be prepared payment measured for dance with th size of each w ghing each loa ereafter .
s of this item nder this item fied under the ecificati on and inf grading nd application the contracto a source app y deleterious m ater extractio for use under n request the he approval o the work as er .
ment capable quired for the t the contract e over dustpr gregates .
alt concrete m to apply wate payment sha is item .
water tank wil ad or by weig a tonne mas shall include a e contract .
ions frastruc n of water .
or .
proved by th materials .
n per num the items of t method of w of the source .
indicated in of a uniform following purp tor is hauling rone surfaces at .
er on a seven all be the num ll be determin ghing andor c ss shall be eq a separate un cture he appropriat num the contrac the contract .
ithdrawal the the contrac m and even ra poses within the wo s. dayperweek mber of cubic ned prior to th calculating a t quivalent to a nit price for ea te regulatory ctor shall ens e method of ap ct documents ate of distribut ork site or pu k basis .
metres of wat he commence typical load a cubic metre .
ach type of wa item num page num agency or ure that the pplication of s andor as tion in such blic traffic is ter supplied ement of the nd counting ater standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num shaping of overburden at top of solid rock backslope january num grading standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num solid rock transitions longitudinal january num grading standard drawing num ground surface bedrock standard undercut in bedrock ground surface bedrock transition in cut condition transition in fill condition common excavation fill in bedrock standard undercut num subgrade quality material num subgrade num num num num borrow aanum as indicated in the contract documents quality material borrow aanum as indicated in the contract documents standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num subdrain january num grading standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num subdrain outlet january num grading standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num tension rodbar assembly january num grading standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num case num cross culvert subgrade above original ground trench num m deep january num grading standard drawing num num d num d num num num original ground subgrade c or shoulder l d num num num num num num id original ground subgrade c or shoulder l note backfill material within nummm of subgrade shall be the same as or similar to that which comprises the roadbed fill .
d nominal pipe diameter outside diameter of concrete pipe limits of foundation excavation see note h num num num file num limits of backfilling around structures to height h or diameter of metal pipe or span of metal pipearch id od backfill as per num astm dnum num and num num d lightly compacted backfill id num idnum num h num num num to num increased to a num slope extending outward and upward from the bottom of excavation .
for culverts having a nominal id nummmthe limits of foundation excavation are standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num case num cross culvert subgrade above original ground trench num m deep january num grading standard drawing num num d num num d num num num original ground subgrade c or shoulder l h id id num idnum num h limits of foundation excavation num num num num num num num num num num excavated material or similar borrow d nominal pipe diameter outside diameter of concrete pipe maximum num maximum num num num subgrade c or shoulder original ground l num num num file num num limits of backfilling around structures to height h or diameter of metal pipe or span of metal pipearch id od note num num to num num astm dnum backfill as per num and num num d lightly compacted backfill increased to a num slope extending outward and upward from the bottom of excavation .
for culverts having a nominal id nummmthe limits of foundation excavation are standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num case num cross culvert original ground above subgrade trench num m deep january num grading standard drawing num limits of foundation excavation d nominal pipe diameter outside diameter of concrete pipe be the same as or similar to that which comprises backfill material within nummm of subgrade shall id the adjacent subgrade material .
or similar borrow excavated material note num num num h maximum num num num l num id num num num num h original ground num subgrade c or shoulder subgrade c or shoulder original ground l num num maximum num num see note num num num d num num d num file num limits of backfilling around structures to height h or diameter of metal pipe or span of metal pipearch id od backfill as per num astm dnum num d lightly compacted backfill increased to a num slope extending outward and upward from the bottom of excavation .
for culverts having a nominal id nummmthe limits of foundation excavation are num and num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num case num cross culvert original ground above subgrade trench num m deep january num grading standard drawing num d nominal pipe diameter outside diameter of concrete pipe as or similar to that which comprises the subgrade material .
backfill material within nummm of subgrade shall be the same id or similar borrow excavated material note subgrade c or shoulder num l original ground num maximum subgrade c or shoulder original ground num num num num maximum num num num num num l num limits of foundation excavation num num num num num num num num num num d num h see note num d num num num num file num limits of backfilling around structures to height h or diameter of metal pipe or span of metal pipearch id od backfill as per num astm dnum num and num num d lightly compacted backfill increased to a num slope extending outward and upward from the bottom of excavation .
for culverts having a nominal id nummmthe limits of foundation excavation are id idnum num h num num num num to num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num case num storm drainage culvert longitudinal to the centreline of roadway january num grading standard drawing num d num num num num num id limits of backfilling around structures num num num num maximum limits of foundation excavation maximum num num original ground in fill num num num subgrade in cut or original ground in fill subgrade in cut or excavated material or similar borrow num num d num file num backfill as per num astm dnum num and num num d lightly compacted backfill increased to a num slope extending outward and upward from the bottom of excavation .
for culverts having a nominal id nummmthe limits of foundation excavation are note standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num foundation excavation for footings solid rock and common cases january num grading standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num foundation excavation for footings common over solid rock case january num grading standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num chain link fence january num grading standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num chain link gate january num grading standard drawing num hinge bolt and frame for footing details see std .
dwg .
num drop bolt nummm frame members cross brace drop latch and catch nummm od posts caps num num num double swing gate num file num depa table janua it num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num artment e of conte ary num tem d num p num a num s num f num c num s num s num b num a num a num p num f num m num c num p num s num s num num num num stan of trans ents descriptio production of aggregate ba shoulder mate fine grading cold milling a shoulder rum shoulder subd bituminous ta asphalt concr asphalt concr partial depth r full depth re microsurfacing chip seal pulverizing shoulder proc standard draw num num num num shou shou num num const num num const ndard sp portatio pav n highway agg sesubbase .
erial asphalt conc mble strips drain ack coat rete method reteend res recycling cycling g cessing wings lder rumble s lder subdrain truction detai truction detai pecificat on and inf vement struc gregates crete specification ult specificati strip installat n and outlet d il of a transve ils at a struct tions frastruc cture n ioners ion details erse key join ure cture number page num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num nt di of es vision num page num depa prod janua artic num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
num num num artment duction of ary num cle .num descrip .num materia .num gener .num rock .num blend .num aggre .num cr .num cr .num pi .num cr .num crush .num cover .num submitta .num constru .num gener .num plant .num pits a .num pits a .num stock .num samp .num aggre .num measure .num basis of descript .num this ite .num for the separat material .num genera .num all stan of trans highway a tion ls ral and gravel a ing of aggreg egate basesu rushed rock rushed grave t run gravel rushed sands hed shoulder r material als uction ral nd quarries c nd quarries c piles pling and test egates produc ement for f payment .
tion em consists o e purposes of te material .
ls al materials sha ndard sp portatio aggregate pav aggregates p gates ubbase basesubbas el basesubba subbase stone subbas material controlled by controlled by ting of aggreg ced outside t payment .
f the process this item the all be supplied ecificati on and inf es vement struc conten physical requ se ase se y owner y others gates he specified ing and stock term rock d d by the cont ions frastruc cture nts uirements limits kpiling of high does not inclu tractor .
cture hway aggrega ude sandston page num .
num num .
num .
num num .
num num num num num .
num num num num .
num num .
num .
num .
num .
num num num ates .
e which is ha item num page num andled as a pr pag num num num oduction o ge num num .num .num .num num .num roc .num .num num .num blen .num .num of highway the contract materials is s the owner r past field per engineer wit grading limits the owner aggregate so viewing in ac building num ck and gravel aggregate sh contain friabl would make environmenta exposed to th aggregate sh te microdeva mto ls num microdeva mto ls num freeze tha mto ls num flat elong mto ls num plasticity ind aashto t nding of aggr blending of a percentage o blending sha tests microd departm y aggrega tor shall provi specified in th reserves the rformance do h a specific s. maintains rec ources locate ccordance wit college hill r l aggregates hall be compo le soluble or e the aggreg al hazard fro he natural ele hall meet the est and meth l num l num w num gated particle num dex tnum and tnum egates aggregates s of crushed pa all not be per deval freeze sta ment of tr ates pavement st ide the pit and he contract d right to reject ocumented by material rega cords of field ed throughout th item num a road frederic physical re osed of clean reactive mine gate prone to om the prese ements after p requirements properties hod es num hall be perm rticles or dec rmitted if requ ethaw and p andard s ransport ructure dor quarry so ocuments .
t any source y the records ardless of co d and labora t the provinc at the owner cton nb duri equirements hard sound erals or other o decompos ence of the p placement in t s of table num table num s of rock and aggr cov aggr aggreg and sh blend aggr blend aggrega shou all highw crushed r aggr and ble aggreg and ble itted to meet crease the pe uired solely to plasticity inde specifica tation an ource for sup of supply of and experien ompliance wit atory testing ce and these s offices loca ng normal bus d durable un r deleterious ition or disin parent materia the work .
num .
num d gravel agg regate type ver material regate base gate subbase oulder materi ding material regate base ding material ate subbase a lder material way aggrega rock aggreg regate base ending materi gate subbase ending materi t the grading ercentage of fl o improve the ex .
ations nd infras j ply unless the aggregates o nce of the ow th physical re results for kn e records are ated in the so siness hours .
ncoated partic materials or ntegration o al or its byp gregate v e ial and tes ates ial e ial requirements lat and elonga e results of m tructur item num january num e source of th on the basis o wner andor th equirements o nown highwa e available fo oils and miner cles that do no conditions tha r present an products whe value max .
num num num num num num num num num s increase th ated particles material quali re num num he of he or ay or ral ot at ny en he s. ty depa prod janua num .
num num .
artment duction of ary num num .num ble the for .num the me .num ble wh .num .num nat agg .num ble .num aggreg num .num cru .num stan of trans highway a ending shall b e blending ma approval prio e blending m easurable .
ending materi en tested in a the blendin requirement tural sand or gregates shal ending of aggr gate basesub ushed rock b crushed roc to conform t with astm c .num rock sh ast sieve num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num num ndard sp portatio aggregate pav be permitted o aterial into the or to producti material shall als shall be accordance w ng materials ts of table num r gravel used ll not exceed regates shall p bbase basesubbase ck basesubb to the gradin cnum and cnum hall be quarrie grading l tm size num p mm mm mm mm mm mm mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num m num m num ecificati on and inf es vement struc only at the cru e crushing pro on of any ble be added s granular mat with astm cnum shall individu num. d as blending num by mass produce a con e ase shall be g limits as se num. ed from a sou tab limits crus aggregate b num mm passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ions frastruc cture usher and th ocess shall be ended product such that the terials having num. ually meet th g material in s of the blend nsistently grad produced by et out in tab urce that is so ble num shed rock b base num mm passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num cture he method an e submitted in t. e rate of ble g a dust cont he microdev the producti ded aggregate ded product .
y the crushing le num whe olid in situ .
basesubbase aggrega num mm passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num nd location of n writing to th ending is con tent not exce val and plas ion of the cr e produced .
g and process en tested in a e ate subbase num mm passin num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num item num page num introducing he engineer ntrolled and eeding num sticity index rushed rock sing of rock accordance m ng num num num num num num num num pr pag num num num oduction o ge num num .num num num .num of highway crushed gra .num crushed gravel to astm c astm sieve size num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num m num m .num gravel b fractured pit run grav .num pit run g table num .num over departm y aggrega avel basesub gravel base o conform to t num and cnum grad aggre num mm passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ase shall hav d face when t vel subbase gravel subbas num when tes rsize rocks in sta ment of tr ates pavement st bbase esubbase sha the grading li num. ing limits c egate base g num m pass num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ve a minimum tested in acco se shall be g sted in accord the pit run m andard s ransport ructure all be produc imits of table table num crushed gra mm sing num m pas num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num m of num of th ordance with a gravel that co dance with as aterial shall b specifica tation an ced by the c e num when num avel basesu aggreg mm ssing num p num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num he particles b astm dnum onforms to th stm cnum an be removed fr ations nd infras j crushing and n tested in ac ubbase gate subbase num mm passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num by mass havin num. he grading lim nd cnum .
rom the work tructur item num january num processing o ccordance wit e num mm passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ng at least on mits set out k. re num num of th ne in depa prod janua num .
num .
artment duction of ary num num .num cru .num num stan of trans highway a ushed sandst crushed sa sandstone t accordance .num sandsto other de .num san .num crushed astm num num num .num crushed greater lsnum para .
para .
perce ndard sp portatio aggregate pav grading astm sieve size num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num m num m tone subbase andstone sub to conform to with astm c one shall be c eleterious mat ndstone rubble d sandstone s grading m sieve size num mm num mm num mm num m d sandstone p than num a grading m num the micr num and num nt loss calcul ecificati on and inf es vement struc table limits pit r e e bbase shall b o the grading cnum and cnum composed of terials and sh e and highly w shall have a m ta g limits cr num p num num proposed for when test modified as foll rodeval abras a num μm si lation .
ions frastruc cture num run gravel s num num num num be produced limits as set num. clean uncoat hall be from a weathered sa maximum pla able num rushed sands num mm passing num num num num use as subba ted in acco lows sion machine ieve shall be cture subbase passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num by the crus t out in table ed particles f a source that andstone shal asticity index stone subba num mm passing num num num num ase shall hav ordance with shall run num m added to de hing and pro e num whe free from clay is solid in situ ll not be acce pi of num. ase g num m pas num num num ve a microde h test me minutes .
etermine mas item num page num ocessing of en tested in y organic or u. eptable .
mm ssing num num eval loss not thod mto ss b in the pr pag num num num oduction o ge num num .num crus .num num .num cov .num num submit .num the .num .num of highway shed shoulde shoulder ma conform to th cnum and cnum ver material cover mater conform to t astm cnum a sie num num num num num num num ttals contractor s the contrac representativ the enginee notification of departm y aggrega er material aterial shall b he grading lim num .
gradin rial shall be the grading and cnum .
astm eve size num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num m hall notify the ctor shall mak ve samples of er shall requ f the evaluatio sta ment of tr ates pavement st be produced b mits set out in tab g limits cr astm sieve size num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num m num m produced by limits set ou t grading li num mm passing num num num num num e engineer in ke available f the material uire up to num on of the mat andard s ransport ructure by the crushi n table num ble num rushed shou num m pass num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num y the crushin t in table num table num mits cover num mm passing num num num num num num num num num writing ident all equipmen proposed for num days from terial .
specifica tation an ing and proc num when tested ulder materia mm sing num num num num num num num num num num num ng and proce num when r material num mm passin num num num num num num num num num num num tifying the sou nt necessary r supply .
m the date o ations nd infras j cessing of roc d in accordan al essing of roc tested in ac m ng num m pas num num num num num num urce of mater for the engi f sampling t tructur item num january num ck or gravel t nce with ast k or gravel t ccordance wit mm ssing num num num num num num rial .
neer to obta to the date o re num num to m to th in of depa prod janua num num num num num artment duction of ary num .num the co approva constru .num genera .num the spe .num the ma .num .num .num for pro nec .num plant .num the nec cle sub .num .num the flow .num the and .num agg .num .num .num pits and .num pro pro .num the at a as stan of trans highway a ontractor sha al of the sour ction al e contractor ecifically direc e contractor aterials at any random sam effects of the no work sh until an appr r rock and gra operty require cessary chang e contractor cessary provis an and free o bstances for the contrac conform to t e contractor wing off the b e contractor d capable of y gregates sha the water amounts of disposal of d quarries co ocessed mate operty of the o e contractor a location wit directed by th ndard sp portatio aggregate pav all not comm rce is received shall carry ou cted by the en shall advise y time during mples shall b e change .
hall be undert roval is receiv avel aggrega ements of ta ges in locatio shall provid sions for pow of injurious a the duration o ctor shall reta the requireme shall provide elts or to th shall crush a yielding a con ll only be was to be used oil alkali acid any washing ontrolled by o erials not mee owner .
shall be resp hin the devel he engineer .
ecificati on and inf es vement struc mence any p d from the en ut the work a ngineer .
e the engine the course of be taken and taken by the ved from the tes if sample able num th on or source to de an area wer and an ad amounts of oi of the work .
ain a qualifie ents of the ca the enginee he stockpile .
and screen a nsistent and a shed by a me for washing d organic ma residue shall owner eting the spec ponsible for th oped pitquar ions frastruc cture processing w ngineer .
as indicated i eer immediat f the work .
tests conduc contractor in engineer .
es taken duri he contracto o produce ma for the own dequate suppl il alkali acid ed electrician anadian elect r safe access aggregates w acceptable pro ethod that prod aggregate s atter or other be the respo cified aggreg he loading ha rry as specifie cture work until wr in the contra tely of any cted by the en n the area of ng the work or shall cease aterial meetin ners lab trai ly of water m d organic ma to perform t rical code .
s to the strea with equipme oduct .
duces a cons shall be clea deleterious s onsibility of the gate type and auling and sto ed in the con ritten notifica ct document changes in ngineer to de f the changed fail to meet t e production ng the require iler and sha minimum num l atter or other the electrical am of crushed nt of adequa sistent produc an and free ubstances .
e contractor .
or size shall ockpiling of th ntract docum item num page num ation of the ts andor as the source etermine the d conditions the physical and make ments .
ll make all min that is deleterious hookup to d aggregate ate capacity ct. of injurious remain the his material ents andor pr pag num num num oduction o ge num num .num pits .num num .num stoc .num .num .num .num .num num .num sam .num .num of highway and quarries processed m responsibility ckpiles crushed agg andor as app stockpiling o the entire we maximum rec .num stockpile aggregat all aggre at all time .num if a poten stockpile finegrain stockpile stockpiles sh completed be forming of c dumping ove it is the expre the specified .num aggregat shall be i mpling and te the crushed shall be acce sampling and departm y aggrega s controlled b materials not y of the contra gregate shall b proved by the of aggregate s eight and dim covery of the es shall not b tes nor near gate is not po es .
ntial for conta e site the co ned material es .
hall be built in efore the next coneshaped er the edge of ess responsib quality and g tes that beco immediately r esting of aggr product shall epted or rejec d testing shal sta ment of tr ates pavement st by others meeting the actor .
be stockpiled e engineer .
shall be done mension of th stockpiled m be placed ne property line ossible or pra amination of t ontractor sha a minimum n layers not e t layer is begu piles with c f stockpiles sh bility of the co gradation and ome contamin removed from regates l be monitore cted on the ba ll be carried o andard s ransport ructure e specified ag at a location e on welldrain he stockpiles aterials .
ear the quarry s tree lines o actical and acc the aggregate all evenly dis m of num mm exceeding one un .
conveyer belt hall not be pe ontractor to e are of uniform nated or mixe m the stockpile d for gradatio asis of the tes out as indicate specifica tation an ggregate type as indicated ned level ba s and in suc ry face stripp or drainage d cess to the st e exists due stribute and m thick to f e metre in de ts pushing u rmitted .
ensure that st m distribution ed with other es .
on throughout sts performed ed in table num ations nd infras j e andor size in the contra ses capable ch a manner ping piles or ditches such t tockpile shall to ground co compact a l form a foun epth and each up piles with tockpiles cont n. r aggregates t the period of by the engin num .
tructur item num january num e shall be th act documen e of supportin r as to ensur piles of othe that retrieval o be maintaine onditions at th ayer of clea dation for th h layer shall b a tractor an tain material o or segregate f the work an neer .
re num num he ts ng re er of ed he n he be nd of ed nd depa prod janua num .
num .
num artment duction of ary num sam re sie no num .num sam con num .num the sha out .num aggreg .num the und .num the sto onc and sho stan of trans highway a procedu mpling aggre duction of sa eve analysis otes num sh num w te num fr de mple sizes sm ntrol purposes bases note e contractor s all be notified tside of the sp gates produce e contractor der num e contractor ckpile all ma ce a test res d shall contin ow that mater ndard sp portatio aggregate pav minimum ure egates ample hift is defined where product esting shall be requency of te etermined by maller than th s as indicated m type base shoulder mat subbase subbase subbase subbase field sample larger than th shall be provi d immediately pecified limits ed outside the shall not pla that the mate shall hold t aterial being p ult indicates nue to do so rial being prod ecificati on and inf es vement struc tab m sampling standa astm astm astm cnum d as one produ tion is greate e increased as esting may al the engineer hose specified d in table num t minimum sie aggregate s m terial num num pit es obtained u he above siev ided a copy o y if any test r . e specified l ace any mate erial being pro he placemen produced in that the mate until such ti duced is withi ions frastruc cture ble num and testing ards m dnum cnum num cnum uction crews er than num s determined lso be reduce r. d in astm dnum num table num eve analysis size mm m num num num num num num num num t run num under astm ve analysis siz of all test resu result indicate limits erial into the p oduced is out nt of material separate and erial being pr ime that num ad in the specifie cture g frequency minimum num mm num num num s daily work pe t per shift the by the engin ed during low num and cnum s sample size mass g num num num num num num dnum shall b zes .
ults as soon a es that mater production st tside the spec into the prod d clearly defi roduced does dditional cons ed limits .
m frequency m eriod .
e minimum fr neer .
production a may be used es cover mate size mm num num num num be at least fo as they are av rials are bein tockpile after cified limits .
duction stockp ined reject s not meet s secutive siev item num page num per shift num mm num num num requency of as d for quality erial mass g num num num num our times vailable and g produced notification pile or shall stockpiles specification ve analyses pr pag num num num oduction o ge num num .num two sp one sp one sp num measu .num the proc num basis o .num pay aggr of highway .num should o the com placed in shall be r the sequenc table num o consecutive pecifications e test outside pecifications e test outside pecifications rement fo quantity to cessed and st of payment ment for wor regate as ide departm y aggrega only one test pletion of num n the producti rejected from ce of materia num .
schema e tests within e e or payment o be measur tockpiled in a t rk under this ntified under t sta ment of tr ates pavement st indicate mate acceptable c on stockpile the work unt al acceptance ta atic represen hold in se stockpile next two specificat hold in se stockpile following specifica t red for paym accordance w item shall inc the contract .
andard s ransport ructure erial to be ou consecutive t otherwise the til num acceptab erejection in able num ntation of ha eparate s tests within tion eparate s test outside ation ment shall be with this item .
clude a separ specifica tation an utside the spe test results e held materi ble consecutiv nto production andling proc place in place in reject ma reject un tests wit e the numbe rate unit pric ations nd infras j ecified limits the material al and any ot ve test results n stockpiles cedure production st production st aterial ntil two conse hin specificat er of tonnes ce for each si tructur item num january num then followin held may b ther productio s are obtained is indicated tockpile tockpile cutive tion of aggregat ze and type re num num ng be on d. in te of depa aggr janua num num num num num num num artment regate bas ary num descript .num this ite material .num genera .num all .num agg sha submitta .num submitt constru .num genera .num the spe .num agg req up .num .num .num the tim be .num .num placem .num the and wo .num stan of trans sesubbase tion em consists o ls al materials sha gregate base all be of the ty als tals are requir ction al e contractor ecifically direc gregate base quirements for to the comple if the materi andor grada immediately any materia the work .
e contractor e during the c taken and tes no work sh until an appr ment e contractor s d grades as ork .
any deficie commencem ndard sp portatio e pav f supply and p all be supplied esubbase sh ype and size red in accorda shall carry ou cted by the en esubbase ma r the class of m etion of the co ial incorporate ation the con rectify the pro l found to be shall advise course of the sts conducted hall be undert roval is receiv shall satisfy h indicated in encies in gra ment of the w pecificat on and inf vement struc placement of d by the cont all conform to as indicated ance with any ut the work a ngineer .
aterials shall material spec ontract .
ed into the w ntractor shall oblem to the s nonconformi the enginee work and su d by the owne taken by the ved from the himself that th the contract ade shall be work .
tions frastruc cture f aggregate b tractor .
o the requirem in the contra crossreferen as indicated i conform to th cified at the tim work does not cease hauling satisfaction of ing to the spe r of any chan ufficiently in a er to determin contractor in engineer .
he existing gra t documents e noted and cture basesubbase ments of num. act document nced item form in the contra he properties me of incorpo conform with g from the so the engineer .
ecified materia nges in the s advance so th ne the effects n the area of ade has been s prior to the d submitted e. .num num and ts .
ming part of th ct document and specifie oration into the h the specified ource of supp .
al shall be rem source mater hat random sa s of the chang f the changed n constructed commencem in writing p item num page num num and is item .
ts andor as ed gradation e work and d properties ply and shall moved from rials at any amples may ge .
d conditions to the lines ment of the prior to the ag pag num num ggregate b ge num num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num .num seg .num .num basesubba aggregate ba rutted or froze by the engine .num any ruts eliminate unsuitabl prior to the area shall ha may be requi the aggrega potential for s .num the max each lift of a required prof the final grad spreading sh operations an placed is sha crawler tract basesubbas the foreslop ridges andor aggregate ba any deteriora directly or ind engineer befo the contract have been bla the contrac specified den the engineer length of roa regation if the cont astm cnum immediately .
if segregation remedy the w departm ase asesubbase en surfaces an eer .
or potholes d by scarifyin e material and placement of ave been sha ired .
ate basesubb segregation .
imum aggreg aggregate bas ile and cross s de after shapin haping and co nd the contra ped and comp tors and scra se .
pe in the aggr r undulations asesubbase ation of the pla directly attribu ore any work tor shall remo aded to the si ctor shall mai sity until the c r may accept t adbed depend ractors meth and tested i n of materials work in place sta ment of tr pavement st materials sha nd work shall which appea ng shaping d placing and f aggregate aped to the s base shall be ate subbase sesubbase sh section .
ng and compa ompacting ope actor shall at pacted to the apers shall n regate bases to form a stra materials sha acement grad utable to the may continue ove from the w des of the lay intain the fin completion of t the work on c ing on conditi hods result n accordance occurs then or shall remo andard s ransport ructure all not be pla l progress only ar in advance and compact compacting n basesubbas atisfaction of e spread even lift thickness s hall be bladed action shall be erations shall t the complet specified den ot be permitt subbase laye ight line slope ll not be blade de which appe contractor sh e over this are work site ex er .
ished grade the contract .
contiguous num k ons at the tim in segregat e with astm the contracto ve the segreg specifica tation an ced on inund y once the wo e of the agg ting or if ne new material o se the slope f the enginee nly and comp shall be num m d shaped and e to the specif proceed simu tion of any d sity .
ted for haulin rs shall be co e in cross sect ed onto the su ears during th hall be repaire ea .
xcess materia to the speci km long sectio me of the work ion of the cnum the c or shall subm gated material ations nd infras dated soft m ork area has gregate place cessary by of the same qu es and ditche er including a pacted in lifts mm .
d compacted fied tolerances ultaneously wi day ensure th ng or placing onstructed to ction .
ubgrade fores he course of th ed to the sat al and oversize ified tolerance ons of roadbe k. materials a contractor sha it a work plan ls from the wo tructur item num january num uddy pothole been approve ement shall b excavating th uality .
es in the wo any topsoil tha minimizing th to produce th s. th the dumpin hat all materi g of aggregat be free of rut slope .
he work and isfaction of th e stones whic es and to th ed or the who as defined b all cease wo n to scarify an ork .
re num num ed ed be he rk at he he ng al te ts is he ch he ole by rk nd depa aggr janua num num num artment regate bas ary num .num compa .num the ma measure .num the q bases basis of .num paymen aggreg stan of trans sesubbase ction e material sha aximum dry de ment for p uantity to be subbase supp payment nt for work u ate basesub ndard sp portatio e pav all be compa ensity .
payment e measured plied and plac under this item bbase as iden pecificat on and inf vement struc cted in accor for payment ed in accord m shall includ ntified under th tions frastruc cture rdance with it t shall be th ance with this de a separate he contract .
cture tem num to a he number o s item .
e unit price fo minimum of of tonnes of or each size item num page num num of the aggregate and type of depa shou janua num num num num artment ulder mate ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num should the type .num if speci .num ra in t .num the .num the det submitta .num submit constru .num the co specific .num the pla the adja .num the adj .num should .num any pla .num sho .num the co uncomp .num wh und the stan of trans erial tion em consists o ls erials shall be er material sh e and size as fied for use in ap may be ma the contract d e contractor s e contractor termined by a als tals are requi ction ontractor sha cally directed b acement of s acent and sur e contractor acent andor er material sh y shoulder s ce any shoul oulder materi ontractor sha pacted thickn here surplus a der item num e shoulder at ndard sp portatio pav f supply and p e supplied by hall conform s indicated in n the contrac ade available documents .
shall be respo shall process astm cnum a red in accord all carry out t by the engine houlder mate rrounding roa shall be resp abutting finis hall be placed spreader cons lder material o al shall not be all spread th ess and shal aggregate ba the contract hisher own e ecificati on and inf vement struc placement of the contracto to the require the contract ct rap shall b e under item onsible to sup s the rap to and shall be f dance with an the work as er .
erial shall be c adbed .
ponsible at h hed surfaces d by equipme sidered for th on the pavem e bladed onto he shoulder l employ meth ase has been tor shall sprea expense prio ions frastruc cture f shoulder ma or .
ements of num documents .
be made avai num andor fr pply the mate contain num free of all lum y crossrefere indicated in carried out in hisher own ex s resulting from ent specifically he work sha ment .
o the subgrad material eve hods to limit s n windrowed ad shape and r to placing a cture aterials on the num num an ilable by the o rom a stockp erial to the wo passing the mps or clods a enced item fo the contrac n a manner so xpense to re m this work .
y designed fo ll be constru de foreslope .
enly in lifts n segregation .
along the sh d compact the ny shoulder m e roadbed sh nd num and owner .
ile location a ork .
e num mm sie and soil .
orming part of ct documents o as to avoid epair any dam or that purpos cted so that .
not exceedin houlder durin e windrowed material unde item num page num houlder .
shall be of as identified eve size as f this item .
s andor as damage to mage to the e. it shall not g num mm g the work material on er this item .
sh pag num num num oulder ma ge num num .num the the .num .num the ope .num .num .num sho eng .num .num fina abut and .num the surf num measu .num the supp num basis o .num pay sho .num the sho num aterial shoulder ma maximum dry rap shall be contractor s n to traffic wit regardless o open to traffic where the d num mm in a commence w oulder materia ineer .
the contract al shaping of tting paveme shall be blen contractor s ace shall be f rement fo quantity to plied and plac of payment ment for wor ulder material contractor s oulder materia .num .
departm aterial shall be y density exc e compacted t shall not perm thout the sho of the distanc c for a period ifference in e any portion o within num hour al shall be p tor shall unde the shoulde ent surface an nded and shap shall keep cle free of should or payment be measured ced in accord t rk under this l as identified shall be subje al placement sta ment of tr pavement st e compacted cept as follows to the num of mit more than oulder materia ce paved eac greater than elevation betw of the work rs of the place placed in driv ertake all hand r material sh nd shall exten ped to match an the adjace der material p t d for payment ance with this item shall inc d under the co ect to a pena operation is n andard s ransport ructure in accordanc s f maximum de num km of each al operation b ch new lift of num days witho ween the asph the should ement of the a veways and a dwork that ma all be consist nd at the spe the foreslop ent pavemen prior to openin t shall be the s item .
clude a separ ontract .
alty of num not carried ou specifica tation an ce with item num ensity as dete h lift of newly eing in progre newly laid as out shoulder halt concrete der material asphalt concr around guide ay be necess tent and con ecified slope pe intersection nt surface and ng the work a e number of t rate unit pric num per day ut in the pres ations nd infras num to a minim ermined by a y laid asphalt ess .
sphalt concre material bein and the sho placement o rete .
e posts as d sary to comple tinuous to th to the line of n. d in all cases area to traffic onnes of sho ce for each si for each occ scribed period tructur item num january num mum of num o test strip .
concrete to b ete shall not b g placed .
oulder exceed operation sha irected by th ete the work .
e grade of th f the foreslop the paveme .
oulder materi ze and type currence if th d as defined re num num of be be ds all he he pe nt al of he in depa fine g janua num num num num num num artment grading ary num descript .num this ite grades material .num none re submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num all fine dimens .num if a ma and this .num the fine of the graded .num on pav extent p .num if s rem the .num the nea measure .num the qu comple .num the are unless basis of .num payme stan of trans tion em consists o . ls equired .
als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b e grading sha sions and tole at any time du ake all necess dor displaced s item .
e grading ma maximum dr to the same ving contract possible to co surplus mater main the prop e engineer .
e contractor s at and uniform ment for p uantity to be m eted in accord ea to be fine otherwise no payment nt for this wo ndard sp portatio pav of shaping a red in accorda all carry out t by the engine all be carried erances as dir uring the work sary repairs to d shall be sc aterial shall be ry density .
if elevation as t ts materials omplete the s rial still rema perty of the o shall be respo m appearance payment measured for dance with this graded shall ted in the co ork shall be at pecificat on and inf vement struc nd compactio ance with any the work as er .
d out in acco rected by the k the surface o reinstate the arified resha e compacted paved shou the top of the remaining fro houldering to ins after com owner and sha onsible to ens e. payment sha s item .
be defined a ntract docum t the unit pric tions frastruc cture on of aggreg crossreferen indicated in ordance with engineer .
e becomes rut e surface gra aped and com in accordanc ulders are sp e adjacent sur om fine grad o the line and mpletion of sh all be remove sure that all s all be the num as num mm be ments .
ce .
cture gate base to nced item form the contrac item num an tted or displa ade and if nec mpacted to m ce with item num pecified the rface .
ding operation grade of the houldering the ed from the w shoulders and mber of squar eyond the ed the specified ming part of th ct documents ndor to grad ced the cont cessary the d meet the requ num to a minim shoulders sh ns shall be u finished pave en these mat work site as d foreslopes re metres of f dge of the pav item num page num d lines and is item .
s andor as des slopes tractor shall depth rutted irements of mum of num hall be fine used to the ement .
terials shall directed by are left in a fine grading vement line depa cold janua num num num num artment milling a ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num the c comme .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the co underly .num the co or appr .num all pic wo .num if a the sm .num the .num the .num the co manho are not .num the co by the e .num the ra site as .num if th eac do stan of trans asphalt co tion em consists o ls dentified .
als contractor sh encement of th tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor sha ying aggregat ontractor shal roved equivale loose mater ked up from ork area to tra a transverse v e contractor ooth num m lo e lanes shall ere shall be n ontractor sha le frames and damaged an ontractor shal engineer .
ap shall rema indicated in t he contractor ch layer mus cuments .
ndard sp portatio oncrete pav f the removal hall notify th he work .
red in accorda all carry out t by the engine all take care e material .
l provide in p ent with auto rial remaining paved shou affic .
vertical cut is shall immedi ong taper as s be complete no transverse all remove all d other struc nd the area a l provide for ain the proper he contract d r removes the st be stockp ecificati on and inf vement struc haulage and he engineer ance with any the work as er .
in full depth partial depth omatic control g after cold m ulders gutters s milled in the ately constru shown in stan d to the same slope control l asphalt con ctures abutting fter removal m the drainage rty of the ow documents or e specified thi piled separate ions frastruc cture d stockpiling o a minimum crossreferen indicated in h removal no removal equ ls for the cont milling shall s or from un e existing pav uct with hot m ndard drawin e location at t l used .
ncrete from th g the work i matches the g of water from wner and shall r as directed b ickness in mo ely unless o cture of asphalt con m of num day nced item form the contrac ot to contam uipment with trol of longitu be swept to nder guide ra vement at the mixed aspha ng num. the end of the he faces of g in such a ma grade of the a m the cold m l be loaded a by the engine ore than one otherwise ind ncrete from a ys in advan ming part of th ct documents inate the ra a ski at least dinal grade .
a granular s ail before reo e limit of the lt concrete a e days cold m gutters catch anner that the adjacent remo illed area as and hauled to eer .
layer then m dicated in th item num page num a roadbed .
nce of the is item .
s andor as ap with the t num m long shoulder or opening the work area a temporary milling .
h basins or e structures oval area .
determined a stockpile material from he contract co pag num num num old milling ge num num .num prop the .num .num .num if th recy .num the and until .num num measu .num the conc num basis o .num pay dept d g asphalt per stockpilin reclaimed asp if a potential site a layer stockpiles .
the height o stockpiled m permitted to t he contract d ycled asphalt contractor s in a conditio l such time as hot mixed as only as a tem rement fo quantity to crete accepta of payment ment for wor th removal as departm concrete g procedures phalt concrete for contamin of clean fine of rap stockp material and n travel on the documents sp mix the rap shall continuo on providing f s the new asp sphalt concret mporary repair or payment be measured ably removed t k under this it s identified un sta ent of tr e pavement st s shall be use e stockpile .
nation of the r egrained ma piles shall be no loaders c stockpile .
pecify that th p shall be weig ously maintain for the safe a phalt concrete te shall be pla r. t d for paymen hauled and s tem shall inclu der the contra andard s ransport ructure ed and care t rap exists d aterial shall b e a maximum crawler tracto e reclaimed a ghed prior to n the work s and efficient f e is placed .
aced in the p nt shall be th stockpiled in ude a separat act .
specifica tation an taken not to due to ground be evenly dis m of num m to lim ors trucks or asphalt conc placement in site free of po flow of traffic otholes cold he number of accordance w te unit price f ations d infrast contaminate d conditions a stributed as a mit the conso r other equip crete is to be n the stockpile otholes and s c from the tim mix or rap a f square met with this item for either full d tructure item num january num or consolidat at the stockpi a base for th olidation of th pment shall b used in a ho e. standing wate me of remova are acceptab tres of aspha .
depth or parti e num num te le he he be ot er al le alt al depa shou janua num num num num artment ulder rumb ary num descrpit .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num the co .num submit constru .num the co specific .num rumble travel a .num rumble num mm on stan .num to acc paved a .num the sho .num unless location .num wit .num wit .num wit lan .num all cold roadbe stan of trans ble strips tion em consists o ls dentified .
als ontractor shal tals are requi ction ontractor sha cally directed e strips shall at the location e strips shall b m at num mm s ndard drawin commodate ru at least num m e outer edge oulder that is otherwise ap ns thin num m of thin num m of a thin num m of es resuming dmilled mate ed within one ndard sp portatio pav f the cold mill l notify the en red in accord all carry out t by the engine be cold mill ns indicated i be a series of spacing para g num. umble strips mm thick and of the rumb full depth asp pproved by th residential or a structure wi the beginnin beyond the g erial resulting hour after m ecificati on and inf vement struc ling of rumble ngineer a min dance with an the work as eer .
led on the o n the contrac f num mm x num allel to and num the right sh d another num ble strip shall phalt concrete he engineer r r commercial th pc concre ng or end of gore area .
g from the w illing to the s ions frasstru cture e strips on the nimum of num da y crossrefere indicated in outside paved ct documents num mm rectan num mm outsid oulder shall m paved or c be a minimu e. rumble strips development ete deck pave tapers of au work under th satisfaction of ucture e paved asph ays prior to co enced item fo the contrac d shoulder r s. ngular trough de the solid w have a minim chipsealed .
um of num m shall not be t ed or bare o uxiliary dece his item sha f the engineer halt concrete ommencing th orming part of ct documents right side in hs milled to a hite edge line mum num m mm inside tha installed in th or leration or ac ll be remove r. item num page num shoulders .
he work .
f this item .
s andor as direction of depth of num e as shown of its width at portion of he following cceleration ed from the sh pag num num oulder ru ge num num measu .num the alon .num num basis o .num pay umble strip rement fo quantity to ng which rumb the measure of payment ment for wor departm ps or payment be measured ble strips hav ement shall be t rk under this i sta ment of tr pavement st t d for paymen e been accep e taken paral tem shall be andard s ransport ructure nt shall be th ptably constru lel to the whit at the unit pr specifica tation an he number of ucted in accor te edge line o rice .
ations nd infras f linear metre rdance with th of the travelled tructur item num january num es of shoulde his item .
d lane .
re num num er depa shou janua num num num num artment ulder subd ary num descript .num this ite outlet s material .num all mate .num subdra followin .num pv per .num co .num .num all outl canc .num all app .num geotex .num free dr submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the co .num the su pavem surroun .num the adj .num the su stan of trans drain tion em consists structures .
ls erials shall be ain pipe shall ng c pipe and rforated as pe rrugated poly all subdrain et pipe shall sa bnum .
urtenances s xtile shall be t raining backfi als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shal bdrain trench ent and shal nding roadbe e contractor acent andor bdrain shall b ndard sp portatio pav of the supply e supplied by be num mm appurtenanc er cancsa b yethylene pipe pipe shall be be solid corr hall conform t type nnum in ac ll shall be sup red in accorda all carry out t by the engine l install the sh h shall be insta l be carried o ed .
shall be resp abutting finis be installed in pecificat on and inf vement struc y and installa the contracto diameter co ces shall be bnum claus e and appurte e prewrapped rugated plast to the require ccordance wit pplied in acco ance with any the work as er .
houlder subd alled in the s out in a man ponsible at h hed surfaces accordance tions frastruc cture ation of shou or .
orrugated slot e dr num co se num or enances confo d with a geote tic pipe and s ements of can th num. ordance to the crossreferen indicated in rain system b shoulder of the nner so as to hisher own ex s resulting from with the stan cture ulder subdra tted plastic p nforming to orming to as extile covering shall conform ncsa bnum .
e requirement nced item form the contrac before paving e roadbed p o avoid dama xpense to re m this work .
ndard drawing in and assoc pipe and sha cancsa b tm fnum .
g. m to the requ .num. ts of num. ming part of th ct documents .
arallel to the age to the ad epair any dam g num .
item num page num ciated drain all meet the bnum and irements of is item .
s andor as edge of the djacent and mage to the sh pag num num oulder su ge num num .num the coup reco .num the roa of sh .num .num all s and .num the num .num sub .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num ubdrain subdrain sh plings compa ommendation material exc adbed and sh houldering ma if the excava material shal work site .
subdrain trenc each layer sh ends of each bdrain outlets all subdrain o the contrac maximum of vertical curve the subdrain outfall .
the trench fo the limit of th the outfall e drawing num all corrugate graded to pro all outfall det the material outlet trench .
.num the tren minimum .num the trenc departm hall be instal atible with th s. cavated from all be uniform aterial .
ated materia ll become the ch backfill sha hall be thorou h continuous outlets shall b tor shall insta num m interv es and as dire n outlets shal or the subdra e foreslope .
end of the su num. ed pipe used ovide for posit tail backfill sh l excavated f . ch backfill sh m of num of th ch shall be ba sta ment of tr pavement st led as a co he pipe sup the subdrain mly graded ac l is deemed e property of all be freedra ughly tamped line of subdra be installed in all tsections vals along th ected by the e l be installed ain outlet sha bdrain outlet for subdrain tive gravity dr all be graded from the outl hall be placed he maximum d ackfilled to ma andard s ransport ructure ntinuous line pplied and in n trench shall cross the widt by the eng the contract aining backfil .
ain shall be ca n accordance s and the out he run of the engineer .
as a continu ll be excavate shall be prot n outlet const rainage from d to match the let trench sh d in accorda dry density .
atch the surro specifica tation an e with all join n accordance l be disposed th of the shou ineer to be tor and shall l and shall be apped .
with the stan tlet structure line and at uous line from ed from the t tected in acc truction shall the subdrain e surrounding all be used nce with item ounding grade ations nd infras nts being co e with the m d of on the s ulder prior to waste then be disposed e placed in tw ndard drawing es to the sub the lowest p m the tsectio tsection at t cordance with be unslotted to the outlet o foreslope gr for backfill o m num and co e. tructur item num january num onstructed wit manufacturer shoulder of th the placeme the excavate of outside th wo equal laye g num. bdrain line at oint along sa on union to th the subdrain t h the standar d and shall b outfall .
rade .
of the subdra ompacted to re num num th rs he nt ed he rs a ag he to rd be in a depa shou janua num num artment ulder subd ary num measure .num the qu the line .num the sh cap for .num the ou finished basis of .num paymen stan of trans drain ment for p uantity to be ear metres of houlder subdr each continu tlet structure d foreslope g payment nt for work un ndard sp portatio pav payment measured for subdrain outl rain shall be m uous section o s shall be me grade .
nder this item pecificat on and inf vement struc r payment sh ets supplied a measured alo of installation .
easured sepa shall be at the tions frastruc cture hall be the line and installed ong the centre .
arately as a un e unit price .
cture ear metres of in accordanc eline of the p nit complete f f shoulder su ce with this ite pipe from end from the tse item num page num ubdrain and em .
cap to end ection to the depa bitum janua num num num num artment minous tac ary num descript .num this ite portlan material .num all mate .num tack co the pro submitta .num the co bitumin .num the co supplie constru .num the co specific .num bitumin applica .num distribu samplin .num the co transve .num bitumin .num imm sha .num the co any bitu .num the .num the rs of num .num tempe .num bitumin traffic s stan of trans ck coat tion em consists o d cement con ls erial shall be oat shall be r visions of as als ontractor sha nous tack coa ontractor sha ed meet the sp ction ontractor sha cally directed b nous pressure ation rates an utors shall be ng valve .
ontractor may erse joint loca nous tack coa mediately prio all be swept c ontractor shal uminous tack e contractor s snum or crsnum to num lmnum rature of the b nous tack coa shall be divert ndard sp portatio pav of supply and ncrete surface supplied by t rsnum or crs tm dnum and all notify the t. ll submit up pecified requi all carry out t by the engine e distributors nd at a continu equipped wi y place the bit ations .
at shall be app or to the app clean .
l protect throu coat overspr shall be respo emulsion sh or as directed bituminous ta at shall be allo ted around fre pecificat on and inf vement struc application of e. he contracto num grade asp d dnum resp engineer at on request t rements as d the work as er .
shall be cap uous and unif th a tank gau tuminous tac plied only whe plication of the ugh traffic and ray .
onsible to rem all be applied d by the engi ack coat when owed to cure eshly sprayed tions frastruc cture f a bituminou or .
phalt emulsion pectively .
t least num day the manufact detailed in the indicated in pable of app form rate both uge and meas k coat by bru en the surface e bituminous d adjacent hi move any bitu d in a uniform neer .
n applied sha for such a tim d surfaces unt cture s tack coat o n and shall c ys in advanc turers certific e contract do the contrac lying tack wi h longitudinal suring stick g ushing or spra e to be treate s tack coat th ighwaystruct umen adherin m manner wit ll be between me as approv til the bitumin n an asphalt onform in all ce of the ap cation that th cuments .
ct documents thin num of ly and transv graduated in l aying at longi ed is dry .
he surface to ture appurten g to these su thout streakin n numc and num ved by the en nous tack coa item num page num concrete or respects to pplication of e materials s andor as established ersely .
itres and a itudinal and o be treated nances from rfaces .
ng at a rate numc .
ngineer and t has set .
bit pag num num num tuminous t ge num num .num bitu widt .num .num .num num measu .num the tack num basis o .num pay d tack coat minous tack c th is left open bituminous inconvenienc the work sh to within num of the days w the contract becomes fou rement fo quantity to b k coat supplie of payment ment for this departm coat applicati to traffic with tack coat a ce to the publ hall be planne num m of the tac work .
tor shall be re uled due to we or payment be measured d and applied t work shall be sta ent of tr pavement st on widths sha h no tack coat applications ic and shall b ed so that tac cked length be esponsible to eather andor t for payment d in accordan e at the unit p andard s ransport ructure all be such th t applied .
shall be st be kept within cked surfaces efore opening o reinstate an traffic .
shall be the ce with this it price .
specifica tation an hat approxima trictly limited the asphalt c s shall be cov g the work a ny bituminous number of sq tem .
ations d infrast ately onehalf d in length concrete wor vered with as rea to traffic s tackcoated quare metres tructure item num january num f the paveme to minimiz k area .
sphalt concret and at the en surface whic s of bituminou e num num nt ze te nd ch us dep aspha janua artic num .
num .
num .
num .
partment alt concr ary num cle .num descrip .num materia .num mater .num as .num co .num fi .num bl .num an .num w .num produ .num g .num w .num bl .num comp .num as .num m .num submitta .num constru .num gener .num equip .num ge .num m .num as .num co .num th .num du .num sa .num ad .num ad .num su .num pla .num co .num ma s t of trans rete meth tion ls rial properties sphalt binder oarse aggreg ne aggregate ending sand ntistripping a wma material uction of aggr rading requir washed aggre ending aggre position of asp sphalt binder ix design als uction ral ment eneral ixing plant sphalt binder old bins hermometric e ust collectors afety and insp dditional req dditional requ urge bins and acing equipm ompaction eq aterial transfe standard sportati hod specif pav con s gate e admixtures regates rements egates egates phalt concret content storage equipment s pection requ uirements for uirements for d storage silo ment quipment er vehicle m d specific on and in ication vement struc ntents te mix irements r batch mix p drum mix pla os mtv cations nfrastru cture lants ants ucture page num .
num .
num .
num .
num num .
num num num num .
num num .
num num num num num num num .
num num num num num num .
num num .
num num num num num num item num page num as pag a num num num phalt con ge num article num .num pro .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num qu .num .num .num .num qu .num .num .num .num num measu .num ge .num pa .num pa .num pa num basis d ncrete me oduction and handling an physical re plant calibr mixing time moisture co transportat timing of pa placing asp padding num joints .num genera .num transve .num transve .num longitu num compactio num additional uality control sampling an control of a compaction uality assuran asphalt con smoothness .num genera .num bumpd surface def repairs .num genera .num remova urement fo eneral ayment adjust ayment adjust ayment adjust of paymen departm ethod spec c placement o nd stockpiling equirements fo ration and tria es and tempe ontent ion of asphal aving operati phalt concrete al erse construc erse key join dinal constru on of asphalt requirement testing nd testing of asphalt concr n testing nce testing a ncrete density s al dip profile re fects al al and replac or paymen tment for den tment for smo tment for use nt sta ent of tr cification pavement st contents f asphalt con g aggregates or asphalt co al mix eratures t concrete ions e ction joint nt uction joint concrete ts for bridge d asphalt conc rete mix produ nd adjustmen y equirement cement nt nsity oothness e of material t andard s ransport ructure ncrete mix oncrete deck paving crete mix uction nts transfer vehic specifica tation an cle mtv ations d infrast page num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num tructure item num january num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num e num num dep aspha janua num num num num .
num .
partment alt concr ary num descript .num this ite concret .num the asp .num hot .num hot .num hot .num wa .num wa .num wa material .num materia num .num asp .num .num .num .num .num num .num coa .num .num .num s t of trans rete meth tion em consists of te .
phalt concrete t mixed aspha t mixed aspha t mixed aspha arm mixed asp arm mixed asp arm mixed asp s al properties phalt binder asphalt bind the asphalt performance mnum table .num when th binder a the wm when antis specified req the contra accordance .num the sam .num samplin enginee arse aggrega coarse aggr the coarse hard sound other soft or coarse aggr astm cnum standard sportati hod specif pav f the supply a e shall be iden alt concrete ba alt concrete ba alt concrete su phalt concrete phalt concrete phalt concrete der shall be su binder grade e grade pg e num performa he selected w acceptance o a additive .
stripping adm quirements of ctor shall pr with astm d mple container ng shall be on er .
ate regate shall be aggregate sh durable part disintegrated regate is the p num and shall me d specific on and in ication vement struc nd placement ntified by the f ase mix b. asesurface m urface mix d e base mix w e basesurface e surface mix upplied by the shall be as sp g asphalt b ance graded wma technolo of the asphalt mixtures are re num a rovide one s dnum from the rs and labels n a random b e supplied by hall be prepar ticles free fro d pieces or ot portion retaine eet the physic cations nfrastru cture t of hot mix as following mix mix c. d. wmab .
e mix wma wmad .
e contractor .
pecified in the binder shall m asphalt bind ogy requires binder shall b required the after the addit ample of as contractors a shall be supp asis as dete y the contracto red by crushin om adherent c ther deleteriou ed on the num cal requireme ucture sphalt concre designations c. e contract do meet the req der specificat additives to be based on t asphalt binde tion of the req sphalt binder asphalt binde plied by the en rmined by an or .
ng rock or gr coatings shal us substances num mm sieve t nts of table num ete and warm cuments .
quirements o ion .
be added to the samples t er grade sha quired admixtu per contrac er storage tank ngineer .
nd in the pres ravel and sha le clay loam s. tested in acco num .
item num page num mix asphalt of aashto the asphalt that contain all meet the ures .
ct taken in ks .
sence of the all consist of schist and ordance with as pag c f p a v v t d p f m p f c a n phalt con ge num coarse aggre fine aggregat physical req air voids vma min voids filled w tsr average tsr val dust to binder physical req freezethaw microdeval petrographic n flat elongat crushed parti num million des num million des absorption note not ma d ncrete me sieve s astm desi egate num num num num num m num m te num num num num num num num µ quirements f with asphalt e of condition ues min r ratio quirements f max num to max num to no.max num to ted particle num to cles num to sign esals sign esals max andatory the o departm ethod spec superpave a size ignation mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm µm µm µm µm or asphalt c ned freeze n astm d or coarse a dti met num million des num million des mto ls num million des num million des mto ls num million des num million des max dti meth num million des num million des dti met num million des min by wt .
min by wt .
astm c owner reserv sta ent of tr cification pavement st table num asphalt conc concrete thaw dnum ggregate thod sign esals sign esals s num sign esals sign esals s num sign esals sign esals num hod sign esals sign esals hod sign esals one face two face num ves the right t andard s ransport ructure num crete mix req type bwma b num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num o obtain a pe specifica tation an quirements ab type c by mass pas num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num etrographic no ations d infrast cwmac ty ssing each s num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num o. tructure item num january num ype dwmad sieve num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num e num num d dep aspha janua tabl phy micr unc note num .
num .
num .
partment alt concr ary num le num cont ysical requir rodeval m ompacted vo e the allowab coarse agg num .num .num num .num fin .num .num .num .num .num num .num ble .num .num .num .num s t of trans rete meth inued ements for f max num to num m num m oid content ble microdev gregate is num for num millio crushing the the retained cnum .
coarse aggr e aggregate fine aggreg fine aggreg sand and s shale clay substances .
fine aggreg accordance table num for num mill crushing the retained mat .num material fine agg fine aggreg ending sand blending san blending sa properties a before the m the maximu not exceed num blending san cold feed at standard sportati hod specif pav fine aggreg mto ls num million design million design min astm val surface fin num provided t on design es e fraction reta d material pas regate may al ate shall be s ate shall be p hall consist o loam schist gate shall be with astm .
ion design e e fraction retai terial passes t produced as regate .
gate may also nd shall be su and shall be s outlined in material is inco um mass of b num of the tot nd shall have the plant .
d specific on and in ication vement struc ate ty num esals esals cnum ne aggregate that the coars sals coarse ined on the num sses the num so be accepte upplied by the prepared by cr of hard soun t and other s e the portion cnum and cnum esals fine ag ined on the num the num mm si per num be accepted upplied by the e used to o table num a orporated into blending sand tal mass .
num passin cations nfrastru cture ype bwmab num num num shall be max se aggregate aggregate m num mm sieve num mm sieve ed or rejected e contractor .
rushing rock o nd durable p soft or disint n passing th num and sha ggregate may .num mm sieve ieve as deter num and passin or rejected o contractor .
btain accepta and the sourc the asphalt c d to be used i ng the num mm ucture b type cw num num num lossnum is from the sa ay be produc e provided th as determin d on the basis or gravel or sc particles free tegrated piec he num mm all meet the p y be produce provided that rmined by ast ng the num m on the basis o able physica ce shall be ap concrete mix .
in the total as m sieve prior to wmac type num num num num if the micro ame source .
ced from pit ru hat no more t ed by astm of past perfo creening a ma from adheren ces or other sieve when physical requ ed from pit ru t no more tha tm cnum and mm sieve may of past perform al asphalt co pproved by th sphalt concre o the introduc item num page num e dwmad num num num deval on un gravel by than num of m cnum and rmance .
anufactured nt coatings deleterious n tested in uirements in n gravel by an num of the d cnum .
y be used as mance .
oncrete mix he engineer te mix shall ction into the as pag num num phalt con ge num num .num num .num d ncrete me antistripping .num antistrip .num the mix d .num the o the w .num the type delivery s wma materia .num the cont .num the con suppliers .num the con preparati .num other w mixes .
.num the engi the work e e a g a c departm ethod spec admixtures ping admixtur requirement f design stage .
owner has ap work .
and dosage slip .
als tractor shall s ntractor shall i s instructions ntractor shall on handling wma materials ineer has app k evotherm numg evotherm dat advera gencor ultrafo astec double cecabase rt sta ent of tr cification pavement st res shall be su for an antistri pproved the a approv of all asphalt upply all mate identify a fac for the use of obtain from storage and u s and the mix proved the fol t oam gx barrel green t numnnum andard s ransport ructure upplied by the ipping admixtu antistripping a table num ved antistrip produ redicote redicote c redicote c rediset lq adhere lo adhere pave bond travcor innova evotherm cecabase binder antist erials required ility to produc f their materia the suppliers use of their m x composition lowing warm foaming specifica tation an e contractor .
ure is determ admixtures list num pping admixt uct e nums c num cnum qnum of num e num d t lite num alt w m numg rt numnnum tripping admix d for productio ce the wma ls .
s all informat materials .
n shall be as mix technolo sonne w cecabas almix fo meeker f rediset l ations d infrast mined at the as ted in table num tures xtures shall b on of wma .
mix in accord ion required s specified fo ogies listed b warmmix se rt oaming syste foaming syst lq tructure item num january num sphalt concret num for use be noted on th dance with th for the prope or convention below for use ems tems e num num te in he he er al in dep aspha janua num num num num num .
num .
partment alt concr ary num .num produc .num gra .num .num wa .num .num ble .num .num .num compo num .num asp .num num .num mix num .num num .num s t of trans rete meth tion of aggreg ading require pit run grav aggregates .
ashed aggreg washed ma hours to allo uniform mois ending aggreg blending of increase the blending sha graded prod osition of asph phalt binder c for the pur assume an a .num asphalt .num asphalt .num asphalt .num asphalt .num asphalt .num asphalt x design responsibili .num prepara owners .num the test carr requiremen .num the des asphalt table num standard sportati hod specif pav gates ements vel or quarrie ates aterials or mat ow free water sture content .
gates aggregates s e percentage o all be perform uct .
halt concrete content rpose of esta asphalt binder concrete b concrete c concrete d concrete wm concrete wm concrete wm ity for design ation and subm s approval is t e contractor s ing laborator ry out the des nts for design sign mix form binder and a num .
d specific on and in ication vement struc ed rock shall terials excava to drain from hall be allowe of crushed pa med at the asp mix ablishing the r content for th num num num mab num mac num mad num mix formula mission of the the responsib shall use profe ry to assess t sign of the asp n mix formula mula is the lab aggregates to cations nfrastru cture be crushed ated from und the aggregat ed only to me articles .
phalt plant col unit price fo he asphalt co of the total of the total of the tota of the total of the total of the total a e asphalt des bility of the co essional eng the aggregate phalt concrete a boratory dete be blended ucture and separat derwater shall te and to allow eet the gradin ld feed units t or asphalt co oncrete mix as specified ton specified ton al specified ton specified ton specified ton specified ton sign mix form ontractor .
ineering serv e materials pr e mix .
rmination of t together to m ed into coars be stored for w the materia g requiremen to produce a oncrete the b s follows nage .
nage .
nnage .
nage .
nage .
nage .
mula dmf fo ices and a qu roposed for us he precise pro meet the requ item num page num se and fine r at least num al to attain a nts andor to consistently bidder shall or the ualified se and to oportions of uirements in as pag num num phalt con ge num num num d ncrete me .num t s s a h .num approval .num all su .num the of the and t .num s a . . .num s e n .num the the e .num a s .num t .num t i .num t b .num o .num a m r a .num s num .num a departm ethod spec the asphalt co superpave v standard pra aashto tnum hotmix aspha of design mi ubmissions sh material samp e source pitq the typesize o sampling of asphalt concre num at least num quantity f num at least num quantity f sampling of th engineer and normal workin contractor sh engineer for a a list of all co sources asp the average g the percentag n the asphalt the asphalt c blending sand other charact all superpave mass graphs relative densit asphalt absorp samples of num kg sa num l of antist a sample of th sta ent of tr cification pavement st oncrete mix d volumetric de actice for mi num standard m alt hma spe x formula a hall include th ples shall be quarry id num of the materia the aggregat ete mix produ num of each for the mix des num num t of eac for the mix des he aggregate delivered to ng hours .
hall submit the pproval at a lo onstituent ma phalt binder so gradation of e ge by mass o concrete mix oncrete mix d d. eristics of the e mix design c used in arriv ty of each ind ption of the co the aggreg mples of fine tripping admix he asphalt bin andard s ransport ructure design shall fo esign for hot xture condit method for p ecimens by me aggregate sou e contract nu tagged and in mber as indica al .
tes for the d ction for the y h aggregate t signation is le ch aggregate signation exce shall be done the owners e dmf includ ocations des aterials includ ources and a each aggregat of each aggreg .
design gradat combined ag characteristics ving at the fin ividual materi ombined aggr gate num e aggregate xture if neces nder num lmix .
specifica tation an ollow aashto tmix asphalt tioning of ho preparing and eans of supe urce approval umber .
ndicate the co ated by the en dmfaggregat year shall not type is in sto ess than num num e type is in st eeds num num t e by the contr central labo ding the follow signated by th ding aggregat antistripping te to be used gate including tion of the com ggregate spec s including bu nal asphalt co al and the co regates .
kg sample num kg sam ssary. . ations d infrast o rnum standa t hma aas otmix aspha determining erpave gyrato l ontract numb ngineer the sa te source ap be undertake ockpile when num t or tockpile when t. ractor in the p ratory in fred wing informati he engineer .
te sources admixture sou in the asphalt g blending sa mbined aggre cified in table ulk relative de oncrete mix d mbined aggre es of coars mples of blend tructure item num january num ard practice fo shto rnum alt hma an the density o ry compactor er the locatio ample locatio pproval for th en until n the tendere n the tendere presence of th dericton durin onmaterials t blending san urces .
t concrete mix and to be use egate includin num. nsity specime esign the bu egates and th se aggregat ding sand an e num num or num nd of r. on n he ed ed he ng to nd x. ed ng en ulk he e nd dep aspha janua num num partment alt concr ary num num num .num s t of trans rete meth .num in o num num k be d .num the eng evaluatio .num the des of th .num .num if the dm .num the why .num the eng .num the en contrac .num once th combine furnace .num the lab .num the app .num the co contrac contrac .num tes lab job mix form .num the job num mm shall pro .num the usin .num the des dmf .
standard sportati hod specif pav order to cal num kg sample kg sample of b delivered to a gineer shall r on by the ow e evaluation ign moisture he coarse and in case of dis blending san mf does not m e engineer sh y the dmf faile e contractor s gineer for appr gineer shall tor receiving w he dmf has ed aggregates to be used fo e engineer sh oratory .
e engineer sh roval of the d ontractor shal tor submits fo t conventiona ting costs inc oratory rate s mula b mix formu m and num µm oduce the des e jmf is esta ng the plant pr sign asphalt b d specific on and in ication vement struc librate the ig es of coarse a blending sand lab designate require up to ners laborato period shall sensitivity te d fine aggrega screpancy in t ds the engi meet the requ hall provide a ed .
shall then prov roval .
not accept a written approv been appro s and a samp r the quality a hall deliver t all complete dmf .
l be respons or evaluation al mix designa curred by the schedule ula jmf es sieve fraction sired asphalt c blished by pr roposed for th binder conte cations nfrastru cture gnition oven aggregate num d and num lmix ed by the eng num days from ory .
include verif sting and ve ates and blend the bulk relativ ineers results irements of t a written expla vide another any asphalt val of the dmf ved the eng le of the asph assurance .
the calibration calibration of sible to pay more than o ation .
e owner sha stablishes the ns of the agg concrete mix p roducing one he work .
ent is the asph ucture n additional num kg sampl x of asphalt bi ineer .
m the time of fication of th erification of th ding sands .
ve density va s shall prevail .
table num it anation to the complete dm concrete mix f from the en gineer shall halt binder for n samples to f the ignition f the owners one asphalt c all be charge e single defi regate and fo properties und or more trial halt binder co samples are es of fine agg nder shall be f receipt of th e asphalt co he bulk relativ lues of the ag .
shall be rejec e contractor mf and resub x produced p ngineer .
prepare sam calibration of o the quality furnace within associated c concrete mix ed as per dt nite percenta or the asphalt der field cond l asphalt conc ontent establis item num page num e required gregate num e required to he dmf for oncrete mix ve densities ggregates or cted .
that details bmit it to the prior to the ples of the f the ignition y assurance n num days of costs if the design per ti standard age for the t binder that itions .
crete mixes shed by the as pag num num num num num num phalt con ge num num num submit .num the fine .num .num the prod .num the .num .num .num .num .num othe spec .num sub num const num .num gen .num num .num equ num .num d ncrete me .num the the j .num the conc ttals contractor sh aggregate for the contract fredericton n contractor duction of the contractor sh the contract sample of an the contract for pg aspha the contract delivery slip f if the source submit in wri work .
er submittals cific phase of mittals are req ruction neral the contract specifically di ipment general .num equipme paving op .num the con pertaining departm ethod spec approved as mf .
actual asph crete mix as de hall submit in r approval by tor shall be r nb central la shall notify t asphalt concr hall submit in tor shall supp ny proposed a tor shall supp alt binders .
tor shall subm for each tanke of supply of ting this pro are required f the work bein quired in acco tor shall carry rected by the nt shall be o perations star ntractor shall g to the work sta ent of tr cification pavement st sphalt binder alt binder c etermined by n writing the p the engineer responsible to aboratory duri he engineer rete mix .
writing the pr ply upon requ admixtures in ly upon requ mit at the time er load of asp the asphalt b posed chang for this item a ng undertaken ordance with a y out the wo engineer .
on site and a rt .
provide safe .
andard s ransport ructure content is th ontent is the ignition furna proposed sou .
o deliver all s ng normal wo num days in a roposed supp uest a sampl n a volume pro est the optim e of delivery phalt binder .
binder change e prior to usi and are conta n. any crossrefe rk as indicate available for e access to specifica tation an he asphalt bin e asphalt bin ce results .
urces of supp samples obta orking hours .
advance of t plier of the asp le of the asp oportional to t mum mixing an to the plant t es during the ng the new a ained within th erenced item ed in the con inspection te the plant an ations d infrast nder content nder content ply of coarse ained for test the commenc phalt binder .
phalt binder num the asphalt b nd compactio the refinery ce e work the c asphalt binde he sections ap forming part o ntract docum esting and a nd equipment tructure item num january num determined b in the aspha aggregate an ting to the dt cement of th num lmix and inder sample on temperatur ertification an contractor sha er supply in th pplicable to th of this item .
ents andor a pproval befor t for purpose e num num by alt nd ti he a . e nd all he he as re es dep aspha janua num num num num num num num partment alt concr ary num num .num mix .num num .num asp .num .num num .num co .num .num .num num .num the .num num .num dus .num .num num .num saf .num num .num add .num .num .num s t of trans rete meth xing plant the asphalt and the con phalt binder s tanks for s maintaining the temperat heating sha ld bins cold bins sh individual ga aggregate .
compartmen minimum ga an individua and intermin ermometric eq an armoured feed line ne tank .
st collectors plants shall all environm of canada agencies hav plants equip return all or in tables num fety and inspe safe and ad mixer units a ditional requi a rotary drye the dryer ca plant scree proportioning standard sportati hod specif pav mixing plant ntract docume storage storage of as it within the r ture recomme ll be by a mea hall be divide ate control to nt dimension ate opening of al compartme ngling of aggre quipment d thermomete ar the discha be equipped ental regulatio the province ving jurisdictio pped with a ba a portion of th num and num ection require equate stairw and other plan irements for b er designed fo apacity shall b ens capable g each type o d specific on and in ication vement struc and its compo ents .
sphalt binder range of num ended by the a ans such that ed into not le enable accura s shall be s f num mm .
nt shall be pr egates shall n er reading from arge valve at with a dust c ons including e of new bru on .
aghouse dust c he fines as re num. ements ways ladders a nt units where batch mix plan or drying and be sufficient to of efficient of asphalt mix cations nfrastru cture onents shall m r shall be c c from the o asphalt binde no flame sha ess than three rate and abso such as to p rovided for ea not be permitte m numc to num the mixer un collecting syst but not limited unswick and collection sys equired to mee and platforms inspection an nts heating miner o heat aggreg screening of shall be prov ucture meet the requ apable of he optimum mixin er supplier .
all contact the e compartme olute proportio promote free ach aggregat ed .
numc shall be f it and in eac tem and this s d to those init dor municipa tem shall be a et the ranges s shall be prov nd sampling a ral aggregate ates to the re f aggregates ided .
p uirements of a eating the m ng temperatur asphalt binde nts each eq oning of each flow of mate te type i.e .
c ixed in the as h asphalt bin system must c tiated by the g l andor loca able to waste and tolerance vided for acces re required .
s shall be pro quired tempe s to sizes r item num page num astm dnum material and re based on er .
uipped with size of cold erial with a coarse fine phalt binder der storage comply with government al regulatory or uniformly es indicated ss to trucks ovided .
ratures .
required for as pag num phalt con ge num num . . . d ncrete me .num scre .num aggr num num .num carry ando and s .num each pla .num bins opera .num each when .num w l .num each locat .num gate .num com samp .num equipme weighing .num gates on .num scales fo accurate .num after plan engineer engineer .num satisfacto the mix a num asphalt streams o num all plants temperat num plant sha mix .
.num the disch departm ethod spec ens shall be k regates shall mm sieve mm sieve .
yover for any or the amoun shall not vary nt shall conta shall be div ation of the pl h hot storage n the aggrega when automa evel of the ag h compartmen tion to prevent es on hot stora partments sh ples as the ag nt shall includ box or hoppe n the hopper s or weighing ag to num throu nt set up and r batching pl r. ory means sh at the specified binder shall over full lengt s shall be eq ture of the agg all include a b mixer shall harged .
sta ent of tr cification pavement st kept clean and be screene is stored y mix defined t of sand whic by more than in a minimum vided into co ant .
bin shall cont ate level falls b atic batching c ggregate in an nt shall be pro t backing up o age bins shall all be provide ggregate is dis de a means f er of ample siz shall be constr ggregate sha ugh the workin prior to batch lant scales s hall be provide d temperature be delivered h or width of m quipped with gregate at the batch mixer c be construc andard s ransport ructure d in good repa ed such tha separately d as the amo ch enters the n num from th m of num hot stora ompartments tain a sensing below onethir controls are in ny hot bin in u ovided with an of material into be constructe ed with suitab scharged .
for accurately ze to hold a fu ructed to prev all be accurate ng range .
hing materials shall be teste ed to deliver t e. to the mixer mixer .
a recording t e drier dischar capable of pr cted to preve specifica tation an air .
at the stone from the sa ount of stone stone bins in e established age bins .
of sufficient g device to in rd of the capa n use batchin use falls below n overflow chu o other compa ed to prevent ble means of o y weighing ag ull batch withou vent leakage w e to num and and wheneve ed for accura the required q r in a thin u thermometer rge chute .
roducing a co ent leakage ations d infrast portion ret and portion which enters n no case sha d value .
t size to allo ndicate at the acity of the bin ng shall not ta w one third fu ute of such si artments .
leakage whe obtaining repr ggregate from ut running ove when closed .
d for asphalt er deemed ne acy in the pr quantity of as niform sheet or pyrometer onsistent and of contents tructure item num january num tained on th passing th s the sand bin all exceed num ow continuou e control pane n. ake place if th ull .
ze and at suc n closed .
resentative te m each bin in er .
binder shall b ecessary by th resence of th sphalt binder t or in multip r to record th homogeneou until batch e num num he he ns us el he ch st a be he he to le he us is dep aspha janua num num partment alt concr ary num num num .num add .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num s t of trans rete meth .num the mix specified ditional requi each cold fe plant contro proportional .num monitors a means of flow of aggr bin should st screens sha entering the the conveyo up of materia the total flow .num the con flow sha content remain c the weighin have provisi the drum .
.num scales f be accu .num the asp tempera the heating and damage .num the sys tempera .num the asp requirem table num the mixing homogeneo the method designed co or loss of the standard sportati hod specif pav xer gate shall d mixing time irements for d eed bin shall h ol shall be s control .
s indicating in warning the egate and as top flowing .
all be installe drum .
or belt with a al on the belt .
w of aggregat ntractor shall all be interlock so that the p constant .
ng systems fo on to enable for weighing a rate to num t phalt binder s ature and relat of the aspha e to the aspha stem shall be ature at discha phalt binder ments of the performanc period and us mix at the d used to tran onstructed an e mix .
d specific on and in ication vement struc be equipped w has elapsed .
drum mix plan have a variabl uch that agg dividual cold f plant operato sphalt binder c d on the con load cell sha te shall be me ensure moni ked with the a proportions of or aggregates easy samplin aggregate sha through the w system shall tive density .
lt mix shall be alt binder .
e equipped w arge .
recovered by pressure agi ce graded asp temperature required mix t nsfer the mix nd operated s cations nfrastru cture with a timing nts e speed belt f gregate feed feed bin feede or shall be pr can be stopp nveyor system all be equippe easured by an itor and main asphalt pump f aggregate a s and the met ng and calibra all be accurat working range .
have provisio e controlled to with automati y extraction f ing vessel p phalt binder s shall be su temperature .
from the drum o that there s ucture lock which sh feeder as wel shall have b er speeds sha rovided on ea ped if the mate m to prevent o ed with a belt n electronic we tain the syste and correcte and asphalt b tering system ation without h te to num and ons to compe o prevent the ic burner con from the asp pav as spec specification .
ch as to pro m mixer to th shall be no se p hall lock the g l as an adjust both individua all be required ach aggregate erial from any oversized ma cleaner to pr eighing system em so that the d for aggrega binder entering m for asphalt having the ma d for asphalt ensate for flu fracture of the ntrols indicati phalt mix sha cified in aash oduce a con he haulage un egregation of item num page num ate until the table gate .
al and total d. e bin so the y aggregate aterials from revent build m. e aggregate ate moisture g the mixer binder shall aterial enter binder shall ctuations in e aggregate ng the mix all meet the hto mnum nsistent and nits shall be damage to as pag num num phalt con ge num num .num num .num d ncrete me surge bins a .num surge bi damage .num storage temperat .num over .num surge bin .num when the maintaine placing equip .num mechanic crossslo .num pavers s of the scr .num pavers s without s thickness .num scre scree .num the cont .num pavers s grade an .num the pave longi .num the equiv .num a m .num a ca pave .num longitudi .num vibrating used in p .num hydr width departm ethod spec nd storage s ns and stora or segregate silos equippe ture without lo rnight storage ns and storag e plant is in c ed above the pment cal selfpower ope .
hall be equipp reeds .
hall be equipp segregation a s and in width eds shall be ed and screed tractor shall p shall be equip d transverse s longitudinal g er and be cap tudinal joints .
contractor s valent for long a joint matchi mats placed a alibrated slop er .
inal grade con hydraulic sc placing mat wi raulic strikeo hs outside of t sta ent of tr cification pavement st ilos age silos and the mix .
ed with a he ocalized overh in the silos sh e silos shall b continuous op onethird cap red pavers sh ped with hopp ped with vibra and with a sm s from num to num equipped wit d extensions .
provide a num m pped with aut slope .
grade control pable of prov shall use a gitudinal grade ing shoe may adjacent to the e indicator sh ntrol shall be u creed extensio dths greater t off extensions the driving lan andard s ransport ructure d their comp eating system heating .
hall not be pe be equipped w peration the m pacity level .
hall be capable pers and distri ating screeds mooth and un m. th heaters wh straight edge tomatic scree shall be equ viding longitud minimum num e control .
y be used to e original mat .
hall be instal used on all lift ons and vibra than num m. s are only ac nes .
specifica tation an ponents shall m shall be c ermitted .
with mix level i minimum leve e of spreading ibuting screws and shall be c niform texture hich are capa with each pav ed controls fo uipped to ope dinal grade c num m skifloati control longit .
led in a read ts .
ating bolton cceptable whe ations d infrast be designed capable of m indicators .
el of mix in th g mix true to s to place mix capable of sp ed surface t able of prehea ver .
or the control erate from eith control as we ng beam or tudinal grade dily visible loc screed exten en laying ma tructure item num january num d so as not t maintaining th he silo must b line grade an x evenly in fro preading mixe to the require ating the entir of longitudin her side of th ell as matchin r an approve of subseque cation on eac nsions shall b ats of irregula e num num to he be nd nt s ed re al he ng ed nt ch be ar dep aspha janua num num num partment alt concr ary num num num .num co .num .num .num .num .num .num num .num ma .num .num s t of trans rete meth .num screed c mpaction equ all rollers sh rollers shall steel wheele water to the pneumatict tire inflation all rollers wit adhering to t .num hydroca compaction .num vibratory .num pneuma .num a co the v .num pav tired .num steeldr .num use aterial transfe material tra asphalt conc characteristi .num minimum .num a conve paver ho .num an auge asphalt the contrac asphalt conc standard sportati hod specif pav cut off shoes uipment all be of types l be in good co ed rollers sha wheels to pre ired rollers sh pressure .
th rubber tires the rubber tire arbon fuels or equipment s y roller atic tire roller ombination st vibratory and ving in echelo d rollers .
um tandem fin e of a steeldru r vehicle mt nsfer vehicle crete from the cs m storage cap eyor system t opper insert a er system in concrete prior ctor has the o crete with com d specific on and in ication vement struc may be used s specifically d ondition and c all be equippe event adhesio hall be selfpr s shall be equ es .
solvents shall hall consist of eeldrum vibr pneumatic ro on on the driv nish roller um finish rolle tv es shall be s e hauling equ pacity of num t to transfer as and the mtv or r to discharge ption of using mpensation pe cations nfrastru cture when placing designed for a capable of rev ed with a me on of the asph ropelled with uipped with a m l not be used .
f at least one ratorypneuma ollers .
ving lanes sha er on base cou selfpropelled ipment into th sphalt concret paddle mixe e from the hop g a material tr er num he ucture g widths less t asphalt comp versing withou eans of suppl alt mix .
a mechanica means to prev of each of the atic tire roller all require the urses shall be d equipment he paver and te from the h ers in the ho pper insert .
ransfer vehicle erein .
p than num m. action .
ut backlash .
lying a contro al means of a vent the asph e following may be used e use of two e optional .
capable of d shall have th hauling equipm pper insert to e for the plac item num page num olled flow of djusting the halt mix from d in place of pneumatic transferring he following ment to the o remix the ement of all as pag num num num num phalt con ge num num .num prod num .num num .num num .num d ncrete me duction and p handling and .num the coa separate .num stockpile that segr .num segregat .num productio produced engineer .num aggregat separate .num mixing of be permit physical req .num once the asphalt c a a p p .num for the p plant calibrat .num the cont .num a trial m testing by .num continuo engineer specified .num trial mixe unless ot departm ethod spec placement of a d stockpiling a rse aggregat ly .
es shall be pla egation and c ted or contam on of asphalt d and in stoc r. tes shall be sizes .
f materials or tted .
quirements fo e jmf has be concrete mix to air voids asphalt binde percent pass percent pass plant mix the tion and trial tractor shall p mix based on y the enginee ous placemen r is satisfied requirements es are the pro therwise autho sta ent of tr cification pavement st asphalt concr aggregates te fine aggre aced on a leve contamination minated stockp concrete sha ckpile unless loaded into loading of mo r asphalt con een designate o the mix con test prope er content sing num mm sing num µm sie tsr shall me mix provide to the the design m er and shall on t of asphalt c that the mix s. operty of the orized by the andard s ransport ructure rete mix egate and b el well drained does not occ piles shall not all not comme s specifically cold feed bin ore than one t ncrete ed by the en trol tolerances table num acceptance erties sieve eve eet the requir engineer a co mix formula nly be carried concrete in th x properties contractor an engineer for t specifica tation an blending sand d base and co cur .
be incorporat ence until all designated o ns so as to type of mater ngineer the c s as shown in num e criteria rements of ta opy of the plan shall be prep out during no he work shall are in accor nd shall be pl the purpose o ations d infrast d shall each onstructed in ted into the w of the aggre otherwise in prevent the rial into a sing contractor sh n tables num criteria num num jmf num jmf num jmf num able num. nt calibration .
pared by the ormal working only be perm rdance with aced outside of padding or tructure item num january num be stockpile such a manne work .
gate types ar writing by th intermixing o gle bin shall no all produce a num and num .
num num num num contractor fo hours .
mitted after th the applicab the work sit patching .
e num num ed er re he of ot an or he le e dep aspha janua num num num num partment alt concr ary num num .num mix .num .num .num .num num .num mo .num .num num .num tra .num .num .num .num num .num tim .num s t of trans rete meth xing times an for batch p into the pug where all of the mixing t all of the agg mixing temp concrete mix temperature .num the max tempera .num the max additive during pavin contract .
oisture conten the maximu from the mix the aggrega not limited to ansportation o trucks for t foreign mate loads shall boxes and b or shielded t truck boxes as required .num hydroca tarpaulins s prior to dum ming of paving paving oper lifted or cont engineer .
standard sportati hod specif pav nd temperatur lants the we mill shall be the aggregate time for drum gregate is tho perature for all x when discha requirement ximum mixing ature recomme ximum mixing supplier .
ng operations nt um moisture c xing unit shall ate shall be d o the presenc of asphalt con transporting a erials .
be covered w be tied down o to prevent air s may be light but must be r arbon fuels or shall be rolled ping the load g operations rations shall n tinue after the d specific on and in ication vement struc res t mixing time num seconds e is thoroughly mix plants sh roughly coate l types of plan arged from th of the dmf u g temperature ended by the g temperature the contracto content allow not exceed num. ried sufficient ce of foaming ncrete asphalt concr with tarpaulins on three sides infiltration .
tly lubricated raised and dra solvents shal back and the into the mate not commence e dates specif cations nfrastru cture e beginning w longer if requ y coated with hall be such to ed with aspha nts shall be su he mixer unit unless otherw for hot mix a asphalt binde of the wma or shall produc wed in the asp .num. tly so that visu slumping or s rete mixes s s of sufficient s s and the fron with an envir ained after ea ll not be used e asphalt con erial transfer v e in the spring fied in table num ucture when the asp uired to produ asphalt binde o produce a h lt binder .
uch that the te shall be contr wise authorized asphalt concr er supplier .
mix shall be a ce only aspha phalt concrete ual evidence stripping of th shall have tig size to overha nt shall be tig ronmentally a ach application .
ncrete shall be vehicle or the p g until the dt num without p phalt binder is uce a homog er .
homogeneous emperature of rolled within d by the engin rete shall be num as specified b alt concrete m e mix as it is of moisture s e mix does n ght metal bo ang the fully lo ht to the box cceptable rele n and before l e uncovered i paver .
ti weight res written permi item num page num s introduced eneous mix s mix where f the asphalt numc of the neer .
numc or the by the wma mixes in the discharged such as but not occur .
xes free of oaded truck of the truck ease agent loading .
immediately trictions are ission of the as pag num num phalt con ge num num num .num d ncrete me g .num paving o altered by .num the plac commenc entire mil placing asph .num the cont .num asph preci .num whe to be .num when pa water and .num all prepa asphalt c .num milled in ac .num existing surfaces documen .num the prepa .num contact e and bridg concrete .num the temp initial com .num the temp initial com .num the max temperat departm ethod spec coun gloucester m restigouche all oth operations sh y written appr cement of the cement of the lled surface ha halt concrete tractor shall p halt concrete ipitation .
n placing asp e overlaid sha aving on an a d at least num ared surfaces concrete .
d and aged a ccordance with approaches or other str nts or as direc removed ma ared as identi edges of exis ge structures .
perature of th mpaction .
perature of the mpaction .
ximum temper ture recomme sta ent of tr cification pavement st cut nty madawaska e victoria hers hall only be roval by the e new asphalt e cold milling as received a place asphalt c e shall not phalt concrete ll be a minimu aggregate ba num m of prepare shall be clea asphalt concre h item num pri to railway c uctures shal cted by the en aterials shall fied in the co sting mats and shall receive e hot mixed a e warm mixed rature of the h ended by the a andard s ransport ructure table num toff dates fo su o o conducted du ngineer .
t concrete mix operation and lift of asphalt concrete on a be placed e surface mix um of numc .
ase the aggr ed base shall b ned of loose ete surfaces s or to the plac crossings and l be removed ngineer .
be disposed ontract docum d contact face e an applicatio asphalt concre d asphalt conc hot mixed asp asphalt binder specifica tation an num or paving urface mixes october num october num uring dayligh x shall comm d shall contin concrete .
a dry surface .
under adver the surface regate base m be maintained or foreign ma shall be treate ing of asphalt d bridges or d to the dept of and the ments or as dir es of curb gu on of tack coa rete shall be a crete shall be phalt concrete r supplier .
ations d infrast bas oct octo ht hours unle mence within num nue on a daily rse weather temperature must be free d ahead of pa aterial prior to ed with bitumi t concrete .
r areas adjac ths shown on exposed sur rected by the utters manho at before plac a minimum of e a minimum o e mix shall be tructure item num january num e mixes ober num ober num ess specifical num days of th y basis until th conditions o of the materi from standin avers .
o placing of th inous tack co cent to pave n the contra rfaces shall b engineer .
oles sidewalk cing the aspha f numc prior t of numc prior t e numc or th e num num lly he he of al ng he at ed ct be ks alt to to he dep aspha janua num partment alt concr ary num num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num s t of trans rete meth the maximu numc .
.num the allo screed m .num the tem probe .
when laying an approved alignment de irregularities be corrected the cross s measured o contract do in narrow ba where it is i asphalt conc practices .
paving of in and as defin shall be car unless other .num drivewa laying op spreading o out concurre approved by adjacent asp to approxima for esal c newly place been permitt .num water re item num damage to t be immediat all placemen and any load be rejected b the speed o continuous o standard sportati hod specif pav um temperatu owable maxim may be increa mperature shal g base andor d method su esignated by t s in alignment d by the additi lope of the as over num m perp ocuments or p ase widening impractical to crete shall be ntersections e ned in the con rried out conc rwise approve ay entrances peration of the of asphalt con ently with the y the engineer phalt concrete ately the same counts equal t d asphalt con ted to cool to equired to low num. the mat as a r tely repaired b nt spreading ds arriving at by the engine of the paver s operation of th d specific on and in ication vement struc re of the war mum temperatu ased for work ll be checked surface cours uch as followi the engineer .
t and grade a on or remova sphalt concre pendicular to provided by th deep or irreg o spread and e spread by h extra widths a ntract docume currently with ed by the engi and aprons s e regular mat ncrete by han machine lay r. e mats includ e location at t to or greater ncrete until fi numc .
wer the mat result of conta by the contrac compacting the work site eer .
shall be match he paver .
cations nfrastru cture m mix aspha ure of the wa k after octobe with a calibra se the alignm ng a stringlin long the outs al of asphalt co ete surface sh the centrelin he engineer .
gular sections finish aspha hand in accor and other var ents whether the machine ineer .
shall be pave .
d shall be ke ying operation ding those pla the end of eac than num million nish rolling is temperature aminant spills ctor to the sat and rolling s e such that th hed to the pro ucture lt concrete be rm mixed asp r numst if approv ated stem ther ment of the pav ne placed by ide edge of th oncrete before hall be within ne of the cros s intersection lt concrete by rdance with s riations from s by hand spre e laying opera ed concurren ept to a minim n of the regula aced on shoul ch days pavin n no traffic s s complete a shall be supp from the con tisfaction of th hall occur on ese requirem oduction of the p ehind the scre phalt concrete ved by the en rmometer or t ver shall be c y the contrac he asphalt co e the edge is num num ss slope spec s turnouts o y machine m tandard hand standard lane eading or mac ation of the r ntly or after th mum and shal ar mat unles lders shall be ng .
shall be perm and the finishe plied in acco ntractors equi he engineer .
ly during day ments can not b e asphalt plan item num page num eed shall be e behind the gineer .
temperature controlled by ctor from an oncrete shall rolled .
num mm when cified in the or driveways methods the d placement e alignment chine laying regular mat he machine ll be carried ss otherwise e completed itted on the ed mat has rdance with ipment shall ylight hours be met shall nt to ensure as pag num num num num num phalt con ge num num .num num .num num num num d ncrete me padding .num material the contr .num asphalt c other me .num the com .num for p .num the c the a .num padding construct joints .num general .num joint a sm .num dirt o whic .num the cons week .num transver .num a tra and asph .num b .num b .num whe the c .num whe back broke .num transver .num whe pave betw pavin departm ethod spec for padding s ract documen concrete for p ans approved paction equip padding num contractor sh asphalt concre is intended t tion of the sub ts shall be co mooth riding su or other fore h joints are to contractor s struction or ot k. rse construct ansverse con at other times halt concrete to below numc f below numc fo re the asphal conditions not n paving res k to full mat en or loose m rse key joint n the elevatio ement a trans ween the existi ng limits and o sta ent of tr cification pavement st shall be the s nts .
padding shall d by the engin pment shall be num and num all establish a ete used for pa to be a sepa bsequent lift o nstructed to e urface .
ign and loose o be made .
hall remove ther work ac ion joint nstruction join s when pavin o cool .
for hot mix as or warm mixed lt concrete su ted in num sumes tapers thickness to material and ta on of the new sverse key jo ng and new a other locations andard s ransport ructure ame asphalt be placed b neer .
e in accordanc num shall no a rolling patter adding .
arate operatio of asphalt conc ensure thorou e material sh and dispose ctivity outside nt shall be co g is halted fo phalt concrete d asphalt conc rface andor num a sm s from surfac expose fres acked in acco asphalt conc oint shall be c asphalt concre s as determin specifica tation an concrete mix by means of ce with num ot apply .
rn to achieve t on and shall n crete .
ugh and cont hall be remov of waste ma e the work s onstructed at t or a period of e. crete .
base course mooth num m lo ce courses p sh straight v ordance with num crete pavemen constructed p ete pavement ned by the eng ations d infrast x designation a selfpowere .num. the maximum not be done inuous bond ved from the aterials resu site before th the end of ea f time which s has been term ong taper sha previously lai vertical surfac num num nt is higher th per standard t at the begin gineer .
tructure item num january num as specified ed paver or b m compaction o as part of th and to provid faces again lting from joi e end of eac ach days wo shall permit th minated due t all be paved .
d shall be c ces free fro and num. han the existin drawing num ning and at th e num num in by of he de st nt ch rk he to ut m ng num he dep aspha janua num .
num num partment alt concr ary num num num .num num .num co .num .num .num .num s t of trans rete meth .num if a sha long .num prio shal with .num when th as the e asphalt beginnin terminat longitudinal .num the follo .num wid .num con may prod eng .num .num all l sha num .num lon the .num lon und .num on mat mat mpaction of a quality contr quality assu if damage t vibratory co equipment a along curbs rollers the m vibrating pla standard sportati hod specif pav transverse k ll immediately g taper at the or to the place ll be cleaned h num num he elevation o existing pavem pavement sh ng and at the tes against an l construction owing require dths of succee ntractors using y leave an duction witho gineer .
before may to tack the lo ongitudinal jo ll receive an .num. gitudinal joint final lift of asp gitudinal join er rolling is a surface cour terial is not s terial shall be asphalt concr rol testing sha urance testing to highway c ompaction eq and proceed w s manholes mix shall be c te tampers o d specific on and in ication vement struc key is cut in y construct w joint area as ement of the of loose fore and num. of the new as ment a straigh hall be const end of the pr n existing pav n joint ements shall a eding individu g a one pave exposed lon ut an applica numth and afte ongitudinal joi oints left expo application o ts shall not be phalt concrete ts shall be co chieved .
rses the me cattered on t carefully rem ete all be the resp shall be carri components a quipment the with the work and similar s compacted w r by hand tam cations nfrastru cture advance of p with hot mixe s shown in sta asphalt conc ign material a sphalt concret ht vertical sur tructed betwe roject and oth vement .
apply when co ual courses sh er operation b gitudinal join ation of tack c r september nt in accorda osed overnig of tack coat i e permitted b e. onstructed to thod of maki the surface o moved .
ponsibility of th ied out in acco andor adjace e contractor using static ro structures an with either sm mpers .
ucture paving the jo ed asphalt co andard draw crete all trans and a tack co te pavement rface equal to een the new er locations w onstructing lo hall be offset between may nt for up to coat unless o numth the con nce with num. ht or which a n accordance between the e o ensure that ing joints sha of the freshly he contractor ordance with ent property shall immed rolling equipm nd places no maller compac p oint area the oncrete a sm ing num. sverse key jo oat applied in is at the sam the thickness lift of pavem where the new ongitudinal joi by num mm numth and sep onehalf of otherwise dire ntractor shall .num num and are exposed e with num edges of drivin maximum co all be such t laid mat and r. num. is occurring diately cease ment .
ot accessible ctive equipme item num page num contractor ooth num m int surfaces accordance me elevation s of the new ment at the w pavement nts .
m. tember numth the days ected by the be required num. to moisture num and ng lanes in ompression that excess d all excess while using using this to full size ent such as as pag num num num phalt con ge num num .num num .num qua num .num d ncrete me additional re .num the con accordan .num the con resulting .num shou stopp pavin .num expansio passing o .num the indic .num the cont .num a steeld pressure roller req .num the brea .num after bre not to dis .num the mat .num for bridg ality control te sampling and .num asphalt c and shal .num the asph once per .num shift .num the asp sampling .num the con and sha outside o departm ethod spec equirements fo ntractor shall nce with the w ntractor shall from any asp uld the memb ped and repai ng recommen on joints and over them .
placing of th ated on stand tractor shall s drum tandem on compress uired for bridg akdown roller s akdown rollin splace the ma shall be finish ge decks num esting d testing of a concrete mix l be accepted halt concrete r shift .
is defined as phalt concrete g and testing tractor shall b ll be notified of the specifie sta ent of tr cification pavement st or bridge dec place asph waterproofing m be responsi pect of the pav brane becom irs made in a ces .
d deck drains he asphalt c dard drawing ubmit a rolling roller operat sion roll of at l ge deck pavin shall be requi ng the mat sh t when stoppi h rolled to rem .num and num asphalt concr production s d or rejected o mix being pr s one product e mix shall g of asphalt c be provided a d if any test ed limits .
andard s ransport ructure ck paving alt concrete manufacturer ble for all da ving operation e damaged accordance wi s shall be pr concrete at e num. g pattern for th ting in the no least num kgm ng .
red to run off hall be rolled ng or turning .
move any mark num shall n rete mix shall be monit on the basis o roduced shall ion crews da be sampled concrete mix a a copy of all te result indica specifica tation an on the dec s recommend amage to the n. paving opera ith the manufa rotected from expansion join he approval o onvibratory m mm of drum w the deck to st with a pneum .
ks .
not apply .
tored through of the testing be sampled aily work perio and tested and pavemen est results as ates that mat ations d infrast ck waterproof dation andor e waterproof ations shall b acturers instr m damage fro nts shall be of the enginee mode and exe width shall be top and turn .
matic tired roll hout the perio performed by at a minimum od .
according to nt cores item s soon as the terials are be tructure item num january num fing system procedures .
ing membran be immediate ructions befor om equipme completed a er .
erting a conta the breakdow ler taking car od of the wo y the enginee m frequency o o dti manua m num. y are availab eing produce e num num in ne ely re nt as ct wn re rk er .
of al le ed dep aspha janua num .
num .
num num .
partment alt concr ary num num .num co .num .num .num .num num .num co .num .num quality num .num asp .num .num s t of trans rete meth ntrol of aspha once a tes specified lim .num the en propertie .num the co propertie regardless plant produc test results d if the test r specified lim .num plant pr mix is p the enginee asphalt conc mpaction tes the contrac of the work assurance t phalt concret compaction a lot is defin defined as th .num one da the quan granular .num one day the quan on granu .num the num lot .
.num if it qua standard sportati hod specif pav alt concrete m st result indic mits in tables gineer may es within the ontractor may es within spe of any chang ction and test do not meet s result from th mits plant pro roduction of a roduced in ac er may reque crete placed i sting ctor shall be to ensure tha testing and a te density testing shall ned as the po he following ys production ntity used for r shoulders .
ys production ntity used for ular shoulders e quantities .num sh is the last ntity shall be d specific on and in ication vement struc mix productio cates that th num and num suggest cha specified limi y suggest ch cified limits .
ges being ma ted within one specified limit he second sa duction may b asphalt concr ccordance wit est the aspha is not within th responsible f at the density djustments be based on a ortion of the w n and placem padding and n and placeme padding and s shall be eva for that day all be added time the mix included in th cations nfrastru cture on he material b num the mate anges to the its .
hanges to a ade a second e hour of noti ts .
ample indica be suspende rete mix shall th num a lt concrete m he specified l for quality con conforms wit a lot average work being co ent of num t o the quantity o ent of less tha the quantity o aluated as per y and the n together and x is produced he previous d ucture being produc erial shall be h constituent asphalt plant d mix sample ification that t tes that the d. l not resume and num mix be remove limits .
ntrol testing fo th the require e method .
onsidered for a or more of as of surface mix an num t of as of surface mix r num. next day tha d the total sh d meeting th days lot .
p ced does no handled as fo materials to settings to e shall be ob the asphalt co mix does no until an acce num. ed if it is dete for the compa ements of this acceptance an phalt concrete x placed in a s sphalt concrete xed placed in num and num at meet the hall be desig hese criteria item num page num ot meet the ollows return test return test tained from oncrete mix ot meet the eptable trial ermined that action stage item .
nd is further e excluding single lift on e excluding n a single lift num. criteria of gnated as a that days as pag num phalt con ge num num .
d ncrete me .num a c p p .num pavemen locations .num sample procedur .num the lot s .num in ea the lo the e .num in no .num the follow .num the over maxi .num area and r .num sma hand .num padd .num cores sh placemen .num the appli .num the place .num the cont .num the c .num the conju mixe each .num the engi num the cont owners departm ethod spec a separate lo construction i placement sh production an nt samples s . locations sha res .
shall be divide ach segment ongitudinal di edge of the se o case shall a wing areas sh shoulder are granulars for mum compac s of obvious repaired in ac ll areas suc dwork and for ding lifts .
hall be obtain nt of the lot .
maximum ma cable .
engineer may ement .
tractor shall ca cores shall be contractor s unction with re d asphalt con h lift with num bl neer shall be tractor shall b laboratory w sta ent of tr cification pavement st ot shall be es ndicate that i hall be signif ndor placeme hall be taken all be determi ed into three s a test site sha stance from t egment .
lateral distanc hall not be cor a where only r which the co ction of the as surface defe ccordance with h as tapers r asphalt mix u ned in accord ay be extende y allow cores arry out the co e a nominal num shall reinstate emoval of the ncrete in num m ows using a s responsible fo be responsible within num hours andard s ransport ructure stablished if it is likely tha ficantly differ ent .
n on the road ned by the e segments of a all be located the end of th ce be less tha red a single lift o ontractor shal sphalt concrete ects as indica h num. aprons br used for isolat dance with a ed to include to be obtaine oring in the pre num mm diamet e the pavem e core by dew mm lifts to the standard comp or labelling the e for the stora of coring for specifica tation an in the engin at a portion of rent from th d by coring a engineer usin approximately d by using ran e segment a n num m from of asphalt con ll establish a r e. ated in num. ridge approac ted levelling a astm dnum saturdays s ed within num h resence of the ter .
ment at each watering the co pavement su paction device e cores .
age and trans testing .
ations d infrast eers opinion f a days pro e remainder at stratified ra ng stratified ra equal length .
ndom number nd the lateral the edge of th ncrete surface rolling pattern num which sh ches gores and repair of f within num h sundays and hours after as e engineer .
h core samp ore hole and f urface elevatio e. sportation of th tructure item num january num n conditions o oduction ando of the day andom samp andom samp .
rs to determin l distance fro he mat .
e mix is place n to achieve th hall be marke and areas failed areas .
hours after th holidays whe sphalt concret ple location filling it with h on compactin he cores to th e num num of or ys le le ne m ed he ed of he en te in ot ng he dep aspha janua num partment alt concr ary num num .num .num .num .num .num s t of trans rete meth mat densitie work and sh the percent core bulk d maximum de the enginee within one w the procedu .num when a the test standar percent .num an a .num if the ou test resu the conditio .num the con rejected .num appeals .num any atte the lot f .num the con of receip .num the con locations appeal a .num the con the con which h commen .num prio testi .num any subs cons .num the test new sam standard sportati hod specif pav s shall be test hall conform to t compaction densities in a ensity of the l er shall provid working day of ure for dealing an individual c t result in qu d practice fo significance le appeal is requ utlier test pro ult shall be us ons and proce ntractor may d or penalized s shall be for a empt to impro for acceptanc ntractor shall s pt of the test r ntractor shall s as determin and these cor ntractor may ntractors repr he does not nts in order to or to leaving t ing procedure y comments sequent to the sidered .
t results from mples .
d specific on and in ication vement struc ted by the eng o the density r of a lot shal accordance w loose mix sam de the contra f their availabi g with an outl compaction te uestion shall or dealing wi evel .
uired before th ocedure show sed in the calc dures for an a appeal the re d lot only onc all tests in the ove density o ce shall void t serve notice o esults .
take addition ned by the en es shall be te have a repre resentative sh consider to resolve them the testing la es are to be gi with respec e contractors m the original cations nfrastru cture gineer by core requirements ll be determin with astm d mples in acco actor with a co lity .
lier test shall est result from be determine ith outlying o he outlier test ws that the ch culations .
appeal of the esults of acce ce .
e lot .
on the appeal the appeal an of appeal to th nal cores in a ngineer within sted by the e esentative pre hall comment be valid and m. aboratory any iven to the en ct to the te s representativ lot shall be ucture e analysis thro indicated in t ned by comp dnum with ordance with opy of the res be as follows m a lot is que ed in accord observations applies .
hallenged tes lot test result eptance testin led lot after nd the original he engineer i accordance w n num hours of t ngineer .
esent during t t on anything d the engine y unresolved ngineer in writ sting proced ve leaving the combined wi p oughout the c table num. aring the ave the average aashto tnum sults of accep s estionable th ance with as using a t st result is va ts shall be as ng of the den the engineer l test results s n writing with with num the contracto the period of g concerning eer shall res comments re ting .
dures which e laboratory th the test re item num page num ourse of the erage of the theoretical num. ptance tests e validity of stm enum test at a num lid then the follows nsity for any r has tested shall apply .
hin num hours at random ors notice of the testing the testing pond to all egarding the are made shall not be esults of the as pag num num num num num phalt con ge num num num .num num num num .num d ncrete me .num a v .num t o smoothness .num general .num the p .num the chec .num the enum .num bumpdi .num indiv to pa .num the surface defe .num the finis of visible measure .num any obvi pavemen .num multi .num i .num defects s .num segr .num rave .num rolle .num crac .num impr .num tire .num sam .num impr .num cont .num flush .num pneu departm ethod spec a new sample value shall be the new mea owner .
profile require smoothness o cked with a hig profile shall b num. p profile req vidual bumps ayment adjust bumpdip pro ects hed surface o e signs of po ed with a num m ous defects nt course .
ple defects w f a defect is c shall include b regated areas elling er marks cking or tearin oper matchin marks pling location operly constr taminant on th hed areas an umatictired ro sta ent of tr cification pavement st e mean for th used for acce an so obtaine ements shall b of the final lift gh speed pro be checked al uirement dips exceedin tment as desc ofile requirem of any pavem oor workman straight edge as determine ithin a num met continuous bey but not necess s ng g of longitudi ns not properly ucted patche he mat nd oller pickup .
andard s ransport ructure he combined eptance and u ed shall be b be specified in t of newly pla ofiler as soon ong the outsi ng num mm as cribed in num. ments shall ap ment course s nship and bu e. ed by the eng tre section sha yond num metre sarily be limite nal and trans y reinstated s specifica tation an test results s unit price adju binding on bo n the contract aced asphalt c as possible a de wheel pat s detected by .num. pply to interch shall have a u umps andor gineer shall b all be conside es it shall be c ed to the follow sverse joints ations d infrast shall be determ ustment .
oth the cont t documents .
concrete pave fter final rollin th in accordan y the profiler s ange ramps .
uniform textu dips exceed be cause for r ered as one d considered as wing tructure item num january num mined and th tractor and th ement shall b ng .
nce with ast shall be subje re and be fre ding num mm a rejection of th efect .
s one defect .
e num num his he be m ct ee as he dep aspha janua num .
num num num num num partment alt concr ary num num .num re num .num num .num measure .num genera .num the pla .num paymen .num the .num the pad .num if re adj s t of trans rete meth pairs general .num repairs as per determin .num the asp concrete .num any sha .num clause num removal an .num the full removed .num all joints .num repaire shall req .num material the mate ment for p al e quantity to ced in accord nt adjustment e unit price ad e unit price dding or as a epairs are ca ustment shall standard sportati hod specif pav to correct su num o ned by the en phalt concret e mix designa y asphalt conc ll not be incor num shall d replaceme l thickness o d by cold milli s shall be tack d areas shall quire further re removed sha erial outside th payment be measured dance with thi t for density djustment for adjustments single lift of s rried out by r be based on d specific on and in ication vement struc urface defects or routing an ngineer .
e used to co ation as that w crete which d rporated in th also apply .
ent of the approp ng or other m kcoated .
be retested epair .
all become th he work site .
d for payment s item subjec density shall of table num urface mix on emoval and r quality assura cations nfrastru cture s shall be car nd crack sea orrect surface which is remo does not conf e work .
priate lift of means as appr for acceptanc he property of t shall be the ct to payment be as shown num shall not n granular sho replacement o ance carried o ucture rried out by re aling .
the me e defects sha oved .
form to the re rejected pav roved by the e ce those faili f the contract number of to adjustments .
in table num apply to asp oulders or brid of the asphalt out on the repa p emoval and re ethod of repa all be the sa equirements vement cours engineer .
ng shall be re tor who shal nnes of asph num. phalt concrete ge decks .
t concrete the aired lot .
item num page num eplacement air shall be me asphalt of this item se shall be ejected and l dispose of alt concrete e placed as e unit price as pag num phalt con ge num of m relat lot num .num pay .num .num d ncrete me theoretical aximum tive density t average num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num continued n ment adjustm individual bum num .
for asphalt c num shall no departm ethod spec unit pr adjustm per to num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num next column ment for smo mps and dips concrete plac ot apply .
sta ent of tr cification pavement st t unit price a rice ment onne num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num oothness shall be asse ed on bridge andard s ransport ructure table num adjustment fo of the maximum dens lot av num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num essed in acco e decks the p specifica tation an or density eoretical m relative sity verage .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num ordance with th payment adju ations d infrast unit pric adjustme per tonn num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reject he schedule s ustments as s tructure item num january num ce ent ne set out in tab shown in tab e num num le le dep aspha janua num num partment alt concr ary num .num paymen .num a u acc basis of p .num payme concret .num compe content specifie .num if th sha the .num if th reim .num pay .num the ave .num payme accorda .num in the c s t of trans rete meth nt adjustment unit price ad ceptably place payment nt for work u te as identifie ensation to th t as determ ed in num. he actual asp all reimburse t month of the he actual asph mburse the co yments and c e asphalt bin erage of all th nt adjustmen ance with item case that the c standard sportati hod specif pav bump a bu num to num to num t num t num t num t num t num t num t num t num t for use of ma justment of ed using a mat under this ite ed under the c he contracto ined by ignit num for the tota phalt binder c the owner usi tender openin halt binder co ontractor the a credits shall b nder content e ignition furn nt for chang m num .
contractor in d specific on and in ication vement struc table num and dip pena umpdip o num mm o num mm to num mm to num mm to num mm to num mm to num mm to num mm to num mm to num mm num mm aterial transfe numt shal terial transfer m shall includ contract .
or or the ow tion furnace l payable tonn ontent is less ing mtos pg ng .
ntent is highe actual invoiced e determined for each mix nace results o ge in the p itiates an app cations nfrastru cture num alty schedule pe num num num num num num num num num num num er vehicle mt ll apply to th vehicle in acc de a separat wner for diffe results and nage will be s than the as g asphalt bind er than the ass d amount sup d upon comple x type will be obtained throu g asphalt b peal under num ucture e enalty num num num num num num num num num num num tv he total quan cordance with te unit price erences betw the assumed as follows sumed binde der price index sumed binder pplied by the c etion of the w e calculated b ughout the co binder price num th p ntity of aspha this item .
for each type ween the asp d asphalt bind r content the x for the mont r content the contractor .
work .
by obtaining ontract .
shall be ca he following s item num page num alt concrete e of asphalt phalt binder der content e contractor th preceding owner shall a weighted alculated in hall apply as pag num phalt con ge num num .num .num if the .num .num for own each norm .num .num for num d ncrete me if the new tes the testing co borne by the .num payment .num if the ne rejection appeal p e contractor the contrac item num. each occurre ner a penalty h day that pav mal work hou the penalty weather .
each surface num per defe departm ethod spec st results afte osts incurred owner .
t to the contra ew test result remains vali rocedure sha carries out re ctor shall be ence that pav of num for e ving is not con rs until pavin shall not app e defect as ect .
sta ent of tr cification pavement st r the appeal p by the owne actor shall be ts after the a d for that lot all be charged epairs for surfa e charged f ving is not pe each day afte ntinuous stop ng resumes .
ply on sunday per num andard s ransport ructure process indica er during the made for the s appeal proce t the testing d in accordan ace defects t for the smoo rformed per num er the numth day pped on any d ys or statutor num the contra specifica tation an ate that a pen appeal proce sampling cost ess verify tha costs incurre nce with item the smoothne othness rete num t y until paving day for more t ry holidays o actor shall pa ations d infrast nalty no longe edures for tha ts .
at a penalty ed by the ow num to the c ess shall be re esting in acc the contracto g commences than num of th or for work ti ay the owne tructure item num january num er applies the at lot shall b still applies o wner during th contractor .
etested .
cordance wit r shall pay th and num fo he contractor me lost due t er a penalty o e num num en be or he th he or rs to of depa aspha janua ar num .
num .
num .
num .
artment alt concr ary num rticle num descrip .num gener .num definit .num e .num d .num j .num a .num l .num s .num s .num m .num s num material .num materi .num as .num co .num fin .num ble .num ra .num ble .num an .num w .num compo .num as .num mi num submitta num constru .num gener .num equipm .num ge .num mi .num pla .num co .num ma stan of trans rete end r c ption ral tions end result sp design mix fo ob mix formu asphalt binder lot stratified rand sample mean .
mean of the de specified thick ls al properties sphalt binder .
oarse aggrega ne aggregate ending of agg ap ending sand .
ntistripping ad ma materials osition of asph sphalt binder c ix design als uction ral ment eneral ixing plant acing equipm ompaction equ aterial transfe ndard sp portatio result spe pav ontents ecification er ormula dmf .
ula jmf r content dom sample eviations kness ate gregates dmixtures halt concrete content ent uipment er vehicle mt pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc rs mix tv tions frastruc n ers cture cture page num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num item num page num as pag num num phalt con ge num article .num pro .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num qu .num .num .num .num .num qu .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num measu .num ge .num un .num pay num basis o ncrete en oduction and p production o trial mix mixing temp transportatio timing of pa placing asph padding driveways a joints num compaction num additional r uality control t general inspection te sampling an asphalt com uality assuranc general for work ca for work ca asphalt dens asphalt cont smoothness asphalt bind thickness ..
surface defe num appeal of l num repairs urement fo eneral it price adjust yment adjustm of payment departm d result s contents placement of a of mix peratures on of asphalt c aving operatio halt concrete nd aprons n of asphalt c requirements testing esting plan it d test results mpaction rollin ce testing and ategory num ategory num and w sity tent gradatio s der ects lot test resul r payment tment upa o ment for smoo t st ment of tr specificati pavement st s asphalt concr concrete ns concrete for bridge de tp s ng pattern d adjustments work categor n and air void ts of the lot othness tandard ransport ion ers ructure rete mix eck paving s ry num ds specifica tation an ations nd infras page num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num tructur item num january num re num num depa aspha janua num num num num .
num .
artment alt concr ary num descript .num genera .num thi asp .num the .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num it s .num .num .num qu eith .num definitio num .num end .num num .num des .num stan of trans rete end r tion al s item consi phalt concrete e asphalt conc hot mixed a hot mixed a hot mixed a hot mixed re hot mixed re warm mixed warm mixed warm mixed hall be the co the contrac assurance t for acceptan this respon contractor o ality assuran her at the job ons d result spec ers a spe process that according to for quality c includes a s .num work c assuran the cate determin per the sign mix form dmf the aggregates concrete mix ndard sp portatio result spe pav sts of the su e and warm m crete shall be sphalt concre sphalt concre sphalt concre ecycled aspha ecycled aspha d asphalt conc d asphalt conc d asphalt conc ontractors re ctor shall imp hat all compo nce conform nsibility is with or purchased nce tests sha site or at the cification er ecification und t produces th o a specified control end tatistically ori ategory the ncequality co egory defined ned by the de contract doc mula dmf laboratory d to be blende x. pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc upply and pla mixed asphalt c identified by ete base mix ete basesurfa ete surface mix alt concrete ba alt concrete su crete base mix crete basesu crete surface sponsibility to lement and m onents as we to the contra hout regard t from supplier ll be perform suppliers pla rs der which the he items of co quality assu product acc ented progra e work will be ontrol blende d will apply to epartment ba cuments .
etermination ed together tions frastruc n ers cture acement of h concrete .
the following b. ace mix c. x d. ase mix hrb urface mix h x wmab .
rface mix w mix wmad o provide an a maintain a qu ell as end res act requireme to whether th rs or subcontr med by the e ant .
e engineer m onstruction an rance plan t ceptance is t m of quality a e classified as ed qaqc w all asphalt co ased on the to of the precis to meet the cture hot mixed as mix designati b. hrd .
wmac .
d. acceptable pr ality control s sult products nts .
he products a ractors .
engineer on onitors the c nd accepts or the contracto the responsib assurance tes s work categ work categor oncrete produ otal estimated se proportion specified pro phalt concret ons roduct as spe system that s submitted to are manufactu random sam ontractors co r rejects the e or is entirely bility of the o sting .
gory num blen ry num or work c uced .
the cat d tonnage of t ns of asphalt operties for t item num page num te recycled ecified .
hall provide o the owner ured by the mples taken ontrol of the end product responsible owner and ded quality category num. tegories are the work as binder and the asphalt as pag num num num phalt con ge num num .num num .num num .num ncrete en job mix form .num jmf the m sieve desired m .num perc asphalt bind .num design a .num approved .num actual as by astm manual lot .num lot a p the work .num work to the .num f s .num f s .num i a . . .num work wher .num f s .num f s .num i a departm d result s mula jmf e establishme e fraction of mix properties centage of con er content asphalt binde d asphalt bin sphalt binder m dnum or d procedure portion of the k category de k category num e job mix for for loose sa segments and for core sam segments and f it is the las apply num if the plan lot .
.num for p samp num if the pla productio k category num re approved c for loose sa segments and for core sam segments and f it is the las apply st ment of tr specificati pavement st ent of the sin aggregate an s under field c nstituent mate r content th der content r content th dti asphalt c num .
work being escribed in th a lot will b rmula have no amples each d one sample mples each d one core sa st time the m nt production plant product ple will be obta ant productio n shall be des and work c changes to th amples each d one sample mples each d one core sa st time the m tandard ransport ion ers ructure ngle definite p nd the aspha conditions .
erials to be lis he asphalt bin the asphalt b e amount of concrete qu considered fo he following se be defined as ot occurred .
h lot shall b taken from e lot shall b ample taken fr mix is produce is num t or le ion of num t ained .
on is more t signated as a category num e job mix fo h lot shall b taken from e lot shall b ample taken fr mix is produce specifica tation an percentage pa alt binder con sted on the jm nder content e binder conten asphalt binde ality assuran for acceptanc ections s num t num be divided in each segment be divided in rom each seg ed with this ess the produ t or less on than num t b a lot .
a lot will be rmula have n be divided in each segment be divided in rom each seg ed with this ations nd infras assing the num ntent that sha mf sheet .
established by nt determined er in the mix nce technicia ce and is furt t where appr nto num approx t. nto num approx gment .
criterion the uction shall be e additional but less tha e defined as not occurred .
nto num approx t. nto num approx gment .
criterion the tructur item num january num num mm and num all produce th y the dmf .
d by the jmf .
as determine an certificatio her defined b roved change ximately equ ximately equ following sha e added to th random loos n num t th num t num ximately equ ximately equ following sha re num num num he ed on by es al al all he se he num t al al all depa aspha janua num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
num num num .
artment alt concr ary num num num .num str .num num .num sam .num num .num me .num num .num spe .num material .num materia num .num asp .num .num .num stan of trans rete end r .num .num .num a separ construc different .num the con .num the bind .num atified rando stratified ra random sam mple mean sample mea sample .
ean of the dev mean of the or the air vo ecified thickn specified th obtained fro ls al properties phalt binder asphalt bind the asphalt performance aashto m ndard sp portatio result spe pav if the plant p lot .
.num for plan sample w if the plant production sh rate lot sha ction indicate t from the rem ntractor may e engineer mu ding .
no appeals w om sample andom samp mple is taken f an the arith viations e deviations ids num d ness hickness the m the core sa der shall be su binder grade e grade num table num pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc production is num nt production will be obtaine production i hall be design ll be establis e that it is lik mainder of tha request to en ust obtain one will be allowed le the divisi from each are hmetic mean the sum of th divided by the e specified ap amples .
upplied by the shall be as sp pg asphal performanc tions frastruc n ers cture num t or less of num t or ed .
is more than nated as a lo shed if in th kely that a p at lot .
nd the lot befo e qa sample d. on of the lot ea or segmen of a set of num he absolute v e number of te pplication rat e contractor .
pecified in the lt binder s ce graded as cture the productio r less one a n num t but ot .
he engineers ortion of a l fore the lot is e and results t into num or mo nt in an unbia num or more tes values of the ests in the lo te divided by e contract do shall meet sphalt binder on shall be a additional ran less than num s opinion co lot shall be s completed .
of the qa sa ore areas or s sed way .
t results cons deviations fro t. the bulk rela cuments .
the require specification item num page num dded to the ndom loose num t the onditions of significantly mples are segments a stituting the om the jmf tive density ements of .
as pag num num num phalt con ge num num num .num num .num ncrete en .num whe binde the w .num when an specified coarse aggr .num coarse a .num the coar hard sou other soft .num coarse a astm cnum .num coarse a on the num the num .num coarse a fine aggrega .num fine agg .num fine agg sand and shale cl substanc .num fine agg accordan table num departm d result s n the selecte er acceptanc wma additive ntistripping a requirements egate aggregate sha rse aggregate und durable p t or disintegra aggregate is th num and shal aggregate ma num mm sieve mm sieve as aggregate ma ate regate shall b regate shall b d shall consis ay loam sc ces .
gregate shall nce with ast num .
st ment of tr specificati pavement st d wma techn ce of the asph e. admixtures ar s of num all be supplied e shall be pre particles free ated pieces o he portion reta l meet the phy ay be produce e provided th s determined ay also be acc be supplied b be prepared b st of hard so chist and othe be the por tm cnum and tandard ransport ion ers ructure nology require halt binder sha re required t .num after the a d by the cont epared by cru e from adhere r other delete ained on the num ysical require ed from pit run at no more th by astm cnum cepted or reje y the contrac by crushing roc ound durable er soft or dis rtion passing d cnum and specifica tation an es that additiv all be based o the asphalt b ddition of the tractor .
ushing rock or ent coatings s rious substan num mm siev ments of tab n gravel by cr han num of th num and cnum ected on the b ctor .
ck or gravel o e particles fre sintegrated p g the num m shall meet th ations nd infras ves be added on the sampl binder grade required adm r gravel and s shale clay lo nces .
ve tested in ac le num. rushing the fra he retained m num. basis of past p or screening a ee from adhe pieces or oth mm sieve w he physical re tructur item num january num d to the aspha es that conta shall meet th mixtures .
shall consist oam schist an ccordance wit action retaine material passe performance .
a manufacture erent coating her deleteriou when tested equirements o re num num alt in he of nd th ed es ed s us in of depa aspha janua artment alt concr ary num coarse aggreg fine aggregate physical requ air voids vma min voids filled wi tsr average tsr valu dust to binder physical requ freezethaw microdeval petrographic n flat elongate crushed partic num million des num million des absorp note not man stan of trans rete end r sieve si astm desig gate num m num num num num num e num m num num num num num num uirements for th asphalt of conditioned ues min ratio uirements for max num to num num max num to num num no.max num to num num ed particle num to num num cles num to num sign esals m sign esals m ption max ndatory the ow ndard sp portatio result spe pav superpave a ze gnation mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm mm num mm num mm num µm num µm num µm num µm r asphalt con d freezetha astm dnum r coarse aggr dti method num million design num million design mto ls num num million design num million design mto ls num num million design num million design max num dti method num million design num million design dti method num million design min by wt .
o min by wt .
tw ast wner reserves pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc table asphalt con crete aw num regate d n esals n esals num n esals n esals num n esals n esals num n esals n esals d n esals one face wo face m c num the right to obt tions frastruc n ers cture num ncrete mix re type bhrbwmab by num num num num num num num num num num num num num b num hr num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num tain a petrogra cture equirements b ty cwm mass passin num num num num num num num num num num num rb num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num aphic no .
pe mac dhr ng each sieve num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num item num page num type rdwmad e num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num as pag num num num num phalt con ge num table num physical r microdeva uncompact note th co num num .num num .num num .num ncrete en num continued requirements al max num to ted void conte he allowable mi oarse aggregat .num fine agg on the num .
num mm .num mate as fin .num fine agg .num washed from the blending of a .num blending to increa .num blending graded p rap .num if applica .num rap cont .num the conc .num the opera recyc .num t t h blending san .num blending .num blending propertie departm d result s for fine aggr mto ls o num million de num million de ent min as crodeval surfa te is num prov gregate may b num mm sieve sieve as det erial produced ne aggregate .
regate may a materials sha aggregate an aggregates of aggregate se the percen shall be perfo roduct .
able to the con shall be sup tractor under i contractor sh crete mix .
contractor sh ation spaced cled mix .
the contracto testing to the hours .
nd sand shall be sand shall es as outlined st ment of tr specificati pavement st regate s num esign esals esign esals stm cnum ace fine aggre vided that the c be produced provided that termined by a d as per num also be accep all be stockp nd to allow the es shall be all ntage of crush ormed at the a ntract pplied by the item num. hall be respo hall be respon d equally over or shall be re owners cen e supplied by be used to in table num tandard ransport ion ers ructure type bhrbwm num num num gate shall be m coarse aggrega from pit run t no more tha astm cnum a num and p pted or rejecte iled for at lea e material to a owed only to hed particles .
asphalt plant c e owner in de onsible for the nsible for coll r the portion o esponsible to ntral laborato y the contract o obtain acce num .
specifica tation an mab c max lossnum ate is from the gravel by cru n num of the re and cnum .
passing the num. ed on the bas ast num hours attain uniform meet the gra .
cold feed units esignated sto e incorporatio ecting num rap of the milling a o deliver the ory in frederic tor .
eptable phys ations nd infras type wmac d num num num num if the micro same source .
ushing the fra etained mate num mm sieve is of past per to allow free m moisture co ading requirem s to produce a ockpiles or o on of rap in p samples du area needed rap sample cton during n sical asphalt tructur item num january num type dhrdwmad num num num deval on action retaine erial passes th e may be use rformance .
water to dra ontent .
ments andor a consistently btained by th nto the aspha ring the millin to produce th es obtained fo normal workin concrete m re num num d ed he ed in he alt ng he or ng mix depa aspha janua num .
num .
num .
artment alt concr ary num num .num .num num .num ant .num .num num .num wm .num .num .num stan of trans rete end r the maximu not exceed blending sa the coldfeed tistripping ad antistripping .num the req mix desi .num the ow the wor the type an delivery slip .
ma materials the contrac the contrac preparation the enginee the work evotherm numg evotherm da advera gencor ultra astec doubl cecabase r ndard sp portatio result spe pav um mass of b num of the to and shall have d at the plant .
dmixtures g admixtures uirement for a ign stage .
wner has appro k. d dosage of a . ctor shall supp ctor shall ob handling sto er has approv g at aform gx e barrel gree rt numnnum pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc blending sand otal mass .
e num pass shall be supp an antistrippi oved the anti approved a a c all asphalt bin ply all materia tain from the orage and use ved the follow en foaming tions frastruc n ers cture d to be used i ing the num m plied by the co ng admixture stripping adm table num antistrippin product redicote num redicote c num redicote cnum rediset lqnum adhere lof num adhere num pave bond t travcor num innovalt w evotherm num cecabase rt nder antistrip ls required for e supplier all e of their mate wing warm mix cture in the total as mm sieve prio ontractor .
is determined mixtures listed num ng admixture nums num num num num t lite num w numg t numnnum ping admixtur r production o l information erials .
x technologie sonne warm cecabase r almix foam meeker foa rediset lq sphalt concre or to the introd d at the asph in table num es res shall be n of wma .
required for es listed below mmix rt ming systems aming system item num page num te mix shall duction into alt concrete num for use in noted on the the proper w for use in ms as pag num num num num num num phalt con ge num num .num com num .num num .num num num num ncrete en mposition of a asphalt bind .num for the assume a .num asph .num asph .num asph .num asph .num asph .num asph .num asph .num asph mix design .num respons .num prep respo .num t t c .num requirem .num the supe stan tnum asph .num t r .num the num .num the num .num approval .num all su .num the locat samp departm d result s asphalt concr er content purpose of e an asphalt bin halt concrete halt concrete halt concrete halt concrete halt concrete halt concrete halt concrete halt concrete sibility for des paration and onsibility of th the contract testing labora carry out the d ments for des asphalt conc erpave volum dard practice num standard m halt hma sp the asphalt c requirements amount of ra num of the to amount of ra num of the to l of design m ubmissions sh material sam tion of the s ple location a st ment of tr specificati pavement st rete mix establishing t nder content b c d hrb hrd wmab wmac wmad sign mix form submission o he contractor tor shall use atory to asse design of the sign mix form crete mix des metric desig e for mixture c method for p pecimens by m concrete mix d in table num ap in the ho otal weight of ap in the hot otal weight of ix formula a hall include th mples shall ource pitqu and the types tandard ransport ion ers ructure the unit price for the aspha num of the num of the num of the num of the num of the num of the num of the num of the mula of the asphal r. professiona ess the aggre asphalt conc mula sign shall follo gn for hotm conditioning preparing an means of sup design at the num for the asp t mixed recyc the combined mixed recycle the combined aggregate so he contract n be tagged a arry id num size of the ma specifica tation an e for asphalt alt concrete m e total specifie e total specifie e total specifie e total specifie e total specifie e total specifie e total specifie e total specifie lt dmf for th al engineering egate materia crete mix .
ow aashto mix asphalt of hotmix as nd determinin perpave gyrat e design asph phalt concrete cled asphalt d materials .
ed asphalt co d materials .
ource approva umber .
and indicate mber as indic aterial .
ations nd infras t concrete th mix as follows ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
he owners a g services a als proposed rnum standa hma aas sphalt hma ng the dens tory compact halt content e mix type sp concrete bas oncrete surfac al the contract cated by the tructur item num january num e bidder sha approval is th and a qualifie for use and t rd practice fo shto rnum and aasht ity of hotm tor .
shall meet th pecified .
se mix shall b ce mix shall b t number th engineer th re num num all he ed to or num o ix he be be he he depa aspha janua num .
artment alt concr ary num num stan of trans rete end r .num sa asp .num .num .num sam the duri .num the con the eng .num a lis sou .num the mix .num the use .num the inc .num othe .num all spe des agg .num sam num num .num a sa .num in o num num requ .num the eng evaluati .num the des of th .num ndard sp portatio result spe pav mpling of the phalt concrete at least num quantity for t at least num num quantity for t mpling of the engineer an ng normal wo ntractor shall ineer for appr st of all const rces aspha e average gra .
e percentage d in the asph e asphalt co luding blendin er characteris superpave cimen mass ign the bulk regates and mples of th num kg samp l of antistrip ample of the a order to cal num kg sample num kg sampl uired to be de gineer shall r on by the ow e evaluation ign moisture he coarse and in case of dis or blending s pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc e aggregates e mix product of each ag the mix desig num t of each a the mix desig aggregate sh d delivered to orking hours .
submit the d roval at a loca tituent materi alt binder sour adation of ea by mass of alt concrete m oncrete mix ng sand .
stics of the com mix design graphs use relative dens the asphalt a e aggregate les of fine ag pping admixtu asphalt binde ibrate the ig es of coarse e of blending elivered to a la require up to wners labora period shall sensitivity te d fine aggrega screpancy in sands the e tions frastruc n ers cture s for the dmf tion for the ye ggregate type gnation is less aggregate typ gnation excee hall be done o the owner mf including ations desig als including rces and an ch aggregate each aggreg mix .
design grad mbined aggre characteristi ed in arriving sity of each i absorption of t e num kg ggregate num re if necessa er num lmix .
gnition oven aggregate g sand and ab designated num days from atory .
include verif esting and ve ates and blen the bulk rela engineers res cture faggregate ear shall not b e is in stockp s than num num pe is in stock eds num num t. by the contr rs central la the following gnated by the g aggregate s tistripping ad e to be used gate includin dation of the egate specifie ics including g at the fina ndividual ma the combined g samples num kg sample ary .
additional num kg sam num lmix of a d by the engi m the time of fication of th erification of th nding sands ative density v sults shall pre p source appro be undertaken pile when th t or kpile when th ractor in the p aboratory in f g informationm engineer .
sources ble dmixture sour in the aspha ng blending s e combined d in table num g bulk relati al asphalt co aterial and the d aggregates .
of coarse es of blending samples are mples of fine asphalt binde neer .
f receipt of th e asphalt co he bulk relativ .
values of the evail .
item num page num oval for the n until he tendered he tendered presence of fredericton materials to ending sand rces .
alt concrete sand to be aggregate num. ive density oncrete mix e combined .
aggregate g sand and e required aggregate er shall be he dmf for oncrete mix ve densities aggregates as pag num num phalt con ge num num num ncrete en .num if the .num t w .num t e .num the cont .num once comb igniti .num t l .num t a .num the cont cont .num t l .num approval .num the the .num t u .num t c .num t .num t .num t .num the j .num .num .num departm d result s e dmf does n the engineer why the dmf the contracto engineer for a engineer sh tractor receivi e the dmf h bined aggreg on furnace to the enginee aboratory .
the engineer approval of th contractor s tractor submit tract conventi testing costs laboratory ra l of job mix f contractor sh contractors s the percenta used in the as the percenta combined agg the asphalt b the asphalt b the compacti jmf when co num for mate num for mat num for asp st ment of tr specificati pavement st not meet the r r shall provide failed .
or shall then p approval .
hall not accep ing written ap has been app gates and a o be used for t r shall delive r shall comple he dmf .
shall be resp ts for evaluat onal mix desi s incurred by ate schedule formula hall submit th submission s age by mass sphalt concret age by mass gregates and binder content binder grade a on temperatu ompared to th rial passing th terial passing phalt binder .
tandard ransport ion ers ructure requirements e a written ex provide anoth pt any aspha pproval of the proved the e sample of th the quality as er the calibra ete calibration onsible to pa tion more tha ignation .
y the owner .
he jmf to the hall include th of each agg te mix .
passing the blending san t as a percent and the aspha ure for the lab he dmf shal he num mm s g the num µm s specifica tation an of table num xplanation to her complete alt concrete dmf from th engineer sha he asphalt b ssurance .
ation samples n of the ignitio ay the owne an one aspha shall be cha e engineer pr he following in gregate inclu num mm an nd tage of the m alt binder sup b briquettes .
l be within the sieve .
ieve .
ations nd infras num it shall be o the contrac dmf and res mix produce e engineer .
all prepare s inder for cal s to the qua on furnace w ers associate alt concrete m arged as per ior to beginni nformation uding blendin nd the num m mass of the tot pplier .
e following lim tructur item num january num rejected .
ctor that detai submit it to th ed prior to th samples of th ibration of th ality assuranc within num days o ed costs if th mix design pe dti standar ing productio ng sand to b m sieves of th tal mix .
mits re num num ils he he he he ce of he er rd n. be he depa aspha janua num .
num num num num num .
artment alt concr ary num num .num submitta .num the co fine agg .num the co product .num the co .num the sam sam .num the for .num the del .num if th sub wo .num other s the spe .num submit constru .num genera .num the spe .num equipm num .num ge .num .num stan of trans rete end r jmf adjustm .num adjustm producti .num the con in source als ontractor shall gregate for ap ontractor sha tion of asphalt ontractor shall e contractor mple of any mple .
e contractor s pg asphalt b e contractor ivery slip for e he source of bmit in writing ork .
submittals are ecific phase o tals are requi ction al e contractor ecifically direc ment neral equipment s the requirem equipment u ndard sp portatio result spe pav ments during ments to the j ion .
ntractor shall s e of aggregate submit in wr pproval by the all notify the t concrete mix submit in writ shall supply proposed ad shall supply u inders .
shall submit each tanker lo supply of the g the propose e required for f the work be red in accord shall carry ou cted by the en shall be desig ments of this s used shall be pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc production jmf shall be submit a revis e used in the riting the prop e engineer .
engineer num x. ting the propo upon request dmixtures upon request at the time of oad of aspha e asphalt bind ed change pr r this item an eing undertak dance with an ut the work a ngineer .
gned and ope specification .
of adequate tions frastruc n ers cture submitted to sed dmf in ac asphalt concr posed source days in adv osed supplier t a sample o in a volume the optimum f delivery to t lt binder .
der changes d rior to using t nd are contai ken .
y crossrefere as indicated i erated to pro rated capacit cture the enginee ccordance wit rete mix .
es of supply vance of the r of the aspha of the asphalt e proportiona m mixing and c the plant the during the w the new asph ned within th enced item fo in the contra oduce an end ty and shall b p r prior to the th num fo of coarse agg commencem lt binder .
t binder num l al to the asp compaction te refinery certif work the cont halt binder su he sections a orming part of ct document d product com be in good wo item num page num start of lot or a change gregate and ment of the mix and a phalt binder emperature fication and tractor shall upply in the pplicable to f this item .
ts andor as mplying with rking order .
as pag num num num phalt con ge num num .num num .num num .num ncrete en mixing plant .num the asph astm d placing equip .num mechanic and cross .num pavers s front of th .num pavers s mixtures required .num scre scree .num the cont .num pavers s .num the pave longi .num the equiv .num a m .num a ca pave .num longitudi .num vibrating used in p .num hydr width .num scre compaction .num compact .num vibra .num p b departm d result s halt mixing pla num and the pment cal selfpower sslope .
hall be equipp he screeds .
shall be equi without seg thickness and eds shall be ed and screed tractor shall p hall be equipp longitudinal g er and be cap tudinal joints .
contractor s valent for long a joint matchi mats placed a alibrated slop er .
inal grade con hydraulic sc placing mat wi raulic strikeo hs outside of t ed cut off sho equipment tion equipme atory roller .
paving in ech breakdown ro st ment of tr specificati pavement st ant and its co contract doc red pavers sh ped with hopp ipped with vi regation and d in widths fro equipped wit d extensions .
provide a num m ped with autom grade control pable of prov shall use a gitudinal grade ing shoe may adjacent to the e indicator sh ntrol shall be u creed extensio dths greater t off extensions the driving lan oes may be us nt shall consi helon on the ollers .
tandard ransport ion ers ructure omponents sh cuments .
hall be capabl pers and distr brating scree with a smoo m num m to num m th heaters wh straight edge matic screed shall be equ viding longitud minimum num e control .
y be used to e original mat .
hall be instal used on all lift ons and vibra than num m. s are only ac nes .
sed when plac st of at least driving lanes specifica tation an hall meet the r le of spreadin ributing screw eds and shal oth and unifo .
hich are capa with each pav controls .
uipped to ope dinal grade c num m skifloati control longit .
led in a read ts .
ating bolton cceptable whe cing widths les one of each o s shall requir ations nd infras requirements ng mixture true ws to place mi ll be capable orm textured s able of prehea ver .
erate from eith control as we ng beam or tudinal grade dily visible loc screed exten en laying ma ss than num m. of the followin re the use of tructur item num january num of e to line grad ixture evenly e of spreadin surface to th ating the entir her side of th ell as matchin r an approve of subseque cation on eac nsions shall b ats of irregula ng f two vibrato re num num de in ng he re he ng ed nt ch be ar ry depa aspha janua num .
num .
num num num num .
artment alt concr ary num num .num num .num ma .num .num produc num .num pro .num .num num .num tria .num num .num mix .num stan of trans rete end r .num pneuma .num a co the v .num pav tired .num steeldr .num use all rollers w from adherin .num hydroca aterial transfe material tran selfpropelle equipment in .num minimum .num a conve paver ho .num an auge asphalt ction and plac oduction of mi asphalt conc for the plant al mix trial mixes a unless other xing and tem mixing temp asphalt con numc of the engineer .
.num the max the temp .num the ma additive ndard sp portatio result spe pav atictired rolle ombination st vibratory and ving in echelo d rollers .
rum tandem fi e of a steeldru with rubber tire ng to the rubb arbon fuels or er vehicle mt nsfer vehicles ed equipmen nto the paver m storage cap eyor system t opper insert er system in concrete prio cement of asp x crete shall me t mix the tsr are the prope rwise authoriz mperatures perature for a crete mix wh temperature ximum mixing perature reco aximum temp supplier .
pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc r. eeldrum vibr pneumatic ro on on the driv inish roller .
um finish roller es shall be e ber tires .
r solvents sha tv s shall be use t capable of r and shall ha pacity of num t to transfer as and the mtv or or to discharge phalt concrete eet the require r shall meet t erty of the con zed by the eng all types of p hen discharge e requirement g temperature ommended by perature of th tions frastruc n ers cture ratorypneuma ollers .
ving lanes sha r on base cou equipped with all not be used ed for placem f transferring ave the follow sphalt concret paddle mixe e from the ho e mix ements of tab the requireme ntractor and s gineer for the plants shall b ed from the t of the dmf e for hot mixe y the asphalt he wma mix cture atic tire roller all require the urses shall be a means to d. ment of aspha asphalt con wing character te from the h ers in the hop opper insert .
ble num. ents of table num shall be place purpose of pa be such that mixer unit sh unless othe ed asphalt co binder supplie x shall be as p may be used e use of two optional .
prevent the a alt concrete a ncrete from t ristics hauling equipm pper insert to num. ed outside the adding or patc the tempera hall be contr erwise author ncrete shall b er .
specified by item num page num d in place of pneumatic asphalt mix and shall be the hauling ment to the o remix the e work site ching .
ature of the olled within rized by the be numc or y the wma as pag num num num phalt con ge num num num .num num .num ncrete en .num the heat and dam .num the printe .num the requi table .num overnigh .num reclaime introduct .num moisture .num the disch .num the as bu not o .num during p identified .num when pr summary transportatio .num trucks fo materials .num loads sh truck box truck or s .num truck bo agent as loading .
.num hydr .num tarpaulin immediat timing of pav .num paving o lifted or c the engin departm d result s ting of the asp age to the asp system shall ed record of th asphalt bind irements of th e num performa ht storage in s ed asphalt co ion into the p content maximum m harged from t aggregate sh ut not limited occur .
paving opera d in the contra roducing hot y from the pla on of asphalt or transportin s. hall be cover xes and be tie shielded to pr oxes may be s required b rocarbon fuels ns shall be tely prior to d ving operatio operations sha continue afte neer .
st ment of tr specificati pavement st phalt mix shal phalt binder .
be equipped he mix tempe er recovered he pressure ance graded ilos shall not b oncrete shall lant .
moisture cont he mixing uni hall be dried to the presen ations the c act .
recycled asp ant operating s concrete ng asphalt co red with tarpa ed down on th revent air infilt e lightly lubr ut must be ra s or solvents rolled back umping the lo ons all not comme r the dates s tandard ransport ion ers ructure l be controlled d with automa erature at disc by extractio aging vesse asphalt binde be permitted .
not be expo tent allowed it shall be num sufficiently so nce of foamin contractor sh phalt the con system detail oncrete shall aulins of suff hree sides an tration .
ricated with a aised and dra shall not be u and the hot oad into the p ence in the sp pecified in ta specifica tation an d to prevent t atic burner c harge .
on from the a el pav as s er specificatio osed to direc in the asph num. o that visual g slumping o hall produce ntractor shall ling the daily have tight m ficient size to d the front sh an environm rained after e used .
t asphalt con paver .
pring until the able num w ations nd infras the fracture of controls and s asphalt mix s pecified in aa on .
ct flame durin halt concrete evidence of m or stripping of only the as submit the d mix proportio metal boxes o overhang th hall be tight to entally accep each applicati ncrete shall e dti weight r without written tructur item num january num f the aggregat shall provide shall meet th ashto mnum ng andor afte e mix as it moisture suc f the mix doe sphalt mixes aily productio ons .
free of foreig he fully loade o the box of th ptable releas ion and befor be uncovere restrictions ar n permission o re num num te a he num er is ch es s on gn ed he se re ed re of depa aspha janua num .
num .
artment alt concr ary num num .num .num .num num .num pla .num .num .num .num .num stan of trans rete end r glo re paving ope altered by w the placem commencem entire milled when the r asphalt con milling oper received a lif acing asphalt the contrac .num asphalt precipita .num when p to be ov when pavin water .
all prepared asphalt conc .num milled a coat in a existing app paved surfa contract do .num the rem prepare contact ed sidewalks a asphalt conc ndard sp portatio result spe pav county ucester mada estigouche v all others rations shall written approv ent of the ne ment of the co surface has r rap is being r crete shall c ration and sh ft of asphalt co concrete ctor shall plac concrete s ation .
placing asphal verlaid shall be ng on aggreg d surfaces sha crete .
and aged asp accordance w proaches to r aces or other ocuments or a moved mater d as identified ges of exist and bridge st crete .
pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc cutof awaska victoria s only be con al of the engi ew asphalt co old milling op received a lift o reused in a re commence wi hall continue oncrete .
ce asphalt con hall not be lt concrete su e a minimum o gate base th all be cleaned phalt concrete with item num railway cross r structures as directed by rial shall be d in the contr ting mats an tructures shal tions frastruc n ers cture table num ff dates for p surfa oct oct nducted durin ineer .
oncrete mix sh peration and s of asphalt con ecycled aspha ithin num days on a daily ba ncrete on a d placed und urface mix th of numc .
he aggregate d of loose or f e surfaces s prior to the p sings and brid shall be rem y the enginee disposed of ract documen nd contact f ll receive an cture paving ace mixes ober num tober num ng daylight h hall commenc shall continue ncrete .
alt concrete m s of the com asis until the e ry surface .
der adverse e surface tem e base must foreign mater hall be treate lacing of asph dge structure moved to the er .
and the exp nts or as direc faces of cur application of p base m octobe octobe hours unless ce within num d on a daily ba mix the place mmencement entire milled s weather co mperature of t t be free fro rial prior to pla ed with bitum halt concrete .
es or areas e depths sho posed surface cted by the e rbs gutters f tack before item num page num mixes er num er num specifically days of the asis until the ement of the of the cold surface has onditions of the material m standing acing of the minous tack .
adjacent to own on the es shall be ngineer .
manholes placing the as pag num phalt con ge num num . . . . . . . ncrete en .num the temp .num a mi .num a mi .num the max temperat .num the max .num the incre .num the temp .num when lay by a stan alignmen num irregulari shall be rolled .
num the cros measure contract num in narro driveway methods hand pla num paving o and as d laying sh mat unle .num drive layin num spreadin out conc approved num adjacent complete num for esal placed a permitted .num wate item departm d result s perature prior nimum of num nimum of num ximum tempe ture recomme ximum temper allowable m eased for wor temperature perature probe ying base and ndard method nt designated ities in alignm corrected by ss slope of the ed over num m p documents o ow base wid ys where it is the asphalt cement pract of intersection defined in the hall be carried ess otherwise eway entranc g operation o ng of asphalt urrently with d by the engin asphalt con ed to approxim l counts equa asphalt concre d to cool to num er required to num .
st ment of tr specificati pavement st r to initial com numc for hot mi c for warm m erature of the ended by the a rature of the w maximum tem rk after octob e shall be c e. dor surface c d such as fol by the engin ment and gra y the addition e asphalt con perpendicular or provided by dening deep s impractical t concrete sh tices .
s extra width e contract d d out concurr e approved by ces and apron of the regular concrete by h the machine neer .
ncrete mats mately the sam al to or greate ete until finish numc .
o lower the m tandard ransport ion ers ructure mpaction shall ixed asphalt c mixed asphalt e hot mixed a asphalt binder wma behind mperature of ber numst if appr checked with course the al lowing a strin eer .
ade along the n or removal ncrete surface r to the centre y the enginee p or irregula to spread a all be spread hs and other v documents w rently with the y the enginee ns shall be p mat .
hand shall be laying operat including th me location at er than num millio h rolling is co mat temperatu specifica tation an be concrete .
t concrete .
asphalt conc r supplier .
the screed sh the wma b roved by the e h a calibrat lignment of th ngline placed e outside ed of asphalt co e shall be wit eline of the c er .
ar sections and finish asp d by hand in variations fro whether by h e machine lay er .
paved concur e kept to a mi tion of the reg hose placed t the end of ea on no traffic s omplete and ure shall be s ations nd infras crete shall be hall be numc behind the sc engineer .
ted stem th he paver shal d by the cont ge of the as oncrete befo thin num cross slope s intersections phalt concret n accordance m standard l and spreadin ying operation rrently or afte nimum and s gular mat un on shoulde ach days pav shall be perm the finished supplied in ac tructur item num january num e numoc or th c. creed may b ermometer o ll be controlle tractor from a phalt concret re the edge num mm whe specified in th turnouts o te by machin with standar lane alignme ng or machin n of the regula er the machin shall be carrie nless otherwis ers shall b ing .
mitted on new mat has bee ccordance wit re num num he be or ed an te is en he or ne rd nt ne ar ne ed se be wly en th depa aspha janua num num .
num .
num .
num .
artment alt concr ary num num .num .num .num num .num pad .num num .num driv .num num .num joi num .num stan of trans rete end r damage to t be immediat all placemen and any load be rejected b the speed o continuous o dding padding sha .num material specified .num asphalt by other .num the com .num for .num the com .num padding construc .num for pad tonnes o .num a m veways and a material pla paved concu nts general .num joints s a smoot .num dirt or o which jo .num the co construc week .
ndard sp portatio result spe pav the mat as a r tely repaired b nt spreading ds arriving at by the engine of the paver s operation of th all not be inclu l for padding d in the contr concrete for r methods ap mpaction equ padding num e contractor mpaction of th g is intended t ction of the su dding loose of mix to dete minimum of on aprons ced in drivew urrently with t hall be constr th riding surfa other foreign oints are to be ntractor shall ction or other pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc result of conta by the contrac compacting the work site eer .
shall be match he paver .
uded as part g shall be t ract documen padding sha proved by the ipment shall b num num shall establ e asphalt con to be a separ ubsequent lift mix sampling ermine the act ne sample sha ways and apr the main lane ructed to ens ace .
and loose m e made .
l remove and r work activit tions frastruc n ers cture aminant spills ctor to the sat and rolling s e such that th hed to the pro of a lot .
the same as nts .
ll be placed b e engineer .
be in accorda num num. ish a rolling ncrete used fo rate operation t of asphalt co g will be don tual binder co all be obtaine rons shall onl es .
ure thorough material shall d dispose of ty outside th cture from the con tisfaction of th hall occur on ese requirem oduction of the sphalt concre by means of ance with num .num and num. g pattern to or padding .
n and shall no oncrete .
ne at a rate ontent .
ed for quantitie ly be include and continuo be removed waste mater he work site p ntractors equi he engineer .
ly during day ments can not b e asphalt plan ete mix desi a selfpowere .num .
num shall not achieve the ot be done as of one samp es less than num d as part of ous bond and d from the fac rials resulting before the e item num page num ipment shall ylight hours be met shall nt to ensure ignation as ed paver or apply .
e maximum s part of the ple per num num tonnes .
a lot when d to provide ces against g from joint end of each as pag num num num phalt con ge num num num num ncrete en .num transver .num a tra and a asph .num b .num b .num whe the c .num whe back broke .num transver .num whe pave betw pavin .num i s l .num p s w .num whe as th asph begin termi .num longitud .num the f .num w .num c m p e . .num a s num departm d result s rse construct ansverse con at other times halt concrete t below numc below numc fo re the asphal conditions not n paving res k to full mat en or loose m rse key joint n the elevatio ement a trans ween the existi ng limits and o f a transvers shall immedia ong taper at t prior to the p shall be clean with num num n the elevatio he existing pav halt pavemen nning and at t inates against inal joint following requ widths of suc contractors u may leave a production wi engineer .
num before m to tack the all longitudina shall receive num .
st ment of tr specificati pavement st ion joint nstruction join s when pavin to cool .
for hot mixed or warm mixe lt concrete su ted in num sumes tapers thickness to material and ta on of the new sverse key jo ng and new a other locations se key is cut ately construc the joint area lacement of t ned of loose fo num and num on of the new vement a stra t shall be co the end of the t an existing p uirements sha cceeding indiv sing a one pa an exposed thout an app ay numth and a e longitudinal al joints left e an applicatio tandard ransport ion ers ructure nt shall be co g is halted fo d asphalt conc ed asphalt con rface andor num a smo s from surfac expose fres acked in acco asphalt conc oint shall be c asphalt concre s as determin in advance o ct with hot m as shown in the asphalt co oreign materia num. w asphalt conc aight vertical s onstructed be e project and pavement .
all apply when vidual courses aver operatio longitudinal lication of tac after septemb joint in accor exposed over on of tack coa specifica tation an onstructed at t or a period of crete .
ncrete .
base course ooth num m lon ce courses p sh straight v ordance with num crete pavemen constructed p ete pavement ned by the eng of paving the mixed asphalt n standard dr oncrete all tr al and a tack crete paveme surface equa etween the n other location n constructing s shall be offs on between m joint for up ck coat unles ber numth the c rdance with num rnight or whic at in accorda ations nd infras the end of ea time which s has been term ng taper shall previously lai vertical surfac num num nt is higher th per standard t at the begin gineer .
e joint area t concrete a rawing num. ransverse key k coat applied ent is at the s l to the thickn ew lift of pa ns where the g longitudinal set by num may numth and s to onehalf s otherwise d contractor sh num num a ch are expose ance with num tructur item num january num ach days wo shall permit th minated due t be paved .
d shall be c ces free fro and num. han the existin drawing num ning and at th the contracto smooth num y joint surface in accordanc same elevatio ness of the ne avement at th new paveme l joints .
num mm .
september num f of the day directed by th all be require and num. ed to moistur num num an re num num rk he to ut m ng num he or m es ce on ew he nt numth ys he ed re nd depa aspha janua num .
num .
num .
artment alt concr ary num num num .num co .num .num num .num add .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num stan of trans rete end r .num lon the .num lon und .num on mat mat mpaction of a if damage t vibratory co equipment a along curbs rollers the m as vibrating ditional requ the contra accordance the contrac resulting from .num should stopped paving r expansion j passing ove .num the pla indicated the contrac a steeldrum pressure on roller require the breakdo after breakd not to displa the mat sha for bridge d ndard sp portatio result spe pav gitudinal joint final lift of asp gitudinal join er rolling is a surface cour terial is not s terial shall be asphalt concr to highway c ompaction eq and proceed w s manholes mixture shall plate tamper irements for b ctor shall pl with the wate ctor shall be m any aspect the membran and repairs m recommences joints and de r them .
acing of the d on standard ctor shall subm m tandem roll compression ed for bridge d own roller sha down rolling t ce the mat wh all be finish ro decks num pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc ts shall not be phalt concrete ts shall be co chieved .
rses the me cattered on t carefully rem rete components a quipment the with the work and similar s be compacte s or by hand bridge deck p ace asphalt erproofing man e responsible of the paving ne become d made in acco s. eck drains sh asphalt conc d drawing num mit a rolling pa er operating n roll of at leas deck paving .
all be required the mat shall hen stopping lled to remove num num tions frastruc n ers cture e permitted b e. onstructed to thod of maki the surface o moved .
andor adjace e contractor k using static structures an ed with either d tampers .
paving concrete on nufacturers re for all dama g operation .
damaged pav ordance with t hall be prote crete at expa num. attern for the a in the nonv st num kgmm to run off the be rolled with or turning .
e any marks .
and num cture between the e o ensure that ing joints sha of the freshly ent property shall immed rolling equip nd places no smaller comp n the deck w ecommendati age to the w ving operatio the manufactu ected from d ansion joints approval of th vibratory mode of drum width e deck to stop h a pneumati num shall not ap p edges of drivin maximum co all be such t laid mat and is occurring w diately cease ment .
ot accessible pactive equip waterproofing on andor pro waterproofing ns shall be i urers instruct amage from shall be co he engineer .
e and exertin h shall be the and turn .
c tired roller pply .
item num page num ng lanes in ompression that excess d all excess while using e using this to full size pment such system in ocedures .
membrane immediately ions before equipment mpleted as ng a contact breakdown taking care as pag num num num num num num num phalt con ge num num .num qua num .num num .num num .num num .num num .num qua num .num ncrete en ality control t general .num the con stage of product specifica inspection te .num the con all phase the itp w .num the itp and requ .num the itp contracto processe .num once ac enforced .num the itp sampling and .num where sp random s by the co .num the con determin the requi .num the con .num resu at all asphalt com .num for each a nuclea shall imm ality assuranc general .num the con detail to t .num while prod departm d result s testing ntractor shall the work from to ensure m ation .
esting plan it ntractor shall es of the con within num day shall include uired test proc shall be suffi ors willingne es .
cepted by the accordingly .
may have to d test result pecified rand sampling pro ontractor .
ntractor shall ation of any a rements of th tractor shall m ults of all qua times and co mpaction rollin h asphalt conc ar gauge or e mediately sub ce testing and ntractor shall the dimension e the contrac uct acceptan st ment of tr specificati pavement st be totally res m the crushin materials and tp submit upon ntract perform ys after the co e but not be cedures to be ciently comp ess and ab e engineer th be updated a ts dom sampling cedure is spe be responsib action to be ta he contract .
maintain reco lity control tes opies shall be ng pattern crete mix type equivalent .
u mit a copy to d adjustment provide an nal and tolera ctor shall be fu nce testing is tandard ransport ion ers ructure sponsible for ng and produc workmanship request in w mance and the ontract award limited to ide used during rehensive an bility to con he plan becom and revised b g procedures ecified the sa ble for the in aken to ensur rds of all insp sts shall be a e provided if re e the contrac pon completi the engineer ts end product ance requirem ully and exclu the responsib specifica tation an quality contr ction of aggre p conform wi writing to the e name of th d. entification an the entire life d detailed to ntrol the con mes a part o by the contrac shall be follo ampling proce nterpretation re that all mat pection and te available for e equested by t ctor shall esta ion of the rol r. conforming ments of the p usively respon bility of the en ations nd infras rol testing thr egates to the th the requir engineer an e party retain nd description e of the contra assure the e nstruction pr of the contrac ctor as condi owed and wh edure shall b of the test re terials and w ests .
examination b the engineer ablish a rolling lling pattern in quality an plans and spe nsible for prod ngineer .
tructur item num january num roughout eve final accepte ements of th n itp coverin ned to condu n of inspectio act .
engineer of th roduction an ct and shall b itions warrant ere no specif be as identifie esults and th work conform t y the enginee .
g pattern usin the contracto nd accuracy o ecifications .
ducing the en re num num ry ed is ng ct on he nd be t. fic ed he to er ng or of nd depa aspha janua num .
s c ig p s b t v f m s s a a t in a num .
artment alt concr ary num num .num sampling mixe coring gnition metho percent fractu sieve analysis bulk relative theoretical ma voids calculat forming supe moisture cont smoothness o stratified rand appeal testing asphalt binde tsr average n all test meth astm enum sh num .num stan of trans rete end r .num for wo shall inc assuran .num for wor the con certain req materials an .num the eng as desc .num the tes characte test d es od ure s density aximum rela tions asphalt erpave specim tent oven me of pavements dom test site g r fla vis rh ro ac fle e of condition hods used as all be substitu the enginee or materials .num such ins to contro .num the en contrac in accor ndard sp portatio result spe pav rk category corporate the nce test result rk category num tractor shall p uirements li nd workmansh gineer and th ribed in num st methods in eristics .
description tive density t concrete sp mens field m ethod asphalt s profiler met es for a.c.p .
ash and fire p scosity heological pro olling thin film ccelerated ag exible creep s ed freeze reference in uted for any o er reserves th and those of spections and ol quality .
gineers appr ctor from her rdance with th pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc num acceptance quality contr ts from the en num the enginee perform the q mits and tol hip to be supp e contractor num. ndicated in t ta tes pecimens method t concrete mi hod projects points operties m oven ing pav stiffness thaw tsr va this specifica other specified he right to ins f subcontracto d tests shall n roval of any his obligation he specificatio tions frastruc n ers cture e testing is th rol test results ngineer in acc er shall perfo uality control lerances are plied .
shall test for table num s able num st methods as ix a alues ation metric s d wire cloth s pect andor te ors and suppl not relieve the materials or n to provide m ons .
cture he responsibi s from the co cordance with orm the qualit testing .
e specified re r compliance shall be used test ast ast dti asphalt ssurance tec manual dti astm c num ast aash ast aash ast ast ast as outlined aashto t num aashto tnum aash aash aas aash ast sieves as spec sieves .
est any of the liers regardle e contractor o mixture sha materials mix p ility of the en ontractor with h this item .
ty assurance egarding the with these re d to determi t method tm d num m d num concrete qu chnician certi procedure i method numastm c num m d num hto tnum m d num hto t num m d num tm e num m d num in specificati num or astm d num or astm d hto tnum hto t num shto rnum hto tnum m d num cified in e contractors ess of location of hisher resp ll in no way xtures and wo item num page num ngineer and h the quality testing and e quality of equirements ne material uality fication num num ons d num d num s operations n. ponsibilities relieve the orkmanship as pag num phalt con ge num num ncrete en .num the loos engineer .num the .num the them for th .num the .num the to the .num the conju hot m comp .num the eng within on .num the qa available .num for w who .num for w appr .num tests pe .num random .num are num .num sma han .num the proc .num whe resul prac signi .num a .num if the test r departm d result s e mix and co r. random locat engineer will m to the owne he lot .
engineer sha contractor sh e owners la contractor s unction with r mixed aspha pacting each ineer shall pr ne working da results for th e provided the work catego has successf work catego oved by the e rformed by th sampling me as of obvious .num. all areas suc ndwork and a cedure for dea n an individu lt in question ctice for deal ficance level .
an appeal is r e outlier test result shall be st ment of tr specificati pavement st re samples s tions shall be l label the loo ers laborator all be respons hall be respon boratory with shall reinstat removal of th alt concrete i lift with num blo ovide the con ay of their ava e loose samp e cores have ry num the qua fully complete ory num the qu engineer befo he engineer s ethods shall n s surface defe ch as tapers asphalt mix us aling with an o ual test result shall be det ling with out required befo procedure sh e used in the tandard ransport ion ers ructure hall be taken determined b ose mix sam ry once all of sible for labell nsible for the hin num hours of te the pavem e core by de n num mm lif ows using a s ntractor with a ailability .
ples will be re been delivere lity control tes ed the nbdti ality control t ore plant prod shall not be co ot be applied ects shall be s aprons br sed for isolate outlier test res t from a lot termined in a tlying observ re the outlier hows that the calculations .
specifica tation an by the contr by the engine mples and the f the loose sa ing the cores e storage and f coring for te ment at each ewatering the fts to the pa standard com a copy of the eported to th ed to the dti sting shall be certification testing equip duction begins onsidered to b d to the follow marked and r ridge approa ed levelling an sult shall be a is questiona accordance w vations using r test applies e challenged ations nd infras ractor in the p eer .
e contractor amples have .
transportatio esting .
h core samp core hole an avement surf mpaction devic e results of ac e contractor lab .
e performed b program .
pment shall b s. be quality con wing areas repaired in ac aches gores nd repair of fa as follows able the valid with astm e g a t test a s. test result is tructur item num january num presence of th shall transpo been obtaine on of the core ple location nd filling it wit face elevatio ce .
cceptance tes once they ar by a technicia be verified an ntrol tests .
ccordance wit and areas o ailed areas .
dity of the te num standar at a num perce valid then th re num num he ort ed es in th n ts re an nd th of st rd nt he depa aspha janua num .
num .
artment alt concr ary num num .num for .num .num .num .num .num num .num for .num .num stan of trans rete end r r work categ for work c every lot on if the results control and mean of dev the toleranc characteristi sample mea acce mix chara air voids binder con num mm num µm note the m if any of the acceptance quality assu if any of the table num other contro r work categ for work c a delayed ba for work c using rando .num if the te further t test pro air voids asphalt b percent p percent p .num if the te owner w characte ndard sp portatio result spe pav ory num category num qu n the contrac s for a given quality assur viation for pay ce referred to ic between t an is defined i ptance toler acteristics ntent mix characteri mix characte test results rance test res e control char num then the lot ol characterist ory num and wo ategory num and asis for every ategory num and m numbers a est results fro esting will be a perties binder conten passing num passing num µm est results fro will test the eristics per ta pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc uality assura t. lot are within rance test re yment adjustm o in table num the quality c in num .
ta rance for co acceptanc b stics in table eristics are ou for that mix sults .
racteristics of t shall be reje tics .
ork category d work categ y lot on the c d work categ and it will be te om the selec required and table num cceptance c nt mm sieve m sieve om the selec remaining sa ables num num tions frastruc n ers cture nce testing s n the toleranc sults shall be ment .
num is the sa control and able num mbining qa e tolerance base mix num num num num num are bas utside the acc characteristic f a lot is outs ected automa num gory num quality contract gory num one s ested for qua cted sample m d the lot will b num criteria num j cted sample amples from num and num cture shall be done ces stated in e combined t ample mean quality assur and qc lot between qa sed on the ave ceptable toler c shall be ca side the acce atically regard y assurance sample will be ality assurance meet the crit be paid at num criteria num num jmf num jmf num jmf num do not meet the lot .
the num .
p e on a delaye table num together to es difference fo rance test re test results a and qc tes surface num num num num erage lot test rance in table alculated usin ptance limits dless of the va testing shall e selected fro e. teria in table num. t the above c e owner will item num page num ed basis for the quality stablish the or each mix esults .
the s st results mix num num num num results .
e num the ng only the as listed in alues of the be done on om each lot e num no criteria the test all mix as pag num num num phalt con ge num num num .num num .num ncrete en .num a sa deter per t asphalt dens .num density t .num pavemen sampling .num for w segm .num for w one f .num in ea the lo the e .num in no .num core conc patte .num core .num core place .num t w .num t c .num the perc densities samples .
asphalt cont .num loose sa the mtv follows .num a lo .num for e whic .num each the o cont departm d result s ample mean rmined and t tables num sity testing shall b nt samples s g procedures .
work catego ments of appro work categor from each of ach segment a ongitudinal di edge of the se o case shall a es shall not b crete surface ern to achieve es shall not be es shall be ob ement of the l the maximum when applicab the engineer concrete plac cent density o s with the ave . tent gradatio amples shall b v discharge u t shall be divi each segmen h to obtain th h sample sha other shall b tractor .
st ment of tr specificati pavement st or the mean this value wil num and num be based on a shall be take ry num five sam oximately equ ry num and wor four segment a test site sha istance from egment .
lateral distan be taken in th mix is place e the maximum e taken within btained in acc lot .
m may be ex ble .
r may allow ement .
of a lot shall erage of the on and air voi be taken on t using an app ded into num se nt random nu e sample .
all be split in be set aside tandard ransport ion ers ructure n of deviation ll be used for num. a lot average en on the ro mples per lot ual length .
k category num ts of approxim all be located the end of th nce be less th he shoulder ed for which m compaction n num m of a loo cordance with xtended to inc cores to be be determine theoretical m ids the road behin proved hoppe egments of ap umbers shall two equal po in the even specifica tation an ns for the co r acceptance e method .
oad by corin shall be sele four sample mately equal l d by using ran e segment an han num m from area where the contract n of the aspha ose sample lo h astm dnum clude saturda obtained wit ed by compar maximum re nd the paver er with num sa pproximately e l be used to ortions one p nt that an ap ations nd infras ombined test and unit pri ng using stra ected one fro es per lot sha length .
ndom number nd the lateral m the edge of only a single tor shall esta alt concrete .
ocation .
num within num ays sundays thin num hours ring the avera elative densit before comp mples per lo equal quantity determine t portion shall b ppeal is requ tructur item num january num results will b ce adjustme atified rando om each of fiv all be selected rs to determin l distance fro f a mat .
e lift of aspha ablish a rollin hours after th s and holiday s after aspha age of the cor ty of the loos paction or fro ot selected a y. he tonnage a be tested an uested by th re num num be nt m ve d ne m alt ng he ys alt re se m as at nd he depa aspha janua num .
num .
num .
num .
artment alt concr ary num num .num num .num sm num .num num .num stan of trans rete end r if the plant obtained an moothness general .num the smo iri smoothn .num definitio .num roa .num .num inte .num .num rep .num .num loc .num .num seg .num .num proj .num ndard sp portatio result spe pav production is nd the produc oothness req ness ons adway smoot the smoothn will be classi categories a number of classification rehabilitation may impact t rnational rou iri is a st roughness in mmm and re this specifica porting interva the reporting iri and num m alized rough localized ro exceeds an roadway cate gment a segment o length .
the s segment len segment leng ject chainage the distance the contract and acceptab pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc s num t or les ction shall be uirements sha hness catego ness category fied as either are determine factors inclu n geometry n strategies a the ability to a ughness index tatistical mea n a measure eported to tw ation .
al g interval for metres for loca hness oughness is established v egory .
of roadway sh segment leng ngth shall be gths may exis e e as measure stake chaina ble for the sm tions frastruc n ers cture ss one addit added to the all be specifie ory ry that applies r category a ed solely at uding but n y access and the prese achieve pavem x iri asurement u ed longitudina wo num decima r this specifica alized roughn reported in value as set hall be defined th shall be num e num metre st as outlined ed by the high age but will be moothness spe cture tional random previous lot .
ed in the con s for a partic category b o the owners ot necessar points inte ence of othe ment smooth used to dete al profile .
ir al places for a ation shall be ness .
num metre i out in table d by the full la num metres for lo es for overal in num. h speed prof e the only cha ecification .
p m loose samp .
tract docume cular section or category c discretion b ily limited to ersections er physical fe ness .
ermine the ri shall be m all procedures e num metres ntervals whe num for ane width ove ocalized roug l iri howev num. filer will be re ainage deeme item num page num ple shall be ents .
of roadway c. roadway based on a o roadway driveways eatures that amount of measured in s relating to s for overall ere the iri a particular er a defined ghness .
the ver shorter eferenced to ed accurate as pag num num phalt con ge num num num ncrete en .num refe .num t p .num equi .num a l e m .num smo .num t t a .
.num p . .num e . . . .num bumpdi .num indiv to pa .num the departm d result s erences this specific publications astm e of travele reference pment a class num ine ow pass num equipment s manufacturer othness test the owner w the owners adjustments a num smoothne completio profile measu num the prof simultane at num me computed exclusions num the num m excluded structures segments payment a num areas req shall be e num individual attributed curbgutte p profile req vidual bumps ayment adjust bumpdip pro st ment of tr specificati pavement st cation refers num standard ed surfaces e rtial laser pr num m shall shall be ins s recommend ting procedur will conduct sm smoothness and areas req ess testing on of the pavin urements filer will rec eously at num m etre intervals d from the num metre segmen from smooth s located with s immediately adjustments .
quiring hand excluded .
num metre se to physical er matchins uirement dips exceedin tment as desc ofile requirem tandard ransport ion ers ructure s to the fo d test metho with an acce rofiler with mo be used for stalled and dations and a es moothness te testing resul quiring correct will be carr ng operation .
cord the rig metre interval s. the num metre interva ts at both end hness calculat hin any num m y before and a work tapers egments exhi features of will be exclud ng num mm as cribed in num. ments shall ap specifica tation an ollowing sta od for measur elerometer e oving averag r all smooth operated astm e num. esting in acco lts will be us tive work .
ried out as ght and left s. the final ir metre interv al average ir ds of the sec tions .
bridges metre segme after the struc intersection ibiting roughn the roadwa ded from paym s detected by .num. pply to interch ations nd infras andards spe ring the long established in e filter high p hness measu in accordan ordance with ed in determ soon as p t wheel pat ri readings w val averages i values .
ction under co s underpass ent including cture shall be ns gore areas ness which c ay including ment adjustm y the profiler s ange ramps .
tructur item num january num ecifications o gitudinal profi nertial profilin pass num m an urements .
th nce with th astm e num mining payme possible upo th iri value will be reporte s will then b ontract shall b s and overpas the num metr excluded fro s aprons et can be direct iron works o ments .
shall be subje re num num or le ng nd he he num. nt on es ed be be ss re m tc .
tly or ct depa aspha janua num .
num .
num .
artment alt concr ary num num .num asp .num num .num thi .num .num .num .num num .num sur .num .num stan of trans rete end r phalt binder asphalt bind .num samples contrac .num the .num for wo num num from th .num for w asphalt .num the eng and type any add .num if a sa num. concrete .num com prod ckness the contrac contract do for work ca for work ca of the cores .num if the th area sha for work c controlled by rface defects the finished of visible s measured w any obvious pavement c .num multiple .num if a ndard sp portatio result spe pav der samples s s shall be a ctors storage e sample conta ork category num t of asphalt c he contractor ork category t binder samp gineer shall l e of asphalt b ditives added mple test re .num the engin e mix product mpliance shal duction is allo ctor shall plac ocuments and ategory num thic ategory num the obtained acc hickness does all be repaired category num an y the owner .
s d surface of a igns of poor with a num m stra s defects as course .
defects withi defect is cont pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc shall be obtain a minimum s tank in accor ainers shall be num the contr concrete mix s asphalt bin y num and wo ple per contra abel the sam binder suppl to the asphal esult falls ou neer may re tion .
ll be verified owed to contin ce the aspha dor as specifi ckness shall b e pavement t cording to num s not meet th d as indicated nd work cat any pavemen r workmansh aight edge .
determined b n a num metre tinuous beyon tions frastruc n ers cture ned and pack size of one rdance with a e supplied by ractor shall o production t der storage ta ork category act .
mples with the ier refinery a t binder .
utside of the equire that th by the engin nue .
lt concrete in cally directed be evaluated thickness sha num. he requiremen d in num egory num the nt course sha hip and bum by the engine section shall nd num metres cture kaged as follo litre and sh astm d num. y the engineer obtain one as aken in accor anks .
num the cont e contract nu and the name material req he contracto neer before th n lifts at the th d by the engin on a lot by l all be determi nts of table num. asphalt conc all have a unif ps andor d eer shall be c l be considere s it shall be co p ows hall be taken r. phalt binder rdance with a tractor shall umber date e and the pro quirements s or suspend t he asphalt co hickness indic neer .
lot basis .
ned from the num then th crete thickne form texture a ips exceedin cause for reje ed as one def onsidered as o item num page num n from the sample per astm dnum obtain one time grade oportions of specified in the asphalt oncrete mix cated in the test results he deficient ess shall be and be free ng nummm as ection of the fect .
one defect .
as pag num phalt con ge num num ncrete en .num such def .num segr .num rave .num rolle .num crac .num impr .num tire .num sam .num impr .num cont .num flush .num pneu departm d result s fects shall inc regated areas elling er marks cking or tearin oper matchin marks pling location operly constr taminant spills hed areas an umatictired ro st ment of tr specificati pavement st clude but not n s ng g of longitudi ns not properly ucted patche s on the mat nd oller pickup .
tandard ransport ion ers ructure necessarily b nal and trans y reinstated s specifica tation an be limited to th sverse joints ations nd infras he following tructur item num january num re num num depa aspha janua bulk re theore density asphalt deviatio gradat mean from jm see n cores w toleran air void mean o target notes artment alt concr ary num measuremen elative density etical maximum y t content ons of lot from ion of deviations o mf ote num with thickness nce see no ds of deviations fr value of num s num additio a if t b if num num. c fo s if num specifi a sp s b li tole tole c if n a v d if d num for co stan of trans rete end r a nt as of m relative mean of m jmf of lot c within ote num om onal requirem the average of table num the the average of numto num the num the lot sh or work catego elected sample f the average fo ied thickness f pecified thickn amples .
ft thickness to erance num x erance num x the thickness o next lift of aspha as specified in t verified by corin the thickness o deficient lot sha ontracts with ndard sp portatio result spe pav acceptancer types of mix size all all b hrb w num m num µm d hrd wma num m num µm all all ments for grada f lot test result e lot shall be r f lot test result lot payment s all be rejected .
ory num and work e the remainin or all samples e for work categ ness specified olerance by ty x specified th x specified th of either lift of b alt concrete to the contract .
t ng the two lifts i of the surface l all be verified b num million esal pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc table num rejection req sieve wmab mm m ac wmad mm m ation ts for the num m rejected .
ts for the num µm shall be reduce .
k category num w ng samples sha exceeds num gory num d application ra ype of mix ickness hrb ickness b c base mix is less achieve a thick the total thickn in the area of t ift is less than by coring all the l a rejected lo tions frastruc n ers cture num quirements b increased num n.a .
n.a .
n.a .
n.a .
n.a .
n.a .
n.a .
n.a .
mm sieve size m sieve size ex ed by numt when the num µm all be tested for refer to note num ate bulk relat d s than the toler kness equivale ness of the two he deficient lo the tolerance e lifts in the are ot will be paid a cture by lot lot payment full num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num of num num falls outside th xceeds num th m sieve size ex r percent passi numb .
tive density obt rance the con ent to the total t lifts for the def ot .
the total thickn ea of the deficie at num of the c p reduced num num num num num num num num num num num num num num n.a .
num num he gradation lim he following sh xceeds num fo ng the num µm s tained from cor ntractor shall pl thickness of the ficient lot shal ness of all lifts f ent lot .
contractors uni item num page num repair replace reject num num num num num num num num of num num mits of hall apply or the sieve size .
re ace the e two lifts l be for the it price .
as pag num phalt con ge num num .num ncrete en appeal of lo .num the con content .num for work mix char quality a calculate .num appeals .num any attem lot for ac .num the follo .num the hour .num the appe .num t s .num for cont engi .num for w cont engi .num if the rema own .num f c .num f c s f l .num the the c whic comm .num p t departm d result s t test results ntractor may gradation air k category num acteristics f ssurance tes ed mean of de shall only be mpt to improv cceptance sh wing procedu contractor s s of receipt of contractor a eal of the lot s the cores fo submission of work catego tractor shall neer .
these c work categor tractor shall neer .
these c e asphalt cont aining portion ers laborato for work ca central labor for work ca conducted at shall deliver t fredericton .
a laboratory .
contractor m contractors r h he does n ments in orde prior to leavin testing proced st ment of tr specificati pavement st s appeal the r r voids and th the contrac from table num st results are eviation indica considered fo ve density on all void the ap ures shall app hall serve no f the test resu nd the engin shall be taken or the appea f the notice fo ory num if the take num more cores shall be ry num and wor take num more cores shall be tent gradatio n of the sam ory .
ategory num all ratory in fred ategory num and the owners he air voids all other app may have a re representative not consider er to resolve t ng the testing dures are to b tandard ransport ion ers ructure results of acc ickness for a ctor may app num if the dif outside the t ates that the l or all tests wit n the appeale ppeal and the ply for an appe otice of appe ults .
eer shall agr n. l of the lot or the appeal .
e density or e cores at ra e tested by th k category num e cores at ra e tested by th on or air voids mples obtaine appeal testi ericton .
d work categ s central lab appeal samp eal testing s epresentative e shall comm to be valid hem .
g laboratory a be given to the specifica tation an ceptance test ny rejected o eal the result fference betw tolerance liste lot will be reje thin the lot .
ed lot after th e original test eal al to the eng ree on a time shall be tak thickness of andom locatio e owner .
if the densit andom locatio e owner .
s is appealed ed in num. ing shall be gory num air vo boratory in f ples to the ow shall be cond present durin ment on anyth and the eng any unresolve e engineer in ations nd infras ting of the de r penalized l ts of any qua ween the qua ed in table num ected .
he engineer results shall gineer in wri e at which the ken within num f the lot is ons as deter ty of the lot is ons as deter the engineer .num and tes conducted a oid appeal te fredericton .
t wners centra ducted in the ng the period hing concern gineer shall ed comments n writing .
tructur item num january num ensity aspha ot only once .
ality assuranc lity control an num or if th has tested th apply .
iting within num e cores for th num hours of th appealed th rmined by th s appealed th rmined by th r shall take th t them at th at the owner esting shall b the contracto al laboratory owners fie of the testing ing the testin respond to a s regarding th re num num alt ce nd he he num he he he he he he he he rs be or in ld g ng all he depa aspha janua num .
artment alt concr ary num num stan of trans rete end r .num any sub be c .num for wor appeale .num if th be cha set .num if th com app .num if th qua esta con .num whe to c .num the test new sam .num a n resu unit .num for exce .num the and .num analysis .num foll test at th lot .num an whic .num if th to th be s .num any sha ndard sp portatio result spe pav y comments sequent to th considered .
rk category num ed the followi e appeal test combined to rged the own out in table num he appeal test mbined togeth eal testing .
e appeal test lity control lab ablish the me ntractor for the en the binder over the cost t results from mples .
new sample ults shall be t price adjustm work catego eed the lift thi e new lot tes the owner .
s of rejected owing an app results conti he discretion is acceptable analysis as ch segments e analysis ind he sample se subject to num y and all pric ll apply .
pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc with respec he contractor when the re ng procedure t results is c gether for pa ners lab testin num. t results is c her for payme t results is s b the results ean of devia e appeal testi r content is a of calibrating m the original mean or the determined a ment .
ory num thicknes ickness tolera st results so o lots peal of the en nue to indica of the engin e. determined b may be acce dicates partia egments in num or num ce adjustmen tions frastruc n ers cture ct to the tes rs representa esults of the m es shall apply closer to the q ayment adjus ng fees to co closer to the ent adjustmen spaced equall from the thre ation for pay ing .
appealed an g the ignition f lot shall be e mean of th and this valu ss appeals num ance specified obtained sha ntire lot in ac ate rejection t neer to deter by the engin eptable .
al lot accepta which rejecte num ts correspon cture sting proced ative leaving t mix character .
quality assura stment and t over the cost quality contro nt at no cost t ly between th ee labs shall yment adjustm additional num furnace .
combined wi he deviations e shall be us num of the num te d in table num all be binding ccordance wi the new test rmine whethe eer will be c ance only tho ed material p as determine ding to the r p dures which the laborator ristics in table ance results the contracto of the appea ol results th to the contra he quality ass be combined ment at no c num will th the test re s for the com sed for acce est results mu num. on both the th num results will be er or not a po carried out to ose areas cor placement occ ed by the eng recalculated item num page num are made ry shall not e num are they shall or shall be al testing as hey shall be actor for the surance and together to cost to the be charged esults of the mbined test ptance and ust meet or contractor num if the new e analyzed ortion of the o determine rresponding curred shall gineer .
test results as pag num num num num phalt con ge num num .num num num num ncrete en repairs .num general .num repa as p deter .num the same .num a s .num clau .num removal .num the remo .num all jo .num repa shall .num mate the m .num overlayin .num the a fin mm f .num a ke draw .num if an withi hish .num repa .num t .num t .num r a departm d result s airs to correct er num rmined by the asphalt conc e asphalt con any asphalt c shall not be in se num sh l and replace full thickness oved by cold m oints shall be t aired areas sh require furth erial removed material outsid ng overlay shall ished compa for a surface ey shall be co wing num. overlay resu n the work a her own expen aired areas sh those failing w the contracto removal dept and the origin st ment of tr specificati pavement st t surface defe num or routing e engineer .
crete used for ncrete mix des concrete whic ncorporated in hall also apply ement s of the appr milling or othe tackcoated .
hall be retest er repair .
shall become de the work s extend the fu cted thicknes course .
onstructed at lts in the nee area the con nse and to the hall be reteste will be rejecte or shall then c th shall be su nal unsatisfact tandard ransport ion ers ructure ects shall be g and crack r replacemen signation as t ch does not c n the work .
y. ropriate lift of er means as a ed for accept e the property site .
ull width of the ss of not less t each end o d for repairs ntractor shall c e satisfaction ed for accepta ed and a seco carry out repa ufficient to rem tory surface l specifica tation an carried out b sealing .
the t to correct s hat which is r conform to th f pavement i approved by t tance those f y of the cont e underlying p s than num mm of the overlai or adjustmen carry out the of the engine ance .
ond overlay s airs in accord move the full ift .
ations nd infras y removal an method of r surface defec removed .
e requiremen n the rejecte the engineer failing shall b ractor who s pavement sur m for a base c id section as nts to the adja repairs and a eer .
shall not be pe ance with num thickness of tructur item num january num nd replaceme repair shall b cts shall be th nts of this ite ed lot shall b . be rejected an shall dispose o rface and hav course and num s per standar acent materia adjustments a ermitted .
num. the overlay l re num num nt be he m be nd of ve num rd als at ift depa aspha janua num num num num artment alt concr ary num measure .num genera .num the con .num .num unit pr .num the .num .num .num .num for sur num .num for num .num if re up .num the lot .num payme .num the inc .num ind tab .num for num stan of trans rete end r ment for p al e quantity to ncrete placed for work c calculated a num app ice adjustme e upas for as for work c num num an for work c and num be subjected for work c and num be subjected r asphalt con rface mix ove num shall not a r asphalt conc num num num epairs are ca pa for the lot e unit price t as follows uplot nt adjustmen e engineer w luding detaile ividual bump ble num. r asphalt conc num num ndard sp portatio result spe pav payment o be measur in accordan category num th as follows plication rate nt upa of th sphalt concre ategory num the nd num .
category num th will be subjec d to num of category num th will be subjec d to num of ncrete placed er granulars is apply .
crete placed a num and num rried out by re shall be base up for asph up up nt for smoothn will provide t ed payment ad ps and dips s crete placed o and num s pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc red for paym ce with this it he quantity of length he lot te are shown e upas for a he upas for cted to num o the values lis he upas for cted to num o the values lis d on shoulde s specified a as padding d num shall not emoval and re ed on quality a halt concrete padensity up ness the contracto djustment sum shall be asse on bridge dec shall not apply tions frastruc n ers cture ment shall be tem subject t f asphalt con specified wid in tables num sphalt concre asphalt conc of the values sted .
asphalt conc of the values sted .
er areas whe and on bridge driveways and t apply .
eplacement o assurance tes base or surfa paasphalt content or with a co mmaries and essed in acco cks the paym y. cture e the numbe to payment ad ncrete for a l dth num num num num ete are as sho crete as show listed and the crete as show listed and the ere a single e decks the d aprons the or overlay of t sting carried ace mixes sh upagradation opy of the s mandatory re ordance with ment adjustm p er of tonnes djustments .
lot shall not e num and num own in table wn in table num e upas in ta wn in table num e upas in ta lift of aspha upa as show e upa as show the asphalt co out on the rep hall be adjuste upaair voids moothness t epair requirem the schedule ents as show item num page num of asphalt exceed that num. s num num num num able num wil num num able num wil alt concrete wn in table wn in table oncrete the paired lot .
ed for each s est results ments .
e set out in wn in tables num l num l as pag num phalt con ge num num .num .num .num .num ncrete en num metre se .num payment average table num localized ro .num with the an iri va roughnes payment roughnes total payme .num the tota adjustme payment value th adjustme section o .num if the tota shall be localized results in summatio segments le .num for segm from num num these are price adj segment departm d result s egments t adjustment iri in mmm num. oughness exception of alue greater ss resulting adjustment ss payments nt adjustmen l payment ad ents for each adjustments he contracto ent and the of roadway .
al num metre assessed eit roughness p n a greater pe on .
ess than num ments less th num metre seg num .
paym eas based on justments sh s in the num m st ment of tr specificati pavement st for num metre m for each num f areas descr than those s in negative p shall be the adjustments f nts djustment sh num metre s . if the total num or shall be total localize segment pay her the total payment adju enalty to the c metres han num metr gments that ment adjustm n the actual n all be prorate metre segmen tandard ransport ion ers ructure e segments s num metre seg ibed in num shown in tab payment adju numerical su for the define all be the su segment in e num metre se assessed th ed roughnes yment adjustm num metre se stment which contractor .
t res in length are not su ments under num number of num ed based on nt as detailed specifica tation an shall be calcu gment in eac num ea ble num sh ustments .
the ummation of ed section of r ummation of ach lane inc gment payme he total num s payment a ment is a neg egment paym hever is num the two pena price adjust ubject to ex num an num metre segm the number d in table num ations nd infras ulated based ch lane in ac ach num metre hall be define e total localiz all the indiv roadway .
all the indiv cluding localiz ent adjustme metre segm adjustment fo gative value ment adjustme merically less alties shall no tments shall xclusions as nd num ments that are of nonexclu num .
tructur item num january num on the overa ccordance wit e segment wit ed as localize zed roughnes vidual localize vidual payme zed roughnes nt is a positiv ment payme or the define the contracto ent or the tot i.e .
whicheve ot be applied be determine described shall apply t e not excluded uded num metr re num num all th th ed ss ed nt ss ve nt ed or tal er in ed in to d. re depa aspha janua artment alt concr ary num ma c ty stan of trans rete end r of theoretic aximum relat density lot average num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num continue u mean of the content from ype bhrbw type cdhr wmacwm ndard sp portatio result spe pav unit price al ive un adj pe ed next colum unit price ad e deviations m the approv wmab rd ad pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc table e adjustmen nit price ustment er tonne num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num mn table djustment fo s of actual as ved asphalt num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num tions frastruc n ers cture num nt for densit o maxi lo num or asphalt co sphalt content num num num num num num num num num num num num num cture ty upad of theoretical imum relative density ot average num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ontent upaa unit pric asphalt co p e unit adju per num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num re a e adjustmen ntent per t num num num num num num reject num num num num num reject item num page num t price stment r tonne num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num eject nt for tonne as pag phalt con ge num a in sh a b c ncrete en sieve si astm desig num mm num µm addition to t all apply if the avera limits of tab if the avera shall apply num num .
for work ca num for the passing the numb .
departm d result s unit price a ze gnation b m m the above ac ge of lot test ble num the ge of lot test numto num the .num the lot w ategory num and e selected sam num µm sieve st ment of tr specificati pavement st table num adjustment f mean of the gradatio type bhrbwma num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num num num num num num to num num cceptancerej t results for th lot shall be r t results for th e lot paymen will be rejecte d work categ mple the rem size .
if the av tandard ransport ion ers ructure num for gradatio e deviations on from the j b type c wmac num t num t num t num t num t num t num t num t num t num t num t num t num t num t num num num num num num t jection requir he num mm s rejected .
he num µm sie nt shall be red d. ory num when t maining sampl verage for all specifica tation an on upag s of the jmf u cdhrd cwmad to num to num to num to num to num to num to num to num to num to num to num to num to num num to num num num num num num to num num rements for g sieve size fal eve size exce duced by num the num µm sie es shall be te samples exce ations nd infras unit price ad for grad per to num num num num num num num num num num num num num rejec num num num num num num num rejec gradation the lls outside the eeds num th numt eve size excee ested for perc eeds num re tructur item num january num djustment dation onne num num num num num num num num num num num num num ct num num num num num num num ct e following e gradation he following eds cent efer to note re num num depa aspha janua artment alt concr ary num iri mmm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num roadway c cate cate cate stan of trans rete end r p payment m cate num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num classificatio egory a egory b egory c ndard sp portatio result spe pav payment adj t adjustmen egory a num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num payment ad on loca mmm pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc table num justment num t for each num catego num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num djustment num alized rough for num metr num num num tions frastruc n ers cture num num metre segm num metre seg ory b num num num num num num num num num num .num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num metre segm hness iri re segments cture ments gment in eac category num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ments paymen each p h lane y c num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num nt adjustmen h occurrence num num num item num page num nt for e as pag num phalt con ge num num basis o .num pay conc .num com cont spec .num ncrete en mean o from targ of payment ment for wor crete as iden mpensation to tent as determ cified in num payment to asphalt binde following limi .num the max approve adjustme departm d result s bump num num num num num num num num num num unit price a of deviations get value air num to num .
num to num .
num to num .
num to num .
num to num .
num to num .
num to num .
num to num .
num to num .
num to num .
num to num .
num t rk under this ntified under t o the contra mined by qa num for the to the contracto er content sp tations ximum amou ed asphalt ents plus num st ment of tr specificati pavement st table num p and dip pe bumpdip .num to num mm num to num mm .num to num mm .num to num mm .num to num mm .num to num mm .num to num mm .num to num mm .num to num mm .num to num mm num mm table num adjustment s of air voids r voids num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num item shall in he contract .
actor or the a ignition furna otal payable t or shall be m pecified in num nt of asphalt binder cont num for type tandard ransport ion ers ructure num enalty sched m m m m m m m m num for air voids s num clude a sepa owner for d ace results a tonnage sha made for asp num for th t content use tent from bhrb mix a specifica tation an dule penalty num num num num num num num num num num num s upaav unit price r arate unit pri differences be and the assum ll be as follow phalt content he total paya ed in the ab the jmf a and num for ations nd infras e adjustmen t num num num num num num num num num num num reject ce for each t etween the a med asphalt ws in excess of ble tonnage ove calculati and subsequ type cd mix tructur item num january num nt type of aspha asphalt binde binder conte f the assume subject to th on will be th uent approve x .
re num num alt er nt ed he he ed depa aspha janua num .
artment alt concr ary num num .num .num .num .num .num .num payme accorda .num in the c .num if th the be .num .num if th rem pro .num if the c andor .num the .num for eac shall pa until pa day for .num for eac per defe stan of trans rete end r if the actual contractor s for the mont if the actual owner shall contractor .
payments a this determ determining the asphalt ignition furna .num for rap the ignit .num for pad ignition .num no bind nt adjustmen ance with item case that the c he new test r en the testing borne by the payment to he new test r mains valid fo ocedure shall contractor car dips the smo contractor s ch occurrence ay the owner aving commen r more than num ch surface def ect .
ndard sp portatio result spe pav asphalt binde shall reimburs th preceding t asphalt binde l reimburse t nd credits sh mination is in unit price ad t binder cont ace results ob p mixes the a tion furnace re dding the act furnace resul er adjustmen nt for chang m num .
contractor in results after t costs incurre owner .
the contracto results after th or that lot be charged i rries out impro oothness shal hall be charg e that paving a penalty of nces and num num of the con fect as per num pecificat on and inf ecification vement struc er content is se the owne the month of er content is h the contracto all be determ ndependent fr djustments as ent for each btained throu actual asphalt esults obtaine tual asphalt b ts obtained u t shall be req ge in the p itiates an app the appeal pr ed by the ow or shall be ma he appeal pro the testing c in accordance ovements for ll be retested .
ed for the sm is not perform num for eac num for each ntractors norm num the c tions frastruc n ers cture less than the er using the m the tender op higher than the or at the actu mined on a lot from and has s determined mix type wil ghout the con t binder conte ed throughou binder conten under num quired for mat g asphalt b peal under num rocess indica wner during th ade for the sa ocess verify t costs incurre e with item num r smoothness .
moothness rete med per num ch day after day that pavi mal work hour contractor sha cture e assumed as mtos pg as pening .
e assumed as ual invoiced t by lot basis s no relation under num ll be calculat ntract .
ent in the rap t the contract nt will be calc .num. terial placed in binder price num the ates that a pe he appeal pro ampling costs that a penalty ed by the ow num to the con including rep esting in acco num or num the numth day ing is not con rs until pavin all pay the ow p phalt binder c sphalt binder sphalt binder amount supp s. nship to calc num. ted by averag p will be subt t. culated by av n driveways a shall be ca following sha enalty no long ocedures for t s. y still applies wner during ntractor .
pairs to individ ordance with num the or numst day r ntinuous stop ng resumes .
wner a penalty item num page num content the price index content the plied by the ulations for ging all the tracted from eraging the and aprons .
alculated in all apply ger applies that lot will or rejection the appeal dual bumps item num. e contractor respectively pped on any y of num as pag num phalt con ge num num .num man .num .num .num .num com .num .num .num .num rete .num .num cos .num ncrete en ndatory penalt the contract segment with the owner r with an iri owner will wa the owner sh mpulsory corre corrective wo concrete .
the on each of th replace the f concrete affec the asphalt c esting followin after correcti corrective wo iri values sh indicate furthe stated in num. t for correctiv all costs asso contractor .
departm d result s ty for iri cate tor shall be h an iri num eserves the r num mmm aive the num hall notify the ective work p ork shall cons e minimum len he num metre s full width of th cted .
concrete repai ng corrective ive work has ork shall be re hall be used a er mandatory .num and as pe ve work ociated with c st ment of tr specificati pavement st egory a subjected to num mmm with e right to require m. in sections num penalty .
contractor if c procedures sist of remov ngth of any re segments affe he driving lan ir shall conform work s been comp etested using and recalculate penalty the c er num corrective wor tandard ransport ion ers ructure a mandatory exceptions of e compulsory s where com compulsory c val and replac pair area shal ected the con ne and the fu m to num pleted each the same pro ed results sha contractor sha rk including r specifica tation an y penalty of areas defined y corrective w mpulsory corre corrective wo cement of th ll be num metre ntractor shall r ll depth of th num. of the num m ofiler used in t all be binding all be subject retesting shal ations nd infras num for e d in num work on any ective work ork is required e surface cou es .
remove by co e surface cou metre segme the original te .
should the to the manda ll be the respo tructur item num january num each num metr .num. of the section is required th .
urse of aspha old milling an urse of aspha ents containin esting .
the ne new iri resul atory penalty a onsibility of th re num num re ns he alt nd alt ng ew ts as he depa part janua num num num num num num artment ial depth r ary num descript .num this ite recyclin placem .num alte .num alte material .num all mate .num the co .num alternat .num the .num the tes .num the dnum .num alterna .num the .num per tab foa .num water .num wa age .num prelimin .num prio ma test .num stan of trans recycling tion em consists ng the reclaim ment of a recyc ernative a u ernative b u ls erials shall be ontractor shal tive a emulsi e emulsified a e emulsified a ts conducted e emulsified a num for anionic ative b aspha e asphalt bind rformance g ble num perfo aming agents .
ater shall be encyagencies nary sampling or to comme aterial to be p ting necessar the sample concrete the ndard sp portatio pav of inplace p med asphalt cled cold bitu using emulsif using expand supplied by t l process the ified asphalt asphalt shall b asphalt may b in the initial p asphalt shall m c. alt binder der grade sha rade pg as ormance gra e obtained s and shall be g of materials ncing the wo produced duri ry to establish es shall be ta e same day as ecificati on and inf vement struc partial depth pavement r minous mixtu fied asphalt .
ded asphalt .
he contractor rap to conta be a cssnum o be cationic or phase of the d meet the requ all be pg num sphalt binder aded asphalt from a so e free of any d ork the cont ng the reclaim the dmf .
aken from the s sampling to ions frastruc cture reclamation o rap using ure .
r. ain num pas or cssnumh or r anionic bas design mix f uirements of num. r shall meet binder spec ource approv deleterious ma tractor shall o ming operatio e roadbed w the satisfactio cture of the existin mobile recy ssing the num an engineer sed on the pe ormula dmf astm dnum the requirem cification an ved by the aterials .
obtain repres on and shall which shall b on of the engi ng asphalt pa cling equipm num mm sieve .
approved eq rformance in f. num for cationic ments of aas d shall conta appropriate sentative sam carry out the be restored w ineer .
item num page num avement ment and uivalent .
the coating and astm shto mpnum ain no anti regulatory mples of the e laboratory with asphalt pa pag num num num rtial dept ge num num .num des num .num num .num d th recyclin sign mix form alternative a .num the emu basic as institute a .num the emu of num .
.num the dm without a emulsifie .num if the co submit a .num the dmf the asph .num correctiv propertie .num the num alternative b .num an expan outlined contracto .num the dmf density t tensile st .num the con laborato design of .num the dm without a asphalt b .num if the co submit a .num the total asphalt b .num the conte epartme ng mula dmf a ulsified aspha sphalt emuls and the asph ulsified aspha f shall ident adverse effec ed asphalt des mposition of separate dm f report shall alt emulsion ve aggregate es of num. maximum am .
nded asphalt in the wirtge ors responsib f shall identify target dry den rength ratio .
ntractor shall ry to assess f the expande f shall ident adverse effec binder design mposition of separate dm asphalt bind binder .
design rate o ent of num u sta ent of tra pavement st alt dmf shall sion manual halt emulsion lt by mass of tify the maxim cts on mix pr sign rate is ad the existing mf .
contain all in and its techn or portland c num can not be mount of cem mix design s en cold rec bility .
y total asphalt nsity of the m use profess the aggregat ed asphalt mix tify the maxim cts on mix pr rate is adjust the existing mf .
er content of f expanded a nless otherwis andard s ansporta ructure be in accord l manual s manufacture f rap shall h mum allowab roperties .
a n djusted by num pavement ch nformation on nical specifica cement shall e met .
ment allowable shall be condu cycling manu t binder conte mixture dry te sional engine e materials p x. mum allowab roperties .
a ted by num o pavement ch the dmf incl asphalt by ma se approved b specifica ation and dance with th series no .
num rs associatio ave a minimu ble field adju new dmf sh num or greater hanges signif n the type m ations .
be incorpora e for incorpo ucted in acco ual .
preparati ent aggregate ensile strengt eering service proposed for u ble field adju new dmf sh or greater .
hanges signif ludes the exis ss of rap sh by the engine ations infrastr he procedures num numrd ed .
fro on aema .
um residual a ustment to th hall be submi r. ficantly the c manufacturer a ated into the m ration into th ordance with t on of the dm e gradation c th wet tensile es and a q use in and to ustment to th hall be subm ficantly the c sting aged bin hall have a mi eer .
ructure item num january num s outlined in om the aspha asphalt conte he design rat itted when th contractor ma and supplier o mix if the dm e mix shall b the procedure mf shall be th compacted bu e strength an ualified testin o carry out th he design rat itted when th contractor ma nder and virg inimum aspha num num a alt nt te he ay of mf be es he ulk nd ng he te he ay in alt depa part janua num num artment ial depth r ary num num .num .num .num .num submitta .num the co .num at l .num .num .num at we pro stan of trans recycling the water c maximum ex .num the exp water co values o .num the rate minimum the combine num .
fi sieve s num num num the mix sha its soake its dry corrective a properties of als ontractor shal least num days a listing of a the dmf as recycled an least num days ighing and o oduction ndard sp portatio pav content of the xpansion ratio pansion ratio ontents with obtained shall e of water inje m halflife of num ed aggregate nal grading size mm num num .num ll conform to t stre test ed mto ls y mto lsnum tsr aggregate or f table num l submit the fo s in advance o all pieces of e s established nd a copy of a s in advance other controlli ecificati on and inf vement struc e expanded a o and maximum and halflife s a minimum o be used in the ection into the num seconds .
e shall compri table num limits for co the strength re table num ength requir min num num portland cem and table num ollowing of the work equipment inte on the basis all calculations e of the wor ng devices t ions frastruc cture asphalt shall m halflife .
shall be dete of two trials fo e final analysi e expanded a se a mix con num ombined agg pa num num num equirements o num rements nimum requi num num num ment shall be num can not b ended for use s of the prelim s done to det rk recent ca to be used in cture be establishe rmined at a m for each wate is .
asphalt shall nforming to th gregate assing num num num of table num rement kpa num num incorporated e met .
e in the work minary sampl ermine the de alibration cert n controlling ed so as to minimum of f er content .
t be selected t he grading lim num. into the mix and ing of the ma esign binder r tificates of a and monitori item num page num provide the five different the average to provide a mits of table if the dmf aterial to be rate .
ll metering ing the mix pa pag num num num num rtial dept ge num num .num .num .num .num .num befo and eng .num sub num const num .num gen .num .num .num .num num .num equ .num .num .num .num d th recyclin prior to the w supplier on a daily b amount of em upon reque certification o no later than design report ore commenc super eleva ineer .
bmittals are re ruction neral the contract specifically di inplace partia binder and wa to the averag the recycled specified in th the work sh underlying a contains a ne uipment the cold mil the asphalt p slope .
the screenin size specifie design .
singleunit r required grad the mixing u deposited dir epartme ng work in writin basis all fiel mulsified asph est the meth of approval of n num months a ts and results cing work und tion on curve equired in acc tor shall carry rected by the al depth recla ater if require e width specif cold bitumino he contract do all be carried aggregate bas egligible amou ling machine pavement to ng and sizing ed and consi recycling eq dation .
unit shall prod rectly into the sta ent of tra pavement st ng the name d testing and halt or asphal hod propose f the water so after completi s of all field an der this item es of the exi cordance with y out the wo engineer .
aiming of exist ed shall be co fied in the con ous mixture s ocuments .
out inplace o se and that unt of granular shall be self the required equipment sh stently produ quipment mu duce a uniform placing equi andard s ansporta ructure of the propo d sampling r t binder used ed for withd urce and on of the wo nd laboratory the contract isting pavem any crossre rk as indicate ing asphalt co ompleted to an ntract docume hall be spread on the roadb ensures the r material .
fpropelled wi d depth and hall be capab ucing the gra ust be capab m thoroughly pment and no specifica ation and osed emulsifie reports and d d drawal and a ork a final w tests .
tor shall ident ment and sha eferenced item ed in the con oncrete pavem n average de ents .
d and compa bed in a mann inplace part ith a cutting d automaticall ble of reducin adation requ ble of sizing y mixed cold ot windrowed ations infrastr ed asphalt or daily reports application o written report tify crossslop ll submit the m forming par ntract docum ment sizing a pth of num mm cted to an av ner that does tial depth rec drum capable ly controlled ng the rap to ired for the the rap m mix product .
ructure item num january num asphalt binde indicating th of water an containing m pe on tangen values to th rt of this item .
ents andor a and mixing wit m num mm an verage width a not disturb th cycled materi e of reclaimin for grade an o the maximu approved m material to th which shall b num num er he nd mix ts he .
as th nd as he al ng nd m ix he be depa part janua num .
num num num num .
artment ial depth r ary num num .num pla vib sm .num pla .num co pne sm .num test st .num the dem .num the .num if t rew .num operati .num inp wo .num if c com ent num .num alte .num num .num alte .num .num stan of trans recycling acing equipm ratory screed ooth and unif acing equipme mpaction eq eumatictired aller compact trip e contractor monstrate his e test strip sh the test strip work the test s onal constrai place partial d ork area is abo cold milling is mmencement tire milled sur ernative a asphalt con upon approv .num the rec days of g .num after all .num the ins less with .num the spe ernative b the minimu asphalt con upon approv .num the rec maximu ndard sp portatio pav ment shall ev d and shall be form textured ent shall be a uipment shal roller of at le tors as requir shall initially s ability to pro hall be free of is not acce strip .
nts depth recyclin ove numoc and s required p of the cold m rface has rece crete may be val of the engi ycled cold bit good curing w soft spots an situ mean mo h no single tes ecified density m binder tem crete may be val of the engi cycled cold m of num days ecificati on and inf vement struc enly distribut e capable of s surface to th automatically c ll consist of east num t ma red .
stabilize a te duce a stabili visual defects ptable as de g shall only b dor when the partial depth r milling operati eived a lift of r e placed once neer tuminous mix weather sunny nd areas exhib isture content st greater than has been ach mperature sha e placed once neer bituminous m ions frastruc cture te the stabili spreading the he required th controlled for a vibratory d ss and for a est strip num k ized roadbed s after placem etermined by be carried out roadbed is fr recycling sha ion and sha recycled cold e all of the fo xture has bee y warm low h biting surface t of the recyc n num and hieved .
ll be numoc .
e all of the fo mixture has cture ized mix in f e mix without hickness in on r grade and sl drum roller o areas inacces m in length a d in conforma ment and com y the engine when the am ree of standin all commence all continue o d bituminous m ollowing requi en allowed to humidity e defects have cled cold bitum ollowing requi cured for a front of a ta t segregation ne continuous lope .
of at least num ssible to full s and one lane ance with this mpaction .
er the cont mbient temper g water .
e within num d n a daily bas mixture .
irements have cure for a mi e been repair minous mixtu irements have t least num h item num page num mper bar and with a s pass .
num t mass a size rollers in width to item .
ractor shall rature at the days of the sis until the e been met inimum of num red ure is num or e been met hours to a pa pag num num rtial dept ge num num num .num plac .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num d th recyclin .num after .num the s cement of co emulsified as the emulsifi required to p specified den water may b emulsified as the stabilize and super el num mm i than num m .num all alignm tangent .num if the en under num the finished not limited to contaminatio .num soft spo approxim num kgm the comp overlapped processed ar the work .
if the engine the contracto if the asphal value the co the recycled the average aashto tnum .num seconda num days a epartme ng r all soft spots specified dens ld bituminous sphalt or asp ed asphalt o produce a un nsity .
be required to sphalt to facili ed mat shall b evation or w it shall be sh mm respectiv ment and grad and where cr gineer determ num the c surface shal o ravelling se n. ts or areas e mately num mm m³ each per num pacted stabili joints and reas outside er determines or shall be req t content bei ontractor shal d cold bitumin inplace recy num. ary rolling if n after placing .
sta ent of tra pavement st s and areas e sity has been s mixture phalt binder sh or asphalt bi niform thorou o be added to tate uniform m be shaped an where existin aped and co vely .
de transitions rossslope va mines that the contractor wil ll be uniform egregation fl exhibiting sur m depth and num or num ized material repaired are the specified s that num or quired to repr ng added to l suspend wo nous mixture s cled mix the ecessary to a andard s ansporta ructure xhibiting surfa achieved .
hall be added inder rate sh ughly coated o the rap pri mixing .
nd compacted g crossslope mpacted to a s shall be smo ries per num e contractor l be required in texture an lushing poth rface defects paved with tw num and num adjacent to th eas in the r areas of sta r more of the rocess the en the field mix ork and subm shall be comp oretical maxi achieve the re specifica ation and ace defects h d to the rap a hall be adjus recycled cold or to or conc d to the pree e was less th a value not le ooth includin num. has not met to reprocess nd free of su holing cracki prior to pav wo lifts of asp or num to he repair .
recycled cold abilization sh area in a sec ntire section o x varies by mit a revised d pacted smoo mum relative equired densi ations infrastr have been rep at the design sted by the d bituminous currently with existing rates han num mm ess than num g tangent to c the requirem or pad the en rface defects ing deflection ving shall be phalt concrete match the fin d bituminous hall be consid ction of the w of the work un num from th dmf for appro oth to a minim e density as ity shall be p ructure item num january num paired and rate .
contractor a mixture of th addition of th of crossslop m or more tha num mm or mor curve curve t ments specifie ntire section .
s including b ns rutting an cold milled t e b at a rate o nal elevation o s mixture a dered as part work is defecti nder this item he dmf targe oval .
mum of num o determined b permitted with num num as he he pe an re to ed ut nd to of of nd of ve m. et of by in depa part janua num .
num artment ial depth r ary num num .num tra rec .num .num .num quality .num the the .num the ver .num .num em per sup com .num .num for rate .num .num for mix freq day .num qc thic .num qc me .num qc lan con stan of trans recycling affic including cycled cold bit the contra equipment a a maximum the contra damaged by control qc e contractor e quality of wo e contractor rification of the the accura binder rate s slip that acc mulsified asph r num lanekm pplied by the mpleted label samples sh the transfer r alternative a e of num sample samples sh astm cnum be tested fo r alternative xture meets t quency of num ys of samplin c testing sha ckness requir c testing shal eets the requir c tests for num ekm .
qc te ncrete .
ndard sp portatio pav construction tuminous mix ctor shall su and material convoy spee ctor shall be y traffic while shall implem ork .
shall be res eir accuracy d cy of the me shall be verifi companies ea halt or asphalt or a minimum e owner .
eac .
hall be taken line after at l a the rap s e per lanekm hall be tested num and moist r residual asp b qc sampl the requirem per lanekm .
g. all ensure tha ements speci ll ensure tha rements of num num and num est results s ecificati on and inf vement struc n vehicles sh xture until the upply any pil required to c ed of num kmh .
e responsible curing .
ment a compr sponsible for during the co etering devic ed by the co ch tanker del t binder samp m of num per co ch sample sh from a samp least num kg shall be samp .
by the cont ure content .
a phalt content ing and testin ents of table qc test res at the depth ified under num t density of t num .
num shal hall be subm ions frastruc cture hall be kept o mat is able to lot vehicles w convoy traffic .
for ensuring rehensive qua calibration o urse of the w ces controllin ontractor by ch livered at the ples shall be ontract to be hall be a mi pling spigot on g has been dr pled by the c tractor if requ a composite astm dnum ng shall ensu e num .
sam ults shall be of recycled num. the compacte ll be performe mitted to the cture off the freshly o carry traffic with operato through or a g that the rec ality control of measuring work .
ng the emuls hecking the q work site .
taken at the tested by the nimum of num n the transfer rawn from the contractor from uested by the sample of ea num. ure that the r mples shall b submitted to cold bitumin ed recycled c ed at a minim e engineer p y placed and without dama r and all ot round the wo cycled pavem qc program equipment a sified asphalt quantities on t work site at e owner with l and identi r line or from e tanker .
m behind the e engineer fo ach days sa recycled cold be taken at o the enginee nous mixture cold bitumino mum frequenc prior to plac item num page num compacted age .
ther labour ork area at ment is not m to ensure and regular or asphalt the delivery t a rate of num h containers ified with a m the end of e paver at a r gradation mples shall bituminous a minimum er within num meets the ous mixture cy of num per ing asphalt pa pag num num rtial dept ge num num .num qua .num .num .num .num .num .num num .num gua .num .num .num .num d th recyclin ality assuranc the contract requirements owner to ver thickness m edge of the s .num thicknes greater th the spec for alternativ contractor s locations as d .num the slab each slab s packaged in labelled wate engineer with prior to the perform a vis .num the recy deflection emulsified as arantee the contract work against owner blam workmanship inadequate t other factors structural fai construed as reprocessed reprocessing promptly and two years aft num and for the purp areas that co shall be con entire work u epartme ng ce qa tor shall in th s and shall la rify test result easurements stabilized mat ss requiremen han the spec ified thicknes ve a prior to shall obtain t directed by th samples will ample shall nonabsorptiv erproof conta hin four hours planned ove sual compacti ycled cold bitu n cracking or sphalt or asph tor shall for a t failure and d meless in all p poor or i raffic control .
ilure of the m s failure ho in accordanc g consisting d efficiently a fter its comple d num. poses of this omprise num sidered a co under this item sta ent of tra pavement st he presence o abel and provi s. s shall be take t with a shove nts are met w ified thicknes s. o the planned two nummm he engineer .
be tested for be dry cut r ve materials t ainers and de s of sampling erlay of the on assessme uminous mixtu r shoving und alt binder sam a period of tw defects includ claims aris incompatible failure to pr mat and area wever the e ce with work u of fulllane r as directed by etion guaran item and at or more of t omplete failur m. andard s ansporta ructure of the engine ide the duplic en by the eng el at a minimu when at least num ss and no ind d overlay of t x nummm s r moisture con removed from to protect the elivered by t . recycled cold ent of the surf ure shall be c der the weight mples shall be wo years afte ding surface d sing from the materials i ractice proven as of rutting o engineer sha under this item reprocessing y the enginee ntee the repro the discretion the area proc e and the c specifica ation and eer obtain do cate samples gineer by mea um frequency num of all me dividual meas he recycled c slab samples ntent .
m the recycle sample integ he contracto d bituminous face to be ove compacted sm t of a loaded t tested by the r completion defects per num e work wh improper de n partial dep or other depr all decide as m. at specified er .
the cont ocessing aga n of the eng cessed or re contractor sha ations infrastr ouble samples to the engine ans of excava y of num per lane easurements surement is num cold bituminou s per kilomet ed cold bitum grity sealed in or in good co s mixture the erlaid .
mooth and sh tandem truck e owner .
of the work num and hether resulti esign of app th recycling p ressions sha s to what a depth shall ractor shall f ainst defects a ineer failure processes on all be require ructure item num january num s for all testin eer to allow th ating along th ekm .
are equal to o nummm less tha us mixture th tre at rando minous mixture n appropriate ondition to th e owner sha howing minim k. guarantee th d shall hold th ng from poo plication rate procedures o all generally b reas must b be carried o for a period o and failure pe of intermitte n this contra ed to redo th num num ng he he or an he m e ely he all al he he or s or be be ut of er nt ct he depa part janua num num artment ial depth r ary num measure .num the qu cold bit basis of .num payme identifie .num the ow correct .num ha .num payme accorda .num adj the em ave .num for eac shall pa and num more th .num for eac owner paving work ho .num portlan num .num the den stan of trans recycling ment for p uantity to be tuminous mixt payment nt for work u ed under the c wner shall r ive aggregate ulage for corr nt adjustmen ance with item justments for e end of eac mulsified asph eraged for the ch occurrence ay the owner num for each han num of th ch occurrence a penalty of is not contin ours until pa d cement a num and num e quantity of nsity x mix de ndard sp portatio pav payment measured fo ture reclaime under this ite contract .
reimburse the e supplied and rective aggreg nt for a cha m num. a change in ch month ba alt is used th e volume rece e that partial r a penalty of day that par he contractor e that paving num for ea nuous stoppe aving resumes pproved by .num sha portland cem esign cement ecificati on and inf vement struc or payment s d recycled a em shall inclu e contractor d incorporate gate shall be nge in the p the pg aspha ased on the he percent re eived during t depth recycli f num for e rtial depth rec s normal wor is not perform ach day until ed on any da s. the enginee all be paid in a ment to be pa application ra ions frastruc cture hall be the n nd placed in a ude a separat the actual ed into the mix paid under ite pg asphalt alt binder pric weigh slips esidue and sp hat month to ing is not per each day unti cycling is not rk hours unt med per num paving comm ay for more t er supplied accordance w aid shall be c ate x theoretic cture number of sq accordance w te unit price cost to a m x per num em num. binder price ce payment q received du pecific gravity calculate the rformed per num l partial depth t continuous til partial dept num the mences and than num of and incorpo with item num. calculated us cal length x w uare metres with this item .
for each alte maximum of .num num shall be ca quantity shall ring that mo y of the emul e monthly adju num the h recycling co stopped on a th recycling re contractor s num for eac the contract rated into th sing the mix d width x depth .
item num page num of recycled .
ernative as numt of num. alculated in be made at onth .
when sion will be ustment .
e contractor ommences any day for esumes .
hall pay the ch day that tors normal he mix per design bulk depa full janua num num num num num num artment depth rec ary num descript .num this ite underly material .num all mate .num asphalt .num the .num per mp foa .num the arri with .num water .num wa age .num asphalt .num the det .num .num mix de .num an out dm .num the den ten .num the lab des .num the co ma stan of trans cycling tion em consists o ying granular ls erials shall be t binder e asphalt bind rformance g pnum table num p aming agents .
e contractor iving at the w h astm dnum ater shall be encyagencies t binder cont e percent by termined by th for the pur assume an a binder requ length x wid sign expanded a tlined in the w mf shall be t e dmf shall nsity target d sile strength e contractor boratory to a sign of the ex e dmf shall ntractor to a aterial is enco ndard sp portatio pav of inplace ful material and supplied by t der grade sha grade pg performance shall provide work area or num .
sample co e obtained s and shall b tent of expand y mass of vi he mix design pose of esta asphalt binde ired shall be th x depth .
sphalt mix d wirtgen cold the contracto identify total dry density of ratio .
r shall use assess the ag xpanded asph correctly sim adjust the dm untered in the ecificati on and inf vement struc l depth reclam placement o he contractor all be pg num asphalt bind graded asph e one asphalt r a minimum ntainers and from a sou be free of any ded asphalt m irgin asphalt n. blishing the er content of num e calculated u esign shall b d recycling ors responsib asphalt bind f the mixture professional ggregate mat halt mix .
mulate field co mf each time e work .
ions frastruc cture mation of the of an expande r. num. der shall me halt binder sp t binder samp of one samp labels shall b urce approv deleterious m mix binder adde unit price fo num for the e using a mix be conducted manual .
pre ility .
der content a dry tensile s engineering terials propos onditions and e a significa cture e existing pav ed asphalt mix eet the req pecification a ple every fifth ple per contra be supplied by ved by the materials .
ed to the un or expanded a expanded asp density of num d in accordan eparation of t aggregate gra trength wet t g services a sed for use i d it shall be nt variation i vement incorp x. uirements of and shall cont h tanker load act taken in a y the owner .
appropriate nstabilized m asphalt the b phalt mix .
the num kgmnum x nce with the the design m adation comp tensile streng and a qualif in and to ca the responsi in the prope item num page num porating the f aashto tain no anti of material accordance regulatory mix shall be bidder shall e amount of theoretical procedures mix formula pacted bulk gth and the fied testing arry out the bility of the rties of the fu pag num num num ll depth r ge num num .num .num .num num .num num submit .num the of e .num the form pulv with eng .num d recycling the total asp virgin expand the water c maximum ex .num the exp water co obtained .num the rate minimum the combine num .
corrective ag the existing a the minimum .num the max it ttals contractor s equipment inte contractor s mula dmf b verizing opera hot mix asp ineer .
the dmf su design perce epartme phalt binder c ded binder .
content of the xpansion ratio ansion ratio ntents with a shall be used e of water inj m halflife of num ed aggregate final g sieve ggregate or p aggregate ble m requirement ximum amoun test m ts soaked its dry m ts shall submit a ended for use shall submit based on repr ation .
the sam phalt concrete ubmission sha entage by ma sta ent of tra pavement st content of th e expanded and maximu and halflife a minimum of d in the final a ection into th num seconds .
s shall comp t grading lim e size mm num num num portland cem end fails to co s of table num nt of cement a t streng method mto lsnum mto lsnum sr at least num da e in the work .
at least num d resentative sa mples shall be e on the sam all include a ss of new as andard s ansporta ructure e design mix asphalt shal m halflife .
shall be det two trials for analysis .
he expanded prise a mix co table num its for comb ent shall be s onform to the num are not m allowable for i table num th requirem minim num ays prior to co days prior to amples of the e obtained fro me day that s copy of all c phalt binder t specifica ation and x includes the ll be establis termined at a each water c asphalt sha onforming to bined aggreg passing num num num supplied for i e grading limi met .
ncorporation ments mum requir num num num ommencing th commencing e material to b om the roadb samples are calculations p to be added t ations infrastr e existing ag shed so as t a minimum o content .
the a ll be selected the grading gate incorporation its of table num in the mix sh rements kpa num num he work a li g the work th be produced b bed which sh taken as ap performed to to the unstab ructure item num january num ged binder an to provide th of five differe average value d to provide limits of tab into the mix num andor hall be num. a st of all piece he design m by the inplac hall be restore pproved by th determine th bilized materia num num nd he nt es a le if if es ix ce ed he he al .
depa full janua num num num num num .
num .
artment depth rec ary num .num before and su engine .num the co asphalt .num the co used .
.num the co applica .num the co report c .num submit constru .num genera .num the spe .num equipm num .num ge .num .num num .num ful .num .num .num .num stan of trans cycling commencing per elevation er .
ontractor shal t binder suppl ontractor sha ontractor shal ation of water ontractor shal containing mix tals are requi ction al e contractor ecifically direct ment neral equipment s the requirem equipment s l depth recla the pulveriz pavement a corrective a asphalt in a the pulveriz sensor to ac the aggreg corrective ag the pulveriz injecting and and the follo .num a syste percenta ndard sp portatio pav g work under n on curves l submit in wr lier .
all submit a d l submit in w and certifica l submit no l x design repo red in accord shall carry ou ted by the eng shall be desig ments of this i shall be of ad amation and s zerstabilizer and underlyin aggregate or controlled ma zerstabilizer ccurately main gate delivery ggregates int zerstabilizer d blending ex owing addition m to control age of water f ecificati on and inf vement struc this item the of the existin riting prior to daily report in riting upon re tion of approv ater than num m orts and resul dance with an ut the work a gineer .
gned and ope tem .
equate capac stabilizing eq shall be ca ng aggregate portland cem anner and pr shall have a ntain a preset vehicle sha o the pulveriz shall have a xpanded asph nal features and monitor for optimum c ions frastruc cture e contractor s ng pavement commencing ndicating the equest the m val of the wat months after c ts of all field a y crossrefere as indicated i erated to pro city and in go quipment pable of pulv e to the dept ment into the roducing a un cutting drum t depth of cut all have a s zed material an expanded halt uniformly the percenta compaction cture shall identify t and shall s g the work th e amount of methods prop ter source .
completion of and laborator enced item fo in the contra oduce an end ood working o verizing and h specified in e mix if requ niform expand m at least num m t. system for c if required pe asphalt injec throughout t age of aspha crossslope o ubmit the va he name of th asphalt conc posed for with the work a ry tests .
orming part of act documents d product com rder .
reclaiming t n num in uired adding ded asphalt m m wide and an controlled int er num. ction system he unstabilize alt binder add item num page num on tangents alues to the he proposed crete binder hdrawal and final written f this item .
s andor as mplying with the existing ncorporating g expanded mix .
n automatic tegration of capable of ed material ded and the fu pag num num num num num ll depth r ge num num num .num num .num num .num num .num d recycling .num a sys treat .num a sy trave .num a he asphalt bind .num each as equipped .num ther .num rear is ca .num the con area so a water tanke .num each wa num lm diameter .num the con area so a graderpave .num the grad slope con .num the con .num the pave a vibrato .num the conti .num the longi compaction .num compact pneumat rollers s epartme stem of nozzl ment and is a stem to contr el speed and m ating system er tankers phalt binder d with the follo rmometer to s r feed valve w pable of drain ntractor shall as to provide ers ater tanker in and flexib r of num mm a ntractor shall as to provide r der used to s ntrol .
tractor shall u er shall be eq ry screed cap paver shall be inuous pass t paver shall itudinal grade equipment tion equipme tictired roller maller compa sta ent of tra pavement st les that unifor adjustable for rol and regula mass of mate to maintain o tanker shall owing show binder te with minimum ning the conte determine the a continuous shall be eq ble noncolla and quickrele determine the a continuous shape the pu use a paver fo quipped with pable of vibra e capable of to the specifie be equipped e and transver ent shall cons r of at least actors as requ andard s ansporta ructure rmly applies e varying width ate the applic erial and operating tem have allroun emperature in m internal dia ents of the tan e number an s mixing opera quipped with apsing supply ease coupling e number an s supply of wa ulverized mat or placement distributing a ting the full w spreading the ed cross slope d with autom rse slope .
sist of a vibra num t mass a uired .
specifica ation and expanded asp hs of treatme cation of expa mperature .
nd heat reten n the bottom t meter of num m nk .
d size of tan ation and min h pumps of y hoses that gs .
d size of tan ater to the mix terial must b of the expand ugers for the width of the m e mix evenly e and grade .
matic screed atory drum rol and for area ations infrastr phalt across t nt anded aspha ntion cladding third of the ta mm when full kers deliverin nimal disruptio f a minimum t have a min kers deliverin xing operation be equipped w ded asphalt m full width to ix placed .
in front of the controls for ller of at leas as inaccessib ructure item num january num the full width o lt in relation t g and shall b nk y opened tha ng to the wo on to traffic .
m capacity o nimum intern ng to the wo n. with automat mix .
be paved an e screed in on the control o st num t mass ble to full siz num num of to be at rk of al rk tic nd ne of a ze depa full janua num num artment depth rec ary num .num test st .num the dem .num the .num if t rew .num if t req .num pulveriz .num the spe .num .num pul rem .num co the .num afte spe .num suc .num bef tan the .num .num .num the def def .num stan of trans cycling trip e contractor monstrate his e test strip mu the test strip work the test s the material quest as appr zing stabilizi e existing asp ecified in the c in areas wh work includ the dmf pr grade and a lverized but u moved from th rrective aggre e pulverized s er pulverizing ecified in the c ccessive pass fore commen gents and su e engineer .
the stabilize slope and s more than nummm or all alignmen tangent and e finished ex fects includin flections rutti soft spots o depth repla asphalt con compacted ndard sp portatio pav shall initially sher ability to ust be free of is not acce strip .
changes sign roved by the e ng grading a phalt concrete contract doc here the exist ding milling to rovision of ad all related wo unstabilized m he surface of egate or port urface prior to g is complete contract doc ses of the pul ncing work u uperelevation ed mat shall superelevatio nummm it more than num. nt and grade t d where cross xpanded asp ng but not lim ng and conta or areas exh aced with num crete b at stabilized ma ecificati on and inf vement struc stabilize a te produce a st visual defect ptable as de nificantly ano engineer .
and compact e and underly cuments and ing pavemen o reduce pave dditional equip ork shall be th material partic the work .
tland cement o stabilization the contract cuments .
lverizerstabil under this ite on curves of be shaped a n or where t shall be sh nummm resp transitions sh sslope varies halt surface mited to rave mination .
hibiting surfac num mm aggreg a rate of num aterial adjace ions frastruc cture est strip num k tabilized road ts after gradin etermined by other test str tion ying aggregat to a combine nt is thicker th ement thickne pment provis he responsibi cles exceedin if required t n. tor shall stab lizer shall be em the cont f the existing and compacte existing cro haped and c pectively .
hall be smooth s per num. shall be uni elling segreg ce defects pr gate base as num kgmnum each nt to the repa cture m in length a dbed in confo ng and compa y the engine rip can be d te base shall ed depth suffic han anticipate ess prior to p sion of additio ility of the co ng num mm in to satisfy the bilize to the w a minimum o tractor shall g pavement a ed to the pre ossslope was compacted to h including ta .num. form in textu gation flushin rior to paving s required an h to match th air .
and one lane ormance with action .
er the cont one at the c be pulverized cient to satisf ed by the co ulverizing ad onal material ntractor .
any dimensi dmf shall b idth and mini f num mm .
identify cros and submit th eexisting rate s less than num o a value no angent to curv ure and free ng potholing g shall be re nd paved with he final eleva item num page num in width to this item .
ractor shall contractors d to a width fy the dmf .
ontractor all djustment of to maintain on shall be be added to mum depth ssslope on he values to es of cross nummm or t less than ve curve to of surface g cracking emoved full h two lifts of ation of the fu pag num num num ll depth r ge num num .num .num num .num ope .num .num .num .num .num num .num qua .num .num .num .num .num .num .num d recycling the expande place expan aashto tnum if the asphal target value erational cons the contract when the s temperature the minimum prior to term this item has completed fo neither publ asphalt surfa surface .
paving with a cured for at exhibiting sur ality control q the contract to the require a lot is that the area of e the contract qc sampling num .
qc samplin requirements per lanekm .
sampling .
qc testing s requirements qc testing s expanded as qc tests for lanekm .
the concrete .
epartme ed asphalt su ded asphalt num. lt content bei the contracto straints tor shall not c tabilized mix is below num m binder temp mination of op s begun shal or the specifie ic nor const ace until the c asphalt concr least num hou rface defects qc tor shall be re ements of this portion of the xpanded asp limits .
g and testing s g and testin s shown in ta .
the qc tes shall ensure t s of num hall ensure th sphalt mix the num an e qc test res sta ent of tra pavement st rface shall be mix theoret ng added to or shall suspe conduct ando x shows sig c. perature shall perations each l have been ed widths .
ruction traffic contractor ha rete shall be urs to a max have been re esponsible fo s item .
sampl e work being phalt stabilizat shall ensure t ng shall en able num .
s st results sha that the dept .
hat the expan eoretical max d num s sults shall be andard s ansporta ructure e compacted tical maximu the field mix end work and or continue th ns of frees be num c. h day the le pulverized a c shall be al as determined allowed only ximum of num d epaired to the r all qc samp ling and testin considered f tion comprisin that the pg a sure that th samples shal all be submit h of the expa nded asphalt ximum relativ shall be perfo e submitted t specifica ation and to a minimum um relative x varies by d submit a rev e expanded a standing wat ength of road and all mixing llowed on th d that such t after the exp days and aft e approval of t pling and test ng shall be ca for acceptanc ng one lanek asphalt binder he expanded l be taken at tted to the e anded aspha mix is compa ve density .
ormed at a mi to the engine ations infrastr m of num of t density as d num from t vised design f asphalt proce ter or when dbed on whic g shaping an he newly plac traffic shall no panded aspha ter all soft sp the engineer ting to ensure arried out by l ce and is furt kilometre of r r meets the re d asphalt m a minimum f engineer with alt mix meets acted to at lea inimum frequ eer prior to p ructure item num january num the average in determined b the mix desig for approval .
ess during rai n the ambie ch work unde nd compactin ced expande ot damage th alt surface ha pots and area .
e conformanc lot .
ther defined a roadway with equirements o mix meets th frequency of hin num days o s the thicknes ast num of th ency of num pe placing aspha num num n by gn n nt er ng ed he as as ce as in of he num of ss he er alt depa full janua num num num artment depth rec ary num .num quality .num the req ow .num thi edg .num .num prio visu .num .num guaran .num the wo sha wo ina pro .num str con rep .num re pro two num .num for are sha ent measure .num the qu asphalt .num overlap areas o stan of trans cycling assurance q e contractor quirements a wners verifica ckness meas ge of the stab thickness re greater than the specified or to the plan ual compactio the expand deflection c ntee e contractor ork against fa all hold the o rkmanship p dequate traf ocedures and uctural failure nstrued as fa processed in a processing c omptly and ef o years after num and num r the purpose eas that comp all be conside tire work und ment for p uantity to be t mix placed i pped joints an of stabilization ndard sp portatio pav qa shall in the p nd shall labe tion of test re surements sh bilized mat wit equirements a n the specified d thickness .
nned overlay on assessme ded asphalt cracking or sh shall for a pe ailure and def wner blamele poor or inco ffic control dor other fact e of the mat ailure howev accordance w consisting of fficiently as d its completio num. es of this item prise num or ered a comp er this item .
payment measured fo n accordance nd repaired a n shall not be ecificati on and inf vement struc presence of th el and provide esults .
hall be taken th a shovel a are met when d thickness a of the expan nt of the surfa surface sha hoving under t eriod of two y fects includin ess in all claim ompatible m failure to p tors .
and areas o ver the eng with work und f fulllane pu directed by th on guarantee m and at the more of the plete failure a r payment sh e with this item reas in the st e measured s ions frastruc cture he engineer e duplicate s by the engi at a minimum n at least num and no individ nded asphalt ace to be ove ll be compa the weight of years after co ng surface de ms arising fro aterials imp practice prov of rutting or o gineer shall der this item .
ulverizing and he engineer .
e the reproces e discretion o area proces and the cont hall be the nu m. tabilized surfa eparately for cture obtain doubl samples to th neer by mea frequency of of all measu dual measure t surface the erlaid .
acted smooth a loaded tand ompletion of t efects as des om work whe proper design ven expande other depress decide as to d stabilizatio the contract ssing against f the enginee ssed or repro tractor shall umber of squ ace and pulv payment .
le samples fo he engineer t ans of digging num per lanekm urements are ment is num m e owner shal h and showin dem truck .
the work gu scribed in num ether resulting n of applica ed asphalt s sions shall g o what area n shall be tor shall for t defects and er failure of ocesses on th be required t are metres o verized areas item num page num or all testing to allow the g along the m. e equal to or m less than l perform a ng minimal arantee the num and g from poor ation rates stabilization generally be as must be carried out a period of d failure per intermittent his contract to redo the of expanded outside the fu pag num ll depth r ge num num basis o .num pay .num com cont the num .num .num .num .num pay acco .num .num the agg .num .num for own pavi work .num port num .num d recycling of payment ment for wor mpensation to tent as verifi supplier to v .num for th if the actual contractor s the month pr if the actual a shall reimburs determinatio ment adjustm ordance with adjustments the end of emulsified as averaged for owner shall regate suppli haulage for c each occurre ner a penalty ing is not con k hours unti tland cement .num shall be the quantity density x mix epartme t rk under this i o the contrac ed by the co verify the amo he total payab asphalt bind hall reimburs eceding the m asphalt binde se the contra n of payment ment for a c item num. for a change each month sphalt is used the volume r reimburse th ed and placed corrective agg ence that pav of num for ntinuous sto l paving resum t as approve e paid in acco of portland x design ceme sta ent of tra pavement st tem shall be ctor or the o ontractors da ount in the la ble tonnage s er content is se the owner month of the t er content exc ctor at the act ts and credits change in th e in the pg as based on th d the percen received durin e contractor d if required .
gregate shall ving is not pe r each day un pped on any mes .
d by the en ordance with cement to be ent applicatio andard s ansporta ructure at the unit pr owner for diff aily weigh slip ast tanker an shall be as fo s less than th r using the m tender openin ceeds the ass tual invoiced a shall be mad he pg aspha sphalt binder he weigh sli nt residue and ng that month the actual co be paid unde erformed per ntil paving co y day for mor gineer supp item num. e paid shall b n rate x theor specifica ation and rice .
ferences betw ps plus appro nd assumed ollows he assumed mtos pg asp ng .
sumed asphal amount suppli de upon comp alt binder pr price paymen ps received d specific gra h to calculate ost to a maxim er item num .
num th ommences an re than num plied and inco be calculated retical length ations infrastr ween actual opriate docum asphalt bind asphalt binde phalt binder lt binder conte ied by the con pletion of the rice shall be nt quantity sh during that avity of the em the monthly a mum of num he contractor nd num for of the contr orporated int d using the m x width x dep ructure item num january num asphalt binde mentation fro er content pe er content th price index fo ent the owne ntractor .
work .
calculated hall be made a month .
whe mulsion will b adjustment .
numt of correctiv r shall pay th each day tha ractors norm to the mix pe mix design bu pth .
num num er m er he or er in at en be ve he at al er lk depa micro janua num num num num artment osurfacin ary num descript .num this ite seal the material .num all mate .num polyme .num the app .num em sho .num the will astm astm astm astm .num aggreg .num agg num .num gra by stan of trans g tion em consists o e existing pav ls erials shall be er modified em e binder sha proved equiva mulsified asph ow no signs o e addition of not be perm test m dnum m dnum m dnum m dnum gate gregate shall when teste adation of ag more than the a si num num num num num num num ndard sp portatio pav of supply pro vement surfac supplied by t mulsified asph all be a quic alent conform halt and polym of separation w polymers or itted .
residue by d test tempe softening po penetration a kinematic vi consist of num ed in accordan gregate shall e specified gr aggregate g astm eve size num mm num mm num mm .num mm num µm num µm num µm num µm ecificati on and inf vement struc oduction and ce improve s he contractor halt binder ckset polym ming to the req mer modified within num day other additive tab binder r prop distillation erature should tests o oint at num o c num iscosity at num num crushed nce with mto l be within the rading limits .
tab grading limit perce num num num num num ions frastruc cture placement o skid resistanc r. mer modified quirements in asphalt sha ys after delive es after the m ble num requirements perty by mass d be num o c on residue num g num s num m num o c d rock having o lsnum .
e grading lim ble num ts and grada ent passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num cture of polymermo e and correc cationic type dicated in ta ll be homoge ery .
manufacture o s c mm g a microdev mits of table num ation toleran tolera odified micros ct rutting .
e cssnumh e ble num. eneous after of the emulsif require num numo c num num mmnum val loss not g num and sh nces ance limits num num num num num num num num item num page num surfacing to emulsion or mixing and fied asphalt ement min .
c min num nums min .
greater than hall not vary mic pag num num is is is is is is is num crosurfac ge num num .num othe .num .num .num .num num .num mix .num .num test ssa tbnum ssa tbnum ssa tbnum ssa tbnum ssa tbnuma ssa tbnum ssa tbnum num submit .num the agg tab .num the tota the q d cing er materials mineral filler free of lumps water shall b polymer mod residue .
th incorporated additives ma quickset pro mix design a design the contract mix design sh all compone proposed by wet co excess wet st wet tr latera specif classif mix tim ttals contractor s regate gradat le num .
contractor s l quantity and quantities use departme shall be port s. be clean and f difiers shall co e polymer so into the emu ay be added operties and to nd are compa tor shall desig hall conform t nt materials the contracto micr ohesion at num at num m s asphalt by l tripping rack abrasion l displaceme ic gravity afte fication comp me at num c shall submit tion final mix shall submit d distribution ed for each co sta ent of tra pavement st tland cement free of harmfu onsist of a m olids along w lsified asphal to the emuls o increase ad atible with the gnate mix pro to the require used in the or for use in t table rosurfacing m propert num minutes mi minutes min .
lwt sand ad n loss one sixd nt er num cycle patibility aaa at least num d x design and at the beginn rate of micro omponent ag andard s ansporta ructure hydrated lim ul salts oil ac inimum of num with special q t at the colloid ion mix durin dhesion only e other compo oportions and ements listed mix design s he work .
num mix properti ty n. set traffic dhesion hour soak day soak s of num kg a baa days prior to results of the ning of each osurfacing pla ggregate emu specifica ation and me or approv cid and other polymer so quicksetting d mill .
ng constructio if they have b onents of the d prepare the in table num shall be repr es placing any e microdeva day of work aced the prev ulsion minera ations d infrast ed equivalen r deleterious m olids by mass emulsifier ag on to provide been included microsurfacin e job mix form num. resentative of requ num kg num kg num g pass num num num num .
num grad cont num y material in al test and the k a written su vious day inc al filler and ad tructure item num january num t and shall b materials .
s of the aspha gents shall b e control of th d as part of th ng mix .
mula .
the fin f the materia uirements gcm min .
gcm min .
gmnum max .
num min .
num gmnum num gmnum max .
num max .
e points min .
trollable to num s min .
the work th e tests listed ummary of th cluding a list o dditives .
e num num be alt be he he al als he in he of depa micro janua num num num artment osurfacin ary num constru .num genera .num the spe .num mic .num the com .num mic .num the pro cali .num the num dur .num .num .num the kep .num on ope aro .num equipm .num equ pro .num rot bitu .num mix ma .num .num stan of trans g ction al e contractor ecifically direct crosurfacing s e application mbined minim crosurfacing s e contractor oportioning de ibration results e proportionin num t of micros ration of the w a change in a mechanic repair is requ e contractor pt off the fresh twolane tw erator and ot ound the cons ment uipment for t oduct complyi tary power br uminous surfa xing equipme achine specific the machin and deliveri water to a re on a continu the machin materials to ndard sp portatio pav shall carry ou ted by the eng shall be place shall consis mum rate of ap hall not be ap shall upon evices to the s prior to begi ng devices sha surfacing plac work aggregate so cal failure to uired .
shall be resp hly placed mix woway high ther labour e struction .
the work sha ng with the re rooms shall b aces .
ent shall be a cally designed e shall be a c ng aggregate evolving mult uous flow bas ne shall have the proportio ecificati on and inf vement struc ut the work a gineer .
ed to a width a st of a minim pplication of num pplied before j no less than satisfaction inning any mic all be recalibr cement and ource since the the applicatio ponsible to e xture for the t hways the c quipment and all be designe equirements o be capable of an automatic d and manufa continuousflo e emulsified tiblade doub is .
sufficient sto oning controls ions frastruc cture as indicated i as specified in mum of a sc num kgmnum .
june numst or afte n num hours n of the engin crosurfacing o rated to the s also when e e previous cal on system an ensure that tr time required contractor sh dor materials ed operated of this item .
f cleaning gra csequenced actured to lay ow mixing un asphalt mine leshaft mixe orage capacit s. cture in the contra n the contrac cratch coat a er august numst notice to the eer and sha operation .
satisfaction of ither of the fo libration or ndor proporti affic includin to prevent da hall supply a s required to and mainta avel sand di selfpropelle y microsurfaci it capable of eral filler con er and discha ty to maintain act documents ct documents and a final c t. engineer c all submit a c the engineer ollowing occu oning device ng constructio amage to the any pilot veh convoy traffic ined to produ irt and other d microsurfac ng .
accurately pr ntrolsetting a arging the mix n an adequat item num page num s andor as s. coat with a calibrate the copy of the r after every urs over the s for which on traffic is surface .
hicles with c through or uce an end debris from cing mixing roportioning additive and xed product te supply of mic pag num num num crosurfac ge num num .num .num .num .num num .num stoc .num .num .num .num num .num qua .num .num .num d cing .num individua mix shall counters at any tim a num m metal the spreadin evenly throug attached to th .num there sh and an a .num the spre uniform c .num the spre compens the rutfilling of a rut box is a stringline o and meet the ckpiling the contract stockpiles sh contaminatio throughout t stockpile to c aggregates f ality control a quality contr the work fr asphalt emul the contract num hours of te quality assur these tests s contractor of departme al volume or w be provided or similar de me .
or wood strai ng machine s ghout the box he mixing ma hall be a front adjustable rea eader box an consistency a eader box s sate for variat g spreader bo s at the discre or other devic e existing pav tor shall be fu hall be placed n of the stock the duration cover num days from different nd quality as rol testing sha rom and incl sion to the de tor shall provi esting .
rance testing shall be made f or replace t sta ent of tra pavement st weight contro and properly vices used in ght edge sha shall be equip x with an att achine and sh t seal to ensu ar seal for fina d rear strike and a free flow shall have s tions in the pa ox shall be sp etion of the c ce must be p vement edge .
ully responsib d on a level w kpiled materia of the contr of production sources shal ssurance tes all be the resp uding the pr esign and pla ide the engin may be cond e available to he specified q andard s ansporta ructure ols for proport marked .
pro n material cali ll be provided pped with pad tached conve hall be used t ure no loss of al strikeoff .
off shall be s w of material t uitable mean avement surfa pecifically des ontractor .
rovided to en le for stockpil welldrained b al .
ract the con n of microsurfa ll be stockpile ting ponsibility of t roduction of cement of the eer with a co ducted by the the contract quality contro specifica ation and tioning each oportioning de ibration and t d for checking ddles to agita entional auge to spread the f mixture at th so designed to the rear str ns provided ace .
signed for rut nsure the long le sites .
base in such ntractor shall acing work .
ed separately the contracto the aggrega e final produc py of all quali e owner durin tor upon requ ol testing .
ations d infrast material to be evices are usu o determine m g surface dev ate and sprea red surfacing mixture unifo he pavement and operated rikeoff .
to maneuve filling applica gitudinal edg a manner so be sufficient .
or throughout ates and poly ct. ity control tes ng the work .
uest but will tructure item num january num e added to th ually revolutio material outp iations .
ad the materi g spreader bo ormly .
t contact poin d to achieve er the box t ations .
the us es are straig o as to preve t aggregate every stage o ymer modifie st results with the results o not relieve th e num num he on ut al ox nt a to se ht nt in of ed in of he depa micro janua num num num .
artment osurfacin ary num .num guaran .num the are .num the aga .num .num .num .num .num ge fail .num ret effi its and .num for are dee are .num placem num .num ge .num .num .num .num .num stan of trans g ntee e warranty pe eas num days a e contractor ainst factors t poor workm poor or inco the cover ag improper de inadequate nerally areas ure however treatment is ciently as dir completion g d num. r the purpose eas that const emed a comp ea under this ment of micros neral the contrac successfully production o the microsu below numc are above num the microsu will freeze w opening the the work a and other de broom shall water shall spreader at flowing wate ndard sp portatio pav eriod for rutt after the repa shall guaran that may inclu manship and fa ompatible ma ggregate supp esign of applic traffic control s of delamina r the enginee defined as a ected by the guarantee the .
es of this item titute num or plete failure item .
surfacing ctor shall dem y placing a tr of the work .
urfacing shal and falling b c and rising urfacing shall within num hou work to traff area shall be ebris .
dried be removed be applied t a rate to da er .
ecificati on and inf vement struc ing shall be airs .
tee for two y ude but may n ailing to pract aterials includ plied by the o cation rates a . ation and flus er shall be the a full lane ap engineer .
th e retreatment m and at the more of the and the con monstrate the rial mix over l not be app but may be a . not be applie rs after place fic .
thoroughly cl mud or other by hand blad to prewet th ampen the su ions frastruc cture num days afte years after th not be limited tice proven m ding incompa owner and shing or blee e sole judge a pplication and he contractor against failur e discretion o area treated ntractor shall e ability to p an area num plied if either pplied when ed when ther ement or whe leaned of all r foreign matt de or other ap he surface if urface withou cture er initial place e completion to the followi microsurfacing atibility of the eding surface as to areas th d shall be ca r shall for a p re and defects f the enginee or retreated be required produce and num m long an the paveme both paveme re is danger t en weather c vegetation lo er not remov pproved metho f required im ut allowing an ement and f n of the work ing g procedures e bituminous es shall be co at must be re arried out pr period of two s as noted in er failure of on the contra to redo the e place micros d one wide ent or air tem ent and air te that the finish conditions wo oose materia ed with the ro od .
mmediately ah ny freestand item num page num for repaired k performed binder with onstrued as etreated .
romptly and years after num intermittent act shall be entire work surfacing by prior to full mperature is emperatures hed product ould prolong al sand dirt otary power head of the ing or free mic pag num num num num num crosurfac ge num num num .num num .num num .num num .num d cing .num manhole the micro application u .num the mixt uniform s .num any ove prior to d .num a sufficie times so .num water fo .num ruts sha not be o straight e .num edges of the road line or sh handwork .num in restric formula m .num the mixt covered tools .
joints .num longitud .num no exce appearan .num longitud .num longitud shall not and tape with a num m .num transver elevation rolling .num the micr departme s valve boxe osurfacing .
using a mecha ture shall be surface .
rsized aggreg delivery to the ent amount o o that complet r spraying the all be filled to overfilled mor edge .
f the microsu dway centerli houlder with cted areas wh may be used ture shall be d and spread inal and trans essive buildu nce will be pe inal joints in t inal joints in overlap more ers and sha m straight edg rse joints sha n across the jo rosurfacing sh sta ent of tra pavement st es drop inlets anical spread spread to fill gate or foreig mixing mach of mixture sh te coverage is e spreader bo have no depr e than num mm urfacing scratc ne lane lines a maximum h here hand sp to retard the deposited in uniformly ove sverse joints s up uncovere ermitted at join the scratch co the surface c e than num m ll not have m ge .
all be construc oint as meas hall be rolled a andard s ansporta ructure s and other se der ruts minor c gn materials hine .
all be carried s obtained .
ox to facilitate ression after t m per num mm ch coat shall s and edges horizontal var preading is n setting time .
a small windr er the surface shall be neat ed areas no nts .
oat shall be co coat shall be m except wh more than num m cted so as to sured with a num at the discret specifica ation and ervice entran cracks and sh shall be scr d in all parts spreading sh the final coat m of rut depth have a unifo white edge riance of num ecessary slig row along on e with squeeg in appearanc onhomogene onstructed as e placed on la here pavemen mm difference o have no mo num m straight ed ion of the con ations d infrast ces shall be hallow pothole reened from of the sprea hall not harm of microsurfa h as measure orm neat app line paveme num mm in any num ght adjustme e edge of the gees or other ce and uniform eous mixture s butt joints .
ane lines .
ad nt width varie e in elevation ore than num mm dge .
ntractor .
tructure item num january num protected fro es and leave the aggregat ader box at a the mix .
acing but sha ed with a num pearance alon ent edge cur num m section .
ents to the m e surface to b r suitable han m. e or unsight djacent passe es as in ramp n as measure m difference e num num m a te all all m ng rb mix be nd tly es ps ed in depa micro janua num .
num .
num .
artment osurfacin ary num num .num re .num .num num .num .num num .num cle .num .num stan of trans g quirements fo the finished of surface d finished surf any surface microsurfaci in table num .num the blee rutfill op num tear ma long o num total ru based num longitud measu num total ar num total ar exceed num bleedin num bleedin any num m l reapplicatio .num all wor contrac any part of within num da case later th .num if the num shall co eanup any microsu shoulders a the contrac with the perf ndard sp portatio pav or finished su d microsurfac defects .
no lu face .
e defects as ing .
such def num. eding defects peration .
una arks in any num or any marks ts num mm de on num random dinal ripples red with a num m reas exhibiting reas exhibiting ding num in an g and flushing g andor flush lane segment on of microsur rk required ctors expense f completed m ays from the han august num numday period mplete the re urfacing mix o and gutters sh ctor shall on formance of t ecificati on and inf vement struc urface cing shall hav umping ballin determined b fects shall inc s as defined i acceptable d num mnum per lane num mm x num eep as measu m samples pe raking or wa m straight edg g raking and c g loss of surfa y num mnum area g exceeding num hing at joints .
t with repairs rfacing over t for reconstru e. microsurfacin time the con numst of the curre extends pas epairs betwee on areas outs hall be remov a daily basis the work .
ions frastruc cture ve a uniform t ng or unmixe by the engine clude but are in num and num i table num defects in fin e four or mor num mm .
ured with a num er lanekm .
ashboarding ge .
chatter excee ace debondin a .
num in any num or defects ex the entire seg uction of un ng rejected fo ntractor receiv ent year .
st august nums en june numst an side the spec ved as specifi remove from cture texture and b ed aggregate eer will be c not necessar n table num nished surfa re marks num m straight ed chatter num eding num in a ng delaminat num mnum area .
xceeding num gment .
nacceptable or surface de ves notificatio st of the curre nd june numth o cified limits of ed by the eng m the work si be free from v will be perm ause for reje rily limited to t num shall also a ace num mm wide xnum dge exceedin mm deep as any num mnum ar tion potholing of the area s areas shall efects shall b on of rejection ent year the of the followin microsurfacin gineer .
te any debris item num page num visible signs mitted in the ction of the those noted apply to the num mm ng num s ea .
g shall require be at the be repaired n but in no contractor g year .
ng such as s associated mic pag num num crosurfac ge num num measu .num the supp .num in a warr num basis o .num pay .num pay acco d cing rement fo quantity to b plied produce areas where r ranty period .
of payment ment for work ment adjustm ordance with departme or payment e measured fo ed and placed rutting has be t k under this ite ment for a c item num .
sta ent of tra pavement st t for payment sh d in accordan een corrected em shall be at change in th andard s ansporta ructure hall be the nu ce with this ite d the engine t the unit pric he pg aspha specifica ation and mber of squa em .
eer may withh ce .
alt binder pr ations d infrast are metres of hold payment rice shall be tructure item num january num microsurfacin for the ruttin calculated e num num ng ng in depa chip s janua num num artment seal ary num descript .num this ite .num chip se .num sin .num do .num single applica .num double of num applica .num material .num all mate .num aggreg .num eac agg .num the bit set out .num em hp stan of trans tion em consists o eal shall be id ngle chip seal uble chip sea chip seals sh ation of num m e seals shall c num mm or num ation of num o under certa approved pe a double sea ls erials shall be gates shall me ch project s gregate sourc uminous bind in the tables mulsified asph pnum hpnum ndard sp portatio pav f the supply a dentified by th s. al d. hall consist of mm cover agg consist of an a num mm cover a or num mm co ain conditions enetration prim al .
e supplied by eet the require hall exhibit c ce to another der shall be s as follows halt hfnums p hfmsnum o ecificati on and inf vement struc and placemen e following m f a single app gregate .
application of aggregate a over aggregat s and at the mer plus a sin the contracto ements of num consistency on the final c selected from s hfnumsp r msnum per ta ions frastruc cture nt of single ch mix designatio plication of bi bituminous b second appl te as indicate discretion of ngle chip sea or .
num. of cover agg coat of a proje the following p hfnums ables num cture hip seals and ons tuminous bin binder followe ication of bit ed in the con f the enginee al may be an a gregate colo ect shall not b g and shall m hfnumsp num num double seals nder followed ed by a single uminous bind tract docume er the applic acceptable su our switching be accepted .
meet the requi hfnums h and figure num item num page num . by a single e application der and an ents .
cation of an ubstitute for g from one irements as hfnumsp num .
ch pag requ test asph disti oil d by v sayb seco siev num coat settl settl dem num n test pene numg visco float solu trich no ip seal ge num grad uirements t on emulsion halt residue by llation distillate volume bolt viscosity fur onds at numc e test retaine num m sieve ting test ement in num day ement in num day mulsiblitynum ml of n caclnum t on residue etration at numc g num s osity at numc pa t test at numc s bility in hloroethylene otes num coat capa coat the s .num c g f num visc d de astm test method dnum dnum rol dnum ed dnum dnum dnum f dnum dnum as dnum dnum ting test ast able of being m ed .
the mixtu stone shall not coating test r good num or fair num to num poor num or osity numc a epartme requireme hfnums m d min .
ma num num num num num num .
note num num num num note num num num num tm method dnum mixed vigorously re shall then be be less than num result more of the ag num of the agg less of the agg and penetration sta ent of tra pavement st table num nts for emul s hfnums ax .
min .
m num num num num num num num num num .
note num .num num num num num note num num num num except that t y for num minutes e completely im num coated .
ggregate surfac gregate surface gregate surface n numc shal andard s ansporta ructure num lsified aspha s hfnums ax .
min .
m num num num num num num .num num .
note num .num num na num num note num num num the mixture of s to ensure tha mmersed in tap ce coated .
e coated .
e coated not ac l fall within the specifica ation and alt binder s hpnum max .
min .
m num num na num num num .num num .
note num num na num num na na num limestone and at the stone is t p water and the cceptable .
area described ations infrastr num hfmsnum ax .
min .
ma num num num num num num .num num .
note num num num na num num na na num emulsified asp thoroughly and e water poured d in table num ructure item num january num num msnum ax .
min .
ma num num num num num num num num .
note num num num na num num na na num phalt shall be d uniformly off after which num num num ax .
num num num num num h depa chip s janua gra emu visc shall b descr note artment seal ary num ade of high ulsified as cosity and pen be within graph ribed by the le ordinates viscosity an figure num stan of trans h float sphalt netration hic regions ttered co nd penetration num .
ndard sp portatio pav viscosity an for high flo high floa hfnum s e f g c n shall be with ecificati on and inf vement struc table num nd penetratio oat emulsifie at emulsified a hfnum s a b c d hin graphic reg figure ions frastruc cture num on requirem d asphalt bi asphalt binde s hfnum d l m n gions describe e num cture ments inder er num s hf n o a ed by the lette fnum p b c d ered coordina item num page num hfnum p l m n o ates in the ch pag num num num ip seal ge num num submit .num the prio .num sub .num the deliv adju num const num .num gen .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num d ttals contractor s r to commenc bmittals are re contractor s vered on the ustment for ch ruction neral the contract specifically d the contrac designated s the placeme avoid damag .num the con abutting .num the con to the en blameles .num all other contracto the contrac for emulsifie otherwise dir unless other constructed num for a double application b intersections the discretion the contrac against dama a period of tw traffic contro num .
epartme hall submit fo cing the work equired in acc hall submit to contract .
th hange in pg a tor shall carry irected by the ctor shall be tockpiles wh ent of single a ge to the adjac tractor shall finished surfa tractor shall b nvironment th ss in all claims r damage c or and the o tor shall desi ed asphalt b rected by the rwise directed num m wide .
e seal all exc efore comme shall be dee n of the engin ctor shall be age from incl wo weeks afte ol shall be the sta ent of tra pavement st or approval b k. cordance with o the enginee e total litres o asphalt binde y out the wo e engineer .
responsible hen material i and double ch cent and surr at hisher ow aces as a resu be responsib hrough the p s arising from laims related owner shall be ign the bitum inder the mi engineer .
d by the engin cess aggrega encing the sec emed to be a neer .
responsible ement weath er the work .
e contractors andard s ansporta ructure y the enginee any crossre er a copy of th of emulsion u r price shall b rk as indicate for loading is supplied by hip seals sha ounding road wn expense re ult of the wor le at herhis performance o m such damag d to this wo e held blamele minous binder nimum appli neer single c ate shall be s cond applicat normal part for the prote er high amb s responsibility specifica ation and er a copy of eferenced item he delivery sli used shall be be calculated ed in the con and hauling y the owner .
all be carried dbed .
epair any dam rk .
own expense of the work ge .
ork shall be ess .
r and cover a cation rate s chip seals and swept off the ion .
of the work ection of new ient temperat y in accordan ations infrastr the design ap m forming par p for each loa e summed an if necessary ntract docum cover aggre out in such a mage to the a e for any da and shall ho e the respon aggregate app shall be num d double chip first binder a and shall be wly construct tures and hig nce with items ructure item num january num pplication rate rt of this item .
ad of emulsio d the payme y per num ents andor a egate from th a manner as t adjacent ando mage suffere old the owne nsibility of th plication rate num lmnum unles p seals shall b and aggregat chip sealed a ted chip sea gh humidity fo s num num an num num es .
on nt .
as he to or ed er he s. ss be te at als or nd depa chip s janua num num .
num .
artment seal ary num .num equipm .num equ in p .num num .num dis .num .num .num .num .num .num num .num bro .num stan of trans ment uipment for p proper workin grader shal stributors bituminous less than num distributors application r rate both lon distributors .num a positiv bars .num an elec measure which sh .num a therm .num heating maintain .num an adjus .num a straine .num a tank g .num a samp the rear cha all nozzles s recommend slots are at obstructions the spray b or dripping a as to preven ooms rotary powe from bitumin ndard sp portatio pav lacing chip se ng order .
l be equipped pressure dist num l. shall provid rates and sha ngitudinally an shall be equi ve displacem ctronic device e pump spee hall be visible ometer well a coils and bu n spraying tem stable length er in the circu gauge and a m ling cock .
assis shall be shall be of the ation for volu t a num angle s. bar shall be e and the spray nt streaking .
er brooms sh nous surfaces ecificati on and inf vement struc eals shall be d with automa ributors shall e application all be capable nd transverse pped with at l ent asphalt p e to measure d and a fifth e to the driver and accurate urners capab mperature and height sp ulating system measuring sti e modified to p e same manu me being spr e with the lon equipped with y bar height s hall be capab s to the satisfa ions frastruc cture specifically d atic slope con be selfprope n rates that e of applying ely .
least the follo pump develop e ground an wheeldriven r thermometer le of applying pray bar and m and in the fi ck graduated prevent incre ufacture type rayed arrang ngitudinal axi h a positive sh shall be adju ble of removin action of the e cture esigned for th ntrol .
elled and sha are within material at a owing devices ping uniform p nd pump spe n speedomete r g even heat d hand spray a illing line d in litres and asing bar hei and size me ged in the spra is of the spra hutoff mecha usted for doub ng gravel san engineer .
hat purpose a all have a cap num of the a continuous a s and applianc pressure withi eed or a tac er and odome to the bitume attachment d ght as the tan eeting the man ay bar so that ay bar and anism to prev ble or triple c nd dirt and o item num page num and shall be pacity of not established and uniform ces in the spray chometer to eter each of en so as to nk empties .
nufacturers t the nozzle free of any vent leaking coverage so other debris ch pag num num num ip seal ge num num .num num .num num .num prep .num .num d spreaders .num aggregat uniformly num m to .num spreade towed tru rejecting .num both fron and closi rollers .num all rollers .num tandem num mm .num vibratory mm .
thre smootht .num pneumat uniformly .num combina are acce num paration leveling with the responsib all other surf but not be lim .num the road and supe engineer .num sweepin before th .num repairing placed a .num sweepin applying epartme te spreaders y placing o num m per pa rs shall be eq ucks and a fr oversize agg nt and rear ho ing can be co s shall be self steel rollers m. threewhee y rollers shall eewheeled v tread rubber t tictired rolle y inflated to a ation tandem ptable alterna num subject to h hot mix asp bility of the ow face preparat mited to the fo d shall be com er elevation a r g excess san he second app g irregularitie and g existing p a single chip sta ent of tra pavement st shall be self aggregate ass .
quipped with ront hopper fi gregate .
oppers shall b ontrolled by th fpropelled an shall have a el steel rollers have a minim vibratory rolle tires .
rs shall have minimum pre rollers equiva atives to the c o the approva phalt concrete wner .
ions shall be ollowing mpacted and and shall com nd aggregate plication is pla s in the first m pavement cle seal .
andard s ansporta ructure fpropelled an over the a rear hoppe tted with adju be designed he operator .
nd capable of minimum ma s shall not be mum mass of rs shall not b e a minimum essure of num alent to the b compaction d al of the engin e and crack fi the responsi shaped with mmence num day e and other d aced mat of a doub ean of sand specifica ation and nd shall be c full width er capable of ustable discha and equipped f reversing wit ass of num t and e used .
f num t and a m be used unles m of seven num kpa .
omag bwnum devices descr neer .
illing ahead o bility of the c h a grader to y prior to chip ebris from th ble seal befor aggregate ations infrastr apable of con of the ap f accepting a arge gates an d so that met thout backlas d a minimum inimum drum ss the rear dr smoothtread numac and dyn ribed in num of single chip contractor an meet an acc p sealing as d he first mat of re the second and other d ructure item num january num ntinuously an pplied binde aggregate fro nd a screen fo tering openin sh .
drum width o m width of num rive wheels ar d rubber tire napac ccnum num throug seals shall b nd shall includ ceptable crow directed by th f a double se d application debris prior t num num nd er m or ng of num re es c gh be de wn he al is to depa chip s janua num artment seal ary num .num placem .num ch hum .num bin .num .num .num the num .num cov imm .num ro con pne com .num .num the or t stan of trans ment ip seals sha midity is high nder applicatio there shall transverse j engineer .
no more th spreading o e temperature num .
ty h h h ver aggregat mediately follo lling shall com ntinuous until eumatictired mpaction dev roller speed e contractor tacked onto c ndard sp portatio pav all not be pla when rain is on shall be at be a minim joints .
the c an num m of peration .
e of the binde binder spr ype of bitumi binder hfmsnum hpnum hpnum fnums hf fnums hf fnums hfnum msnum tes shall be owing the app mmence imm all cover agg roller and o ices describe d shall not ex shall ensure completed sec ecificati on and inf vement struc aced when t threatening t a uniform rat mum of ove contractor sha road surface er when spra table num raying tempe inous m num nump numsp numsp numsp applied unifo plication of bit mediately beh gregate place one pass wit ed in num ceed num kmh that no bitum ctions of chip ions frastruc cture the ambient or on damp s te determined erlap and no all repair una shall be spr ayed shall be num erature rang temperatur c minimum m num num num num num num ormly over th tumen .
hind the aggre ed has receiv th a steelw num and num h. minous binder seals .
cture temperature surfaces .
d by the cont o missed are acceptable jo rayed ahead e within the ra ges re range maximum num num num num num num he full width egate placing ved a minimu heeled roller num. r fuel or solve is below num tractor .
eas at longit oints as direc of the cover anges specifi of the spray g operation a um of two pa r or three p ents are spille item num page num num c when tudinal and cted by the r aggregate ed in table yed surface and shall be sses with a passes with ed sprayed ch pag num num num ip seal ge num num .num gua .num .num .num .num num measu .num the and num basis o .num pay .num pay acco d arantee the contrac factors that m .num poor wor .num poor or the cove .num improper .num inadequa generally lo failure howe .num a retrea distributo compacte section num retreatment contractor sh gc num .
for the purpo individual are deemed a co area of the w rement fo quantity to double seal d of payment ment for wor ment adjustm ordance with epartme ctor shall gua may include b rkmanship an incompatible r aggregate r design of ap ate traffic con oss of cover a ver the own atment shall or truck a lay ed with rolle num. t shall be car hall guarante ose of the co eas that comp omplete failu work .
or payment be measured designed sup t rk under this i ment for a cha item num .
sta ent of tra pavement st arantee the w ut may not be nd failing to pr materials in pplication rate trol .
aggregate flu er shall be th consist of yer of num m rs .
all equip rried out prom e the retreat ontract and at prise num or re and the c t d for paymen pplied and pla tem shall be ange in the pg andard s ansporta ructure work perform e limited to th ractice proven ncluding incom es and ushing and b e sole judge a an applicatio mm cover agg pment shall m mptly and effic tment agains t the discretio more of the e contractor sh t shall be the aced in accor at the unit pr g asphalt bind specifica ation and med in accord e following n chip seal pr mpatibility of bleeding surfa as to areas th on of emuls gregate place meet the min ciently as dire st failure and on of the own entire area tr hall be requir e number of rdance with th rice .
der price sha ations infrastr dance with g rocedures the bitumino aces shall be hat shall be re sion binder p d with a chip nimum requir ected by the defects in ac ner failure of reated or retr red to resurf square metre his item .
ll be calculate ructure item num january num gc num again ous binder wit e construed a etreated .
placed with p spreader an rements unde engineer .
th ccordance wit f intermittent o reated shall b face the entir es of chip se ed in num num st th as a nd er he th or be re al depa pulve janua num num num num num num artment erizing ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num wo tran .num all wor .num the co num mm .num the co conditio num mm .num oversiz shall be .num the re of num .num the co elevatio .num grader measure .num the qu comple basis of .num payme stan of trans tion em consists o ls dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ork under this nsitions to ma rk shall be ca ontractor shal m into the agg ontractor shal on with al sieve when ze pieces rem e disposed of graded surfa of the maxim ontractor sha on .
r shall be equ ment for p uantity to be m eted in accord payment nt for this wo ndard sp portatio pav f the pulveriz all carry out t by the engine item shall al atch into the ex rried out to th l carry out the gregate base ll ensure that ll material measured in maining after f outside the w ace material s mum dry dens all shape the ipped with au payment measured for dance with this ork shall be at pecificat on and inf vement struc ing shaping a the work as er .
lso include ex xisting conditio he full roadbe e work such t esubbase lay t this pulveriz sized such accordance w pulverizing s work site .
shall be comp sity as establis road with a utomatic slope r payment sh s item .
t the unit pric tions frastruc cture and compact indicated in xcavating and ons as directe ed width to int that the pulve yer .
zed region is h that num with astm c shall become pacted in acc shed by a tes grader to m e control .
all be the nu ce .
cture ion of a road the contrac d moving of p ed by the eng tercept the ex erizing extend in a complet of the num. e the propert cordance with st strip .
meet an accep mber of squa dbed surface .
ct documents pulverized ma gineer .
xisting foresl ds to a minimu tely mixed an material p ty of the con h item num to ptable crown are metres of item num page num s andor as aterial in the opes .
um depth of nd loosened asses the ntractor and a minimum and super f pulverizing depa shou janua num num num num artment ulder proc ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num thi .num a longit shall be .num the in of the conditio .num oversiz shall be .num the co process .num re with .num wh num with .num the ma .num final s grade o of the f .num the co surface stan of trans cessing tion em consists o ls dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b s work shall tudinal cut be e formed havi situ material abutting asph on with all ma ze pieces rem e disposed of ontractor sha sing operation gardless of t hin num days fo here the differ mm in any p hin num hours o aterial shall be haping of the of the abutting foreslope and ontractor shal e shall be free ndard sp portatio pav f the process ll carry out t by the engine be carried ou etween the ed ing a straight shall be proc halt concrete aterial sized s maining after f outside the w all not permit n is in progres he length of r any portion rence in eleva portion of the of the comme e compacted e processed g asphalt con d shall be ble l keep clean e of shoulder pecificat on and inf vement struc ing shaping a he work as er .
ut before pavi dge of the exis vertical face .
cessed to a m so that the o that num o processing s work site .
t more than ss .
the work ar of the work o ation betwee work the s encement .
to the maxim shoulder ma crete surface nded and sha the adjacent material prior tions frastruc cture and compact indicated in ng .
sting asphalt minimum dep material is i of the materia shall become num km to be rea the shou open to traffic n the asphalt shoulder proc mum density a aterial shall b e and shall ex aped to match pavement su r to opening t cture tion of materia the contrac concrete ma pth of num mm in a complete al passes the e the propert open to traf ulder process c. t concrete an cessing opera as determined be consistent xtend at the sp h the foreslo urface and in the work area al on the sho ct documents t and the sho m andor to th ely mixed an num mm sieve ty of the con ffic where th sing shall be nd the should ation shall be d by a rolling p t and continu pecified slope pe intersectio all cases the a to traffic .
item num page num ulder .
s andor as oulder work he full depth d loosened e. ntractor and e shoulder e completed der exceeds e completed pattern .
uous to the e to the line on .
e pavement sh pag num num oulder pr ge num num measu .num the proc num basis o .num pay .num the sho rocessing rement fo quantity to cessing comp of payment ment for this contractor s oulder process departm or payment be measured pleted in acco t work shall be shall be subje sing operation sta ment of tr pavement st t d for paymen rdance with t e at the unit p ect to a pena n is not carrie andard s ransport ructure t shall be the his item .
price .
alty of num ed out in the p specifica tation an e number of num per day prescribed pe ations nd infras square metre for each occ riod as define tructur item num january num es of shoulde currence if th ed in num .
re num num er he .
standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num shoulder rumble strip installation january num pavement structure standard drawing num rumble strips rumble strips a a painted shoulder line painted shoulder line a a nummm nummm paved or chipsealed shoulder nummm min .
nummm typical nummm nummm painted edge line num nummm standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num shoulder subdrain and outlet details january num pavement structure standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num construction detail of a transverse key joint january num pavement structure standard drawing num existing asphalt concrete surface existing asphalt concrete base existing asphalt concrete base existing asphalt concrete surface new asphalt concrete surface see note num see note num stage num stage num num x thickness of final lift the existing asphalt concrete shall be cold milled to the shape indicated .
when the existing pavement has been removed in advance of paving the is resumed .
the transverse joint shall be straight and have a vertical face when the tar paper is removed .
note num note num file num num the taper may be placed on tar paper and shall be removed when paving joint area the contractor shall construct a smooth nummm long taper .
standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num construction details at a structure january num pavement structure standard drawing num depa table janua it num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num artment e of conte ary num tem num por num co num re num ten num ste num ste num ste num exc num pre num pos num ste num ste num brid num sea num fin num ste num gu num ser num wa num sho num eng num fre num re num re num re num sta num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num stan of trans ents rtland cemen ncrete in stru inforcing stee nsion splices eel h piles eel pipe piles eel sheet pile cavation with ecast prestres sttensioning eel superstruc eel laminated dge pot bear aled expansio nger joint ass eel ballastwal ide rail syste rvice duct s aterproofing .. oring gineered fill eedraining b moval of asp moval of dec moval of stru andard drawin num num roa num num roa num num con num num stee num num stee num num stee num num stee num num stee num num stee num num stee num num pres num num brid num num balla num num dec num num num num balla wat num num free ndard sp portatio desc nt concrete .. uctures el e cofferdams hin cofferdam ssed concret g system cture d bearings rings on joint asse semblies l angle em structure structures ackfill halt concrete ck concrete .. uctures ngs adway drain f adway drain d ncrete limits f el h piles pi el h piles pi el h piles sp el h piles se el h piles se el pipe piles el pipe piles stressed bea ge pot bearin astwall protec ck at barrier w ast wall wate terproofing re e draining ba pecificat on and inf structures ription ms te beams emblies es e structures for structures details for foundatio le cap detail le point deta plice details equences for equences for pile point de splice detai m lifting dev ngs nomenc ction details wallcurb wat erproofing sy equirements o ackfill placeme tions frastruc s s on overexcav ls ails welds for ho welds for fla etails ils vice details v clature terproofing d ystem details on box culve ent details cture numbe pag num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num vation orizontal posi at position vertical only details ert or rigid fr di er of ges num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num tion rame vision num page num depa port janua num num num num num num num artment land ceme ary num descript .num this ite material .num genera .num all .num ma .num cemen .num the asc .num .num .num .num .num .num aggreg .num agg num .num other a .num a w adm .num curing .num bur sur .num for .num cu oth .num bur sha .num cu stan of trans ent concre tion em consists o ls al materials sha aterial propert nts and supple e following wo cribed to them blended hyd supplement blast furnac blended sup fly ash .
gates gregates use num .
admixtures no written statem mixture conta materials rlap absorpt rfaces .
r vertical surfa ring materials er substance rlap shall be all have a mas ring water sh ndard sp portatio ete f the proportio all be supplied ies shall conf ementary ce ords and phra m in csa anum draulic ceme tary cementin ce slag pplementary d in concrete ot covered b ment shall be p ains no purpos tive mat or aces curing s s shall at any e which would of a quality ss of not less all be free of pecificat on and inf structures oning supply d by the cont form to csa a menting mate ases whereve num ent ng materials cementing m shall meet th y astm provided to th sely added ca nonwoven shall be carrie y time of use have a delet which will ab s than num gm chlorides oils tions frastruc s y and placeme tractor .
anum if not o erials er used in this materials he material pr he engineer f alcium chlorid geotextile s ed out by usin be in good c terious effect bsorb water r mnum when clean s dirt and oth cture ent of portlan otherwise spe s item shall h roperties spec from the man de .
shall be use ng burlap .
condition free upon concret readily when n and dry .
her deleteriou nd cement con ecified herein .
have the mea cified in acco ufacturer stat d for curing e from holes te .
dipped or s us materials .
item num page num ncrete. . aning rdance with ting that the g horizontal dirt clay or prayed and po pag num num num num num ortland ce ge num num submit .num the eng but .num .num .num the subm num const num .num gen .num .num .num num .num care .num .num num .num prop .num .num .num d ment conc ttals contractor s ineer in adva not be limited the contract the contract with atlantic equivalent .
.num the conc accordan .num only con plant cer until the w proposed m mitted at leas ruction neral the contract specifically di concrete sha no loads sha minimum com e and storage all concrete segregation all cement accordance w portioning and the contract class of conc .num concrete if during the workability o submit a new all concrete s departme crete shall have the ance of the su d to tor shall provid tor shall subm provinces r crete supplier nce with csa ncrete supplie rtification sha warranty peri mix proportion st num days befo tor shall carry rected by the all meet the re all be applied t mpressive stre e of materials materials s damage and aggregate a with the requi d compositio tor shall be r crete specifie e shall meet th e progress of r does not m w mix design t shall be propo sta ent of tra structu e source of s upply of the co de the engine mit certificatio ready mix c r shall submit anum .
ed from such all be maintai od expires .
ns design c ore concrete p y out the wo engineer .
quirements of to new concre ength of num mp s hall be hand contaminatio and other c rements of c n of concrete esponsible fo d and propos he requireme f the work meet the requ to the engine ortioned in ac andard s ansporta ures supply of por oncrete to the eer with the na n that the con concrete asso t proof of cert certified plan ined for the d certified by th production is rk as indicate f csa anum ete including v pa. dled and pro on .
oncrete cons sa anum an e or providing c sed for use .
ents of csa a it is determi uirements of er in accorda ccordance wit specifica ation and rtland cement e work and th ame of the pro ncrete supplie ociation plan tification in th ts shall be ac duration of th he contractor due to start .
ed in the con if not otherwis vibration until otected in su struction ma nd csa anum .
concrete mix anum exposur ined that the the specifica ance with the th the submitt ations d infrast t concrete ap his approval s oposed ceme er is certified nt certificatio he appropriate cceptable to t he fabrication r or hisher a ntract docum se specified h the concrete uch a way aterials shall num. designs for e re class cnum .
e concrete ha ations the c e num. ted mix desig tructure item num january num pproved by th shall consist o nt supplier .
in accordanc on program o e categories the owner an n and erectio agent shall b ents andor a erein .
has attained as to preve be stored each exposur as inadequat contractor sha ns .
e num num he of ce or in nd on be as a nt in re te all depa port janua num num num num num artment land ceme ary num .num concre .num por anum .num deliver .num de ena .num the bat .num num .num add .num .num placem .num the with .num all .num flo .num all unl for .num for mo sur .num co .num curing .num cu .num .num for sur by stan of trans ent concre ete production rtland cemen num. ry livery of conc able continuo e batch deliv tch of concrete the batch tic dition of wate water shall engineer .
.num slump a ment e contractor h csa anum concrete plac oats shall be w concrete sha ess otherwise a minimum o rm ties shall ore below the rface .
ncrete shall re and protectio ring shall be c curing comp r vertical surfa rface supplyin keeping form ndard sp portatio ete n t concrete sh crete shall be us deposition very ticket me e delivered to cket shall inclu er not be adde adjustment of shall be resp .
cement shall wood or magn all be placed e specified in of num hours pr be of such ty e finished su eceive an ord on carried out in pound may be aces curing ng a continuo mwork in place pecificat on and inf structures hall be produ in accordanc n until the plac eeting the req o site .
ude quantities ed after batch superplasticiz onsible for al be in accorda nesium .
steel in a space fr n the contrac rior to ordering ype that they rface of the dinary surfac accordance w e used where shall be carri ous source of e for the spec tions frastruc s ced in accord ce with csa a cement of eac quirements o s of materials hing for any zed concrete s l formwork de ance with csa l floats shall n ree of standin ct documents g and placing y can be enti concrete lea ce finish in ac with csa anum e specifically r ied out by se moisture to t ified curing pe cture dance with th anum and sh ch concrete s of csa anum batched .
purpose with shall be with a esign and con a anum unle not be permitt ng water clea s. water infiltr g concrete .
irely removed aving no met ccordance wit num and this it referenced by curing wet bu the burlap an eriod .
he requireme hall be regulat section is com num shall accom hout the appr admixture onl nstruction in a ess otherwise ted .
an of all dirt ration shall be d or cut back tal within num th num. tem .
y another item urlap against nd sealing wit item num page num ents of csa ted so as to mpleted .
mpany each roval of the y. accordance e noted .
and debris e controlled k num mm or mm of the m. the vertical h plastic or po pag num num num ortland ce ge num num .num test .num .num num measu .num the conc num basis f .num pay iden d ment conc ting the contract discharge th the owner s rement fo quantity to b crete proportio for paymen ment for work ntified under th departme crete tor is respons he characteris shall carry out or payment be measured f oned supplied nt k under this it he contract .
sta ent of tra structu sible for supp stics specified t quality assu t for payment s d and placed i tem shall inclu andard s ansporta ures plying concre d in the contra urance testin shall be the nu in accordance ude a separate specifica ation and te which sha act documen ng .
umber of cubic e with this item e unit price fo ations d infrast all have at th ts .
c metres of p m. or each class tructure item num january num e point of fin portland ceme of concrete a e num num al nt as depa conc janua artic num .
num .
num .
num .
artment crete in st ary num cle num descript .num concre .num concre .num concre .num concre .num concre num material .num gener .num materi .num ag .num fin .num co .num w .num ad .num cu .num ce .num compo .num ge .num associ num submitta num constru .num gener .num equipm .num ba .num mi .num de .num falsew .num placem .num ge .num fo .num co .num t .num bo .num de .num su .num pr .num br .num m .num tremie stan of trans ructures tion ete in structur ete in structur ete in structur ete in structur ete in structur ls ral al properties .
ggregates ne aggregate oarse aggrega ater dmixtures uring materials ement and su osition of conc eneral iated materials als ction ral ment and prod atching ixing elivery work and form ment eneral ootings and w olumns beam spans ox girders ecks and diap uperstructure r rofile of bridge ridge decks multispan stee e concrete ndard sp portatio c res a res b res c res d res e ate s pplementary c crete mix s duction mwork working slabs .
phragms reactions on e superstructu el girder bridg pecificat on and inf structures ontents cementing ma bents piers a re componen ges tions frastruc s aterials and abutments nts cture .. s page num num .
num num num .
num .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
num num .
num .
num num .
num .
num .
num num .
num .
num .
num .
num num .
num num num .
num .
num item num page num co pag num num oncrete in ge num article .num co .num .num .num pla .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num cu .num co .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num hot .num finis .num .num .num .num .num .num .num qua .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num measu num basis f structure nstruction join limitation in use of keys acing and finis tolerances .
upper horizo bearing surf bridge curbs bridge deck deck surfac screed mach ring and prote ld weather re general materials placing enclosed pro heating with insulation withdrawal o weather req shing hardene general defects form defects brid ordinary sur high quality num bridge deck ality testing general quality cont quality assu age of comp num frequency o num hardened a num permeability num compressive urement fo for paymen departm es nts use of constr shing plastic c ontal surfaces faces s and sidewal s e repairs to m hines ection equirements otective heati in a housing .
of protection .. uirements ed concrete .. med surfaces .
ge deck rface finish surface finis k surface prep trol testing urance testing pressive stren of compressiv ir void testing y testing freq e strength tes r payment nt sta ment of tr structu contents ruction joints concrete s ks meet toleranc ng sh paration g ngth testing e strength te g frequency uency sting andard s ransport ures s es .. . sting .. specifica tation an ations nd infras page num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
num .. num num .. num num num tructur item num january num re num num depa conc janua num num num num artment crete in st ary num descript .num this ite .num this ite .num co .num .num co .num .num co .num .num co .num .num co .num .num a contin .num definitio .num the asc .num .num .num .num .num material .num genera .num all .num ma stan of trans ructures tion em consists of em is subdivid ncrete in stru concrete for safetycurbs .num concret ncrete in stru concrete for ncrete in stru concrete for ncrete in stru concrete fo barrierwalls components .num concret docume ncrete in stru concrete for nuous structu ons e following wo cribed to them blended hyd supplement blast furnac blended sup fly ash .
s al materials sha aterial properti ndard sp portatio f the supply p ed into but no uctures a r use in bridg s sidewalks a e for use in in uctures b r use in buried uctures c r use in bridge uctures d or use in br safetycurbs s. e for use in d ents .
uctures e r use as tremi re is defined a ords and phra m in csa anum draulic ceme tary cementin ce slag pplementary all be supplied es shall confo pecificat on and inf structures placement and ot limited to t ge abutments nd independe ntegral bridge d bridge abutm e piers .
ridge deck s s sidewalks decks in integ e concrete in as the comple ases whereve num ent ng materials cementing m d by the contr orm to csa a tions frastruc s d finishing of c the following t including but ent curb and g abutment as ment approac slabs includin at grade app gral abutment footings .
ete deck slab er used in this materials and ractor .
anum if not oth cture concrete in st types t not limited to gutter at the e s indicated in t ch slabs .
ng but not proach slabs t bridges as between the e s item shall h herwise spec tructures .
o abutment b nd of wingwa the contract d limited to d and other in indicated in th expansion joi have the mea ified herein .
item num page num barrierwalls lls .
documents .
diaphragms ntegral deck he contract nts .
aning co pag num oncrete in ge num num .num mate .num structure erial propertie aggregates .num the coar .num stockpile that segr .num stock the g .num segr .num stock the p .num fine and time of ba .num petrograp accordan .num a pe obse .num whe is su reque reque reque .num the coate know maxi .num the in an which .num whe know cons quan .num a d .num blending .num the exce departm es es rse aggregate es shall be pla egation and c kpiles shall be grading limits s regated or con kpiles shall b production of c d coarse aggr atching .
phic examina nce with csa etrographic ex erved change n the size of uch that more est for an ex est for extens ested as a mi petrographic ed grains so wn to cause mum pn for c aggregate pe n aggregate s h is known to n the sample wn to have tituents shal ntitatively .
additional tes deleterious eff of aggregate blending mat ption of the g sta ment of tr structu and fine agg aced on a leve contamination e checked dur specified .
ntaminated sto e maintained concrete to be regates shall ation of the anuma an xamination of in the materia the crushing than two yea xtension to t sion shall incl nimum .
examination oft flaky partic harmful rea coarse aggreg etrographer sh ample and to be deleteriou e has been f specific unfa ll be descri sting shall be fect on concre s shall only be erials shall in rading require andard s ransport ures regate shall e el well drained does not occ ring the norma ockpiles shall so that there e placed in the only be com aggregates s nd as describe f the aggrega al at the pit or operation or t ars supply is the time requ ude details of shall detect t cles chert an actions in po gate shall be r hall be respon o comment on us .
found to poss avourable effe bed qualitati e necessary ete .
e permitted to ndividually me ements .
specifica tation an each be stockp d base and co cur .
al course of th not be incorp e is a sufficie e following num bined in the shall be mad ed below .
ates shall be quarry .
the usage of stockpiled th uirement for f inventory m the presence nd all deleter ortland ceme reported .
nsible to desc n the unfavour sess properti fects on con ively and t to prove the o meet the gra eet the require ations nd infras piled separate onstructed in s he work for c porated into th ent supply of num days .
specified pro de on an an initiated whe material from he contractor the petrogra anagement a e of deleteriou rious substan nt concrete cribe each roc rable effects o ies or constit ncrete those to the exten e aggregate ading requirem ements of this tructur item num january num ely .
such a manne conformance t he work .
aggregates fo oportions at th nnual basis ere there is a m that operatio r may submit aphic test .
th and time perio us shale mic nces which ar mixtures .
th ck type prese of any materi tuents that ar properties o nt practicabl shall have n ments .
s item with th re num num er to or he in an on a he od a re he nt al re or e no he depa conc janua num num artment crete in st ary num num .num fin .num .num co mic alk num .num coa .num li co mic par un alk stan of trans ructures e aggregate fine aggreg approved co the amoun independent csa anum limits for de deleterious physic al and lignite cro deval kali aggregate notes num num num arse aggrega the amount samples com limits prescr imits for dele deleterio al and lignite cro deval rticle shape confined free kali aggregate notes num num num ndard sp portatio gate shall co ombination .
nts of delete t samples shall not exce eleterious su s substances cal properties e e reaction num the sample sh anuma .
the dried and the p examination .
test runs for a following the within num years testing period num kgmnum cem ate t of deleteriou mplying with ibed in table eterious sub us substanc e eze thaw e reaction num the sample sh csa anuma shall be dried petrographic e test runs for a following the required within testing period num kgmnum cem pecificat on and inf structures onsist of unc erious substa complying eed the limits tab ubstances an s and s hall first be test e material retai portion which is a period of two year of no test of previous res d shall be num yea ment content .
us substances the grading r num .
ta stances and ces hall first be test a .
the material and the portion examination .
a period of two year of no test n num years of pre d shall be num yea ment content .
tions frastruc s coated natur ances in fin with the g specified in t ble num nd physical p test proc note csa anum csa anum modifie ted for low den ned on the liqu s coal or lignite years .
there ing the cycle s sults .
ars .
job mix ag s in coarse ag requirements able num physical pro test proce note csa anum .
csa anum .
csa anum .
csa anum .
modifie ted for low den l retained on th n which is coal years .
there ing the cycle s evious results .
ars .
job mix ag cture ral sand ma ne aggregate grading requ table num .
properties of cedures e num .numa .numa ed num nsity material in uid with a speci e shall be deter shall be no tes hall begin agai ggregate comb ggregate det in csa anum operties of c edures num numa numa numa numa ed num nsity material in he liquid with a or lignite shall shall be no tes hall begin agai ggregate combi anufactured s e each dete uirements in f fine aggreg test l num num num n accordance w ific gravity of num rmined by petr sting on the thir in .
new results bination shall co termined on in num shall not coarse aggre test lim num num num num num num y n accordance w specific gravity be determined sting on the thir in .
new results ination shall co item num page num sand or an ermined on ndicated in gate limits num .num num years with csa .num shall be ographic rd year .
s required ontain ndependent exceed the egates its years with y of num d by rd year .
s ontain co pag num num num num num num oncrete in ge num num .num num .num num .num num .num num .num com num .num structure water .num the sour .num waterto materials admixtures .num a written purposef .num any adm shall be a curing mater .num burlap a surfaces .
.num curing m or other s .num burlap sh shall hav .num curing w cement and .num fly ash s .num on fl shall exce .num on propo shall .num high mposition of c general .num it shall b submitted concrete .num concrete .num a calcium the eleva asphalt c superstru departm es rce of supply s cementing m s that is equal n statement fully added ca mixtures which accounted for rials absorptive m . materials shall substance wh hall be of a q ve a mass of n water shall be f supplementa slag and silic latwork concre be limited t ed num. formwork co ortions shall not exceed num er replaceme concrete mix be the respon d to the engi conforms to t e types a b c m nitrite corros ation of the b concrete excl ucture .
sta ment of tr structu shall be the re materials ratio to the total w from the ma lcium chloride h increase the in the mix des at or nonw at any time hich would hav uality which w not less than num free of chlorid ary cementing a fume may b ete exposed t to num num oncrete expo be limited to num. nt proportions nsibility of th neer are prop the specificat c and d shall sion inhibitor bridge seat b luding approa andard s ransport ures esponsibility o o shall be co weight of ceme anufacturer s e shall be prov e watertocem sign to meet t woven geotext of use be in ve a deleteriou will absorb wa num gmnum whe es oils dirt a g materials be used to chlorides a and num re osed to chlo num num s may be perm e contractor perly batched ion .
l be exposure shall be adde bearing block ach slabs bur specifica tation an of the contract omputed usin ent plus fly ash stating that t vided to the e menting mater the specified w tile shall be good conditio us effect upon ater readily w n clean and d and other dele and freezing a espectively .
t orides and f and num resp mitted at the d to ensure th d mixed plac e class cxl a ed to all concr ks approach ried below gra ations nd infras tor .
ng the weight h silica fume the admixture engineer .
rials ratio by num watertoceme used for cu on free from h n concrete .
when dipped o dry .
eterious mater and thawing t total replacem freezing and pectively .
tota discretion of th hat the mixtu ced and cured and type e sh rete in the ab slabs overla ade and to c tructur item num january num t of cementin and slag .
e contains n num or greate enting ratios .
uring horizont holes dirt cla or sprayed an rials .
the proportion ment shall no thawing th al replaceme he engineer .
ure proportion d such that th hall be fnum .
butments abov id directly wit concrete in th re num num ng no er tal ay nd ns ot he nt ns he ve th he depa conc janua num num num artment crete in st ary num num .num associa .num the the .num saf .num ma submitta .num the co num day but not .num ce ass .num .num .num pro writ per not .num the sta sha .num .num other s specific .num submitt stan of trans ructures .num the dos .num the cor calcium .num the calc be provi of concr .num acc from disp .num veri ated materials e contractor s contract doc fety anchor as aterials shall b als ontractor shal ys in advance be limited to rtification tha sociation ac the concret production o only concre plant certific oposed sourc ting a minimu riod shall be i t been previou e proposed d mped and si all include specified ha submittals are c phase of the tals are requir ndard sp portatio sage rate shall rosion inhibiti nitrite by weig cium nitrite sh ded to the en rete .
eptable verific m computeriz pensing units .
ification shall b s shall supply a cuments .
ssemblies sha e stored at lea ll submit the of the supply at the concre ca plant ce te supplier sh of the concret ete supplied fr cation shall be ces of aggreg um of num day ncreased to a usly approved design mix p igned by the ardened prope e required for e work being u red in accorda pecificat on and inf structures l be num lmnum .
ng calcium ni ght of solution all be added a ngineer for the cation shall in zed batch pl be provided o ny associated all be available ast num mm o source of sup y of the concr ete supplier i rtification pro hall submit p te in accordan rom such cer e maintained f gates and tes ys prior to the a minimum of d for use in the proportions c professiona erties and ag this item and undertaken .
ance with any tions frastruc s itrite admixtur .
at the concret e quantity of t nclude but is lants or prin on the delivery d materials ne e from the ow off the ground pply of portla rete to the wo s certified in ogram or the e proof of confo nce with csa rtified plants s for the duratio st results sha e proposed u f num days if th e owners pro certified by th l engineer w e of testing fo are containe y crossreferen cture re shall conta te ready mix p he calcium ni s not necess ntouts from y slip .
ecessary for c wner. . and cement c ork and this s n accordance equivalent as ormance to t a anum .
shall be acce on of the wor all be submit se of such m he aggregate ojects .
he contracto who reviewed or strength a ed within the s nced item form ain between num plant and verif trite added to sarily limited t computerized onstruction a concrete to th submittal sha e with atlanti follows he requireme ptable to the rk .
tted to the e materials .
this s proposed fo or or hisher d the concret ir and perme sections applic ming part of th item num page num num to num fication shall each batch to printouts d admixture as shown on he engineer all consist of c concrete ents for the owner and engineer in s notification or use have agent and te mix and eability .
cable to the his item .
co pag num num num num num num num num oncrete in ge num num const num .num gen .num .num .num .num num .num equ num .num num .num num .num num num .num fals .num structure ruction neral the contract specifically di concrete ma shall conform the contract of each concr when detaile described in num ipment and p batching .num the con being ac propertie .num the m to the mixing .num mixers a site and longer tim .num unde a tim delivery .num the batc batch of c .num the b .num addition o .num wate engin .num s sework and fo the contract with item num departm es tor shall carry irected by the aterials and m m to csa anum .
tor shall notify rete placemen ed in the cont num in acc production ntractor has t ccurately and s. moisture cont e batching of nd agitators u discharge sha me is specifica er conditions c me of less than ch delivery tick concrete deliv batch ticket sh of water er shall not be neer .
slump adjustm ormwork tor shall be re num .
sta ment of tr structu y out the wo engineer .
methods of co .num and csa a y the enginee nt .
ract documen cordance with he responsib consistently tent for aggreg concrete .
used for tran all be complet ally authorized contributing to n num½ hours .
ket meeting th vered to site .
hall include qu e added after ment of super esponsible fo andard s ransport ures rk as indicate oncrete constr anum if not ot er at least two nts the contra h the contract bility to ensure batched to p gates shall be sporting conc ted within num½ d in writing by o rapid stiffen he requireme uantities of ma r batching for plasticized co r all falsework specifica tation an ed in the con ruction and m therwise spec o days in adva actor shall ins documents .
e that the co produce the s e determined crete shall de ½ hours of com y the engineer ing of concret nts of csa a aterials batch any purpose oncrete shall b k design and ations nd infras ntract docum methods of te cified herein .
ance of the c stall the assoc oncrete mix p specified mix and adjustme eliver their loa mpletion of bat r. te the engine anum shall ac hed .
e without the a be with admixt construction tructur item num january num ents andor a est for concret ommenceme ciated materia proportions ar x and concret ents made prio ad to the wo tching unless eer may speci ccompany eac approval of th ture only .
in accordanc re num num as te nt als re te or rk a fy ch he ce depa conc janua num num num num artment crete in st ary num num .num the with .num all .num placem num .num ge .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num .num foo .num stan of trans ructures e contractor h item num. submissions w ment neral all concrete in the contra new concre compressive .num all load enginee bonding of n .num before d tightene laitance .num hardene ponding .num methods shall be the contrac selected con the time of unless other concrete sh .num concret joints wi .num retemp permitte concrete pl contract do if the concre sequence of least num mm otings and wo where over placed in ac ndard sp portatio shall be resp with respect t shall be plac act document ete shall be d e strength .
s to be appl er .
new concrete depositing ne d and the sur removed .
ed concrete in advance o s of obtaining subject to the ctor shall dete nstruction me batching unti rwise authoriz all be placed e at the adva thin a concret pering any p ed .
lacement adv cuments and ete details are f placing a bu m. orking slabs rexcavation oc cordance with pecificat on and inf structures onsible for al o falsework a ced in a space ts .
efined as con ied on new on hardened ew concrete rface of the h surfaces sha of placing con g an adequate e approval of t ermine requir ethod and tem il final placing zed in writing .
while still plas ancing face of te placing ope artially harde vancement s or authorized e such that a f ulkhead shall ccurs in the s h standard dr tions frastruc s ll formwork de and formwork e free of stand ncrete that ha concrete sha concrete sha on concrete hardened conc all be thorou ncrete .
e bond betwe the engineer .
red delivery te mperature con g shall be ma stic and worka f the concrete eration shall n ened concrete hall be upg d by the engin feather edge o be introduce solid rock exc rawing num cture esign and co shall be in ac ding water un as not attaine all be subject all be carried o that has set crete shall ha ughly saturat een the harde .
emperature o ntrol but con aintained betw able .
e placement m not be permitte e with additio rade unless neer .
or thin section ed to maintain cavation for fo and as follow nstruction in ccordance with nless otherwis ed its minimu t to the appr out as follows the forms s ave all foreign ted with wat ened and fres of concrete to ncrete temper ween num c must be plast ed .
onal water s otherwise no n might be cre n an edge thic ootings concr ws item num page num accordance h item num. se specified m specified roval of the shall be re matter and ter without sh concrete o satisfy the ratures from and num c tic and cold hall not be oted in the eated by the ckness of at rete shall be co pag num num num num oncrete in ge num num num .num num .num num .num structure .num dow footin .num if the botto botto .num t m .num prior to compress .num for step placed in upper po shall perm .num the free w columns .num concrete in the co .num prior to t attained protection .num concrete compress .num falsewor attained num .num unless s the supe character tbeam span .num concrete .num concrete box girders .num concrete .num the b and t departm es n to an eleva ng the contra e overexcava om of the foo om of the exca the working mpa at num da the placemen sive strength ped footings n two or more ortion shall be mit .
concrete in th water or laitan e in columns s ontract docum the placemen a minimum n requirement e in columns s sive strength rk supported num of its min pecifically pe erstructure un r of concrete i ns e in girder web e in a tbeam e in box girder bottom slab s the webs .
sta ment of tr structu ation of num m actor shall pla ation is in exc oting the co avation up to t slab shall ha ys .
nt of footings of num mpa .
and similar s stages and w e placed as s he lower porti nce shall be re shall be place ments andor a nt of walls or compressive ts must be sa shall be allow of num mpa be by brackets nimum specifi rmitted by the ntil column fo in the column bs shall be de span shall be rs shall be pla hall be placed andard s ransport ures mm below the ce the concre cess of num m ontractor shal the bottom of ave a minimu s the workin stepped form where the mo soon as stiffen on shall be d emoved befor ed in one cont as directed by column form e strength of atisfied in acco wed to cure a efore adjacent on columns ed compress e engineer in rms have be s. posited unifor e placed in on ced in two or d first with a c specifica tation an e specified ele ete specified fo mm below th l place work the specified m specified c ng slab concr mwork details onolithic natur ning of the co designed so a re the next lay tinuous opera y the engineer mwork all conc f num mpa a ordance with num minimum of num t formwork is p shall not be ive strength .
n writing con een stripped s rmly in horizo ne continuous three separat construction jo ations nd infras evation of the for the footing e specified e ing slab con footing eleva compressive rete shall hav where conc re has to be m oncrete in the as to minimize yer of concret ation unless o r. crete in footin nd the footin num .
num hours and placed .
e placed until ncrete shall no sufficiently to ntal layers .
operation .
te operations .
oint between t tructur item num january num e bottom of th .
elevation of th crete from th ation .
strength of num ve a minimu rete has to b maintained th e lower portio e bleeding an e is placed .
otherwise note ngs must hav ng curing an d to a minimu l concrete ha ot be placed determine th .
the bottom sla re num num he he he num m be he on ny ed ve nd m as in he ab depa conc janua num num num artment crete in st ary num num .num dec .num .num .num .num num .num sup .num num .num pro .num .num stan of trans ructures cks and diaph all diaphragm prestressed diaphragms prior to placi .num pier diap live load as show deck concre structure .
the deck sl strength prio superimpose .num bulkhea until the following .num no com the deck sl minimum sp deck slab .
perstructure r the load of abutments u specified com ofile of bridge longitudinal engineer .
.num the con system a or other .num when th transver .num the adva the where exce carry out gra ndard sp portatio hragms m concrete w girders that must have ng the concre phragms in pr d shall be plac wn on the conc ete shall be pla ab concrete m or to the plac ed dead load ads for the dec e deck slab c g the initial se disturbance mpressive stre ab concrete a pecified comp reactions on b f the superstr until concrete mpressive str superstructu girders tra ntractor shall a minimum of additional loa he contractor rse floor beam e contractor s ance of the pl superstructur essive cambe ade adjustmen pecificat on and inf structures with the excep t are made attained num ete for the dec restressed co ced concurren crete placeme aced uniforml must have at cement of cur on the deck s ck slab placem concrete reac t of the deck s of the emb ngth of num mp and continuou pressive stren bents piers ructure shall e in the bent rength .
re componen nsverse floor notify the en f num days in ad ads on the su r carries out t ms and stringe shall submit th lacement of a re .
er of precast nts as directe tions frastruc s ption of contin continuous f of its minim ck slab or any oncrete girder ntly with the p ent diagram in ly and symme ttained num o rb barrierwal slab .
ment shall rem ches a minim slab concrete bedded reinfo pa is achieved us pier diaph ngth prior to t or abutments not be allowe ts piers or ab nts r beams and ngineer of the dvance of the perstructure t the surveying ers shall be pr he profiles to any falsework prestressed ed by the eng cture uous pier dia for live load mum specifie y other superim bridges that portion of the d n the contract etrically with re of its minimum lls or sidewa main in place um compress e. orcing shall d. ragms must h the placemen s ed to come u butments has d stringers s e availability o placement of to allow for the g under item num rofiled by the c the engineer formwork or beams occu ineer .
p phragms for b and integra d compressiv mposed dead are made co deck over the t documents .
espect to the m specified c lk concrete o for at least num sive strength occur until a have attained nt of any vehi upon the ben s reached th shall be prof of hisher saf f any falsewor e profiling .
num longitud contractor .
a minimum o other addition urs the cont item num page num bridges with al abutment ve strength d loads .
ntinuous for e same pier width of the compressive or any other num hours and of num mpa a minimum d num of its icles on the nts piers or e minimum iled by the fety support rk formwork inal girders of num days in nal loads on tractor shall co pag num num num oncrete in ge num num .num num .num num .num trem .num structure bridge decks .num the deck starting a the contr .num concrete contract .num placi .num vehic conti comp .num deck sla between .num during th cost to th exposed water spr multispan st .num before d girders sh .num the place not proce preceding mie concrete the contract concrete plac accordance w .num tremie p spacing o .num a co place .num during p particular and level documen .num conc .num prior to a area sha .num the l departm es s k slab concre at one end of ract documen e in continuou documents .
ing of concret cles or any s nuous structu pressive stren b safety curb november nums he concreting he owner tha portions of a ray .
teel girder bri deck slab con hall be remov ement of dec eed until the m g concrete de tor in conjunc cement includ with aci num ipes shall be of num m. all p ncrete pump ement plan .
lacing the up r care must be l upper surfac nts .
crete in exces any placing o ll be securely lower templat sta ment of tr structu ete for a simp a span and p nts .
us slab and sl te in deck slab superimposed ure until all c ngth .
b parapet ba st and may numst of the deck s t cement past steel superst idges ncrete is plac ved .
k concrete for minimum spe eck placement ction with the ding mix desig csa anum a kept filled with pipes shall be may be used pper surface o e taken to ens ce num mm o ss of num mm of the tremie held in prope te shall be loc andard s ransport ures ple span shall proceeding to labongirder bs shall be co d dead load s concrete has arrier wall an unless autho lab and barrie te or other lea tructure empl ced on steel r any single p ecified compre ts as detaile concrete sup gn contingen and the follow h concrete wh used in contin d to charge tre of the concret sure that the t or num mm of of the upper d concrete ver er alignment b ated a maxim specifica tation an l be placed in the other end bridges shall ntinuous betw shall not be a attained num d sidewalk c orized by the e er walls the c akage from th oying an eng spans the fa placement on essive strengt ed in the contr pplier shall pla ncies monitor wing minimum hile depositing nuous rotation emie pipes as te must be ke tremie concre f the elevation designated su rtical shaft re by steel templa mum of num m ab ations nd infras n one continu d unless othe l be placed a ween construc allowed on an of its mini concrete shall engineer in w ontractor sha e forms is rem gineer approv falsework sup a continuous th has been a ract documen an all aspects ring and test requirements g and shall ha n to maintain c s part of an ap ept as level a ete has a reas n designated urface shall be einforcing bars ates .
bove the top o tructur item num january num uous operatio erwise noted s shown in th ction joints .
ny portion of mum specifie not be place writing .
ll ensure at n moved from th ved pressurize pporting bridg structure sha attained for th nts .
s of underwate placements s ave a maximu concrete leve pproved trem as possible an sonably smoot in the contra e removed .
s in the trem of the tremie .
re num num n in he a ed ed no he ed ge all he er in m l. ie nd th ct ie depa conc janua num num num artment crete in st ary num num .num .num in t rem .num .num the of e .num .num .num .num constru num .num lim .num .num stan of trans ructures .num the upp during placi following con .num the con once the rate of n .num for plac app .num the con concrete .num a maxim concrete of num m the area of p moved and the all laitance a be disposed e owner shall each pier for t the contrac assistance th the contrac tremie coring should such at hisher ow engineer to .num the co addition remedia uction joints mitation in use construction or as approv equipment bulkheads p vertical cons the roadwa ndard sp portatio per template is ing of the str nditions ntractor shall e contractor w not less than num a plan area g ced at a rate roved in writin ncrete must co e at any time d mum centre t e placement a m from the insid pier shafts at e top of the fo and concretin of outside the l arrange to h he purpose of ctor shall as hat may be ne ctor shall susp g operation .
h cores identif wn expense remedy the d ntractor shall al coring to ation plan satis e of construct n joints shall n ved in writing or other unfo parallel to the p struction joint y. pecificat on and inf structures s to be positio uctural tremie only begin t warrants the c num cubic metre greater than num of not less ng by the eng ontain enough during the pla to centre spa and the outsid de face of the t the top of t oting shall be g residue sha e work area .
ave one or m f checking the s part of the ecessary to en pend all of he fy defects or f carry out co deficiencies id be responsi determine th sfactory to the ion joints not be permitt g by the engin oreseen reas principal lines ts in deck slab tions frastruc s oned near the e the contra the tremie pla capability of s es per hour th num square m than num cubi gineer .
h retarder to e acement .
acing of trem de rows of trem e sheet piling c the structural e chipped dow all become th ore cores dril e quality and s work provi nable the drill erhis construc fail to meet th orrective meas dentified in the ible at herh he full exten e engineer .
ted except tho neer unless sons in whic s of stress .
bs shall not b cture top of the cof actor must sat acement for upplying and hroughout the metres concre ic metres per ensure a minim ie pipes shal mie pipes sha cofferdam wa tremie footin wn to sound co e property of led from the s strength of the de access p ling to be carr ction operatio he specificati sures subjec e structural tre is own expen nt of the def ose shown in occasioned b ch case the c be allowed pa p fferdam .
tisfy as a mi the footings o placing the co entire placem ete shall be s r hour unless mum depth of ll be num m in all be spaced alls .
ng the laitan oncrete .
the contracto structural trem e concrete pla platforms and ried out efficie ns on the pie ons the con ct to the appr emie concrete nse for the c fects and to the contract by the breakd contractor sh arallel to the c item num page num inimum the of any pier oncrete at a ment .
upplied and s otherwise f num m of fluid any footing a maximum ce shall be or and shall mie concrete acement .
d any other ently .
er during the tractor shall roval of the e. cost of any develop a documents down of the hall provide centreline of co pag num num num num oncrete in ge num num .num num .num plac num .num finis app asph app con foo colu and misp colu and foo vari num .num structure use of keys .num suitable other leve .num keys or documen cing and finis tolerances .num unless ot grade an shed bridge d proach slab di halt concrete proach slab bu ncrete bridge b ting grades umns walls c exposed win placement or umns piers w exposed win tings ation in sizes upper horizo .num the conc upper ho directed b .num use .num stee departm es keys shall be els where wo construction nts unless oth hing plastic c therwise requ d dimension s pla position deck rectly overlaid uried below gr bearing block surface var cap beams a gwalls eccentricity in walls beams ngwalls and location ontal surfaces crete shall be orizontal surfa by the engine of mortar topp l floats shall n sta ment of tr structu e formed at th ork is interrupt joints shall b herwise perm concrete uired in the co shall be as sh t acing and fin in structure g surfa d with su rade surfa k or seat riation from le and high qual surface v n pier cap be and high qu cross plan dim misplac of slab and w s e placed in th aces shall be eer .
ping shall not not be permitte andard s ransport ures he top of the ted .
be of the typ itted by the e ontract docum hown in table table num nishing tole grades ace variation grades urface variatio grades ace variation grades vel or specifie lity surface ar variation from eam bridge ality surface a sectional dim mensions widt cement or ecc wall openings he forms in su e as indicated be permitted .
ed .
specifica tation an e upper layer pe and detail ngineer .
ments the ma num. rance limits on ed slope reas true line seat areas mensions thlength centricity dir uch a way th d in the con .
ations nd infras of each day as shown in ximum deviat s tolera num m num mm ov num m num mm ov num m num mm o num to num num .
num mm num m num num mm num m num of footing rection of mis num num hat the final e ntract docume tructur item num january num s work and n the contra tions from line ance mm ver num m mm ver num m mm ver num m num mm .num num mm mm mm num mm mm g dimension in placement bu mm mm elevation of th ents andor a re num num at ct e n ut he as depa conc janua num num num artment crete in st ary num num .num bea .num num .num brid .num .num .num .num num .num brid .num .num .num .num .num stan of trans ructures aring surface where bear surfaces on plane .
.num if bearin artificiall sandpap dge curbs an sidewalks a elevations sh the concrete floating sha before this centre line o dge decks concrete br following sec continuous provided by .num access .num the acc placing of c that .num the rate operatio .num the nec use .
the finishing .num bull floa falsework a concrete an .num care sh weight o .num suitable measure ndard sp portatio s ring pads oth which pads a ng block sur y roughened per .
d sidewalks and curbs sh hown in the c e shall be wor all be kept to a finish has se of the roadwa ridge decks s ctions .
access to th the contracto shall be provi cess bridges s oncrete in br e of producin ons within the cessary tools g operations fo ts or magnes and wedges nd the contrac hall be exercis of the bridge d e means sh ement by the pecificat on and inf structures her than steel are to be plac rfaces are gr d as required hall be cons contract docu rked with a m a minimum co et the surface ay with a fine shall be finish he bridge de or .
ded by means shall be positio ridge decks sh g and placing scheduled tim and equipme or silica fume ium trowels s shall be che ctor shall mak sed to ensure deck concrete hall be prov engineer of s tions frastruc s l are shown ced shall be w round to me d to produce structed by p ments .
agnesium floa nsistent with t e shall be lig dry broom .
hed by power eck surface s of suitable t oned as requi hall not be pe g concrete sh me .
ent are at the modified con hall be used t ecked immed ke necessary e that settlem e is minimal .
vided by the settlement and cture in the contra wood or mag eet tolerances a surface te placing concr at to give a un the desired fin ghtly roughen r machine me during finish transverse bri ired by the en ermitted until hall be sufficie e site and in ncrete shall be to remove def diately prior adjustments .
ment and defl e contractor d deflection .
p act document nesium floate s the surfac exture similar rete continuo niform surface nish .
ed perpendic ethod as spec ing operation idges .
ngineer .
the engineer ent to comple satisfactory c e limited to scr fects .
to placing b ection due to r to permit item num page num ts concrete ed to a level ce shall be r to coarse usly to the e. cular to the cified in the ns shall be r is satisfied ete finishing condition for reeding .
bridge deck o the added immediate co pag num num num oncrete in ge num num num .num num .num structure .num screed b deck to t required .num scre defle .num scre .num supp .num i t s . .num the c to su .num f o e d e deck surface .num areas ou engineer .num it sha conc screed mach .num screedin machines .num prior to b over the f .num this .num while for d the c .num nece departm es bars or pipes s the line and for any antici ed bars and ect appreciably ed pipes or ba ports for scree f the supports type which ca so that no par num the supp deck conc hardened approval o contractor sh upport the add for steel girde or the contrac engineer acc deformations engineer .
e repairs to m utside of tolera r. all not be acce crete that has hines g of bridge de s approved b beginning con full length of t test run shall e operating th eflection and controlling dim essary correct sta ment of tr structu shall be set to grade as sho ipated settlem pipes shall be y under the ap ars for deck p ed pipes or ba s for the rails an be removed rt remains less ports shall be crete before th the holes of the enginee hall be respon ditional loads i er bridges sc ctor shall subm eptable to th or permanen meet toleranc ances identifie eptable to ach hardened .
ecks shall be by the enginee ncrete placing the bridge seg be made with he screeding proper adjust mensions of sla tions shall be andard s ransport ures the correct e own in the c ment andor ca e of such typ pplied loads .
pours shall be ars shall not be are located i d without dist s than num mm e removed an he deck conc shall be ent er .
sible for the d mposed by th creed rails sha mit an analysi he owner de nt loads impa ces ed in table num hieve this repa accomplished er .
operations t gment to be p h the screed in machine in th tment the co ab reinforcem made before specifica tation an elevation to fo ontract docu ambered defle pe and be ins firmly secure e carried upo n the concret turbing the co m below the fin nd the resulti crete has hard irely filled an design of deck he powerdrive all be support is stamped a emonstrating arted to the g num shall be air by placing d by powerd the screeding placed .
n its finishing his test the sc over on slab re ment and forms starting the p ations nd infras orm the surfac ments with a ection of the s stalled so that ed prior to plac n reinforcing s te the suppor oncrete or pa nished concret ng holes ent dened or onc nd finished k hangers and en screeding ted on the top and signed by there will be girders for a e repaired as d grout or conc riven bridge d g machine sha position .
creed rails sh einforcement s checked .
placement of c tructur item num january num ce of the bridg allowances a structure .
t they shall no cing concrete .
steel .
rts shall be th artially remove te surface .
tirely filled wit ce concrete ha subject to th d form bracke machine .
p girder flang a profession e no excessiv pproval by th directed by th crete over dec deck screedin all be operate hall be checke measured an concrete .
re num num ge as ot .
he ed th as he ts e al ve he he ck ng ed ed nd depa conc janua num num artment crete in st ary num num .num .num curing .num the pla and .num co ac .num all .num .num .num .num .num equ the stan of trans ructures after the co dense slab machine .
.num the scre porous p .num the con the deck num m inte .num if th scre .num the scr uniforml .num the fina and protectio e contractor cement the p d protection of ncrete shall b ci num and ac exposed conc the curing p concrete pla attained num .num wet cu absorpti the curing p grout placem a burlap ab after finishin a fog mist screeding un way as to m concrete sur .num water s misting concrete uipment and m worksite and ndard sp portatio oncrete has b the surface s eeding machi places .
ntractor shall k slab across rvals .
he top cover eeding operati reeding opera y consolidate al deck finish s on shall submit proposed me f the concrete e protected a ci num. crete surfaces period for con acement and for concrete ring shall be ive mat or fa period for mo ment or as rec bsorptive mat g of the concr system shal ntil concrete i maintain high rface .
hall not be al when placin e has achieve materials nece d ready for us pecificat on and inf structures been placed shall be struc ne shall carry verify the top the deck with or the thickn ion shall be re ation shall be d dense and shall be obtain t to the engi thod and seq e. gainst plastic s mortar and ncrete shall be until num o e placed betw e carried ou bric kept cont ortar or grout commended b t or nonwov rete surface .
ll be applied is covered wit relative humi lowed to drip ng the burlap ed final set .
essary for cur e before place tions frastruc s spread and ck off immedia y sufficient co cover on the hin num m of the ness of deck epeated .
e repeated a d smooth surfa ned by metho ineer for app quence to be or dry shrinka grout shall be e for a minim of the minimu ween novemb ut by means tinuously wet shall be num d by the manufa ven geotextile continuously th burlap or n idity above th flow or pudd p or nonwov ring and prote ement of conc cture consolidated ately by the p oncrete in fron e reinforcing s screeding op k slab does n as may be n ace true to the ds approved proval num day employed in age cracking e continuously mum of num day um specified ber numst and ma of ponding t. days from the acturer .
e fabric shall y to bridge d nonwoven ge he concrete a dle on the con ven fabric or ection of conc crete commen p d to provide passage of the nt of the scree steel and the t peration at a m not meet tole necessary to e lines and gr by the engine ys prior to th the work fo by strict adhe y wet cured .
ys from the co compressive ay numst .
continuous completion o be applied i decks from t eotextile fabric and prevent d ncrete surface at any time rete shall be a nces .
item num page num a uniformly e screeding ed to fill low thickness of maximum of erances the produce a rade .
eer .
he concrete r the curing erence to ompletion of strength is sprinkling of mortar or immediately the time of c in such a rying of the e during fog before the available on co pag num num num num oncrete in ge num num .num .num .num .num .num num .num cold num .num num .num structure freshly finish construction o .num the con concrete it shall be th protection is p material or e placed on eit continuous s bridge decks formwork sh .num when for surfaces .num for verti vertical s plastic .
d weather re general .num for the p between .num cold ambi below .num the cont meet the acts and .num curing a compress .num during p cessation .num contracto days is a materials .num the temp the mixed than num departm es hed concrete operations .
ntractor shall damaged by he responsib properly cons equipment ot ther the conc tructures with shall be barr all not be rem rmwork is rem shall be kept cal surfaces urface supply equirements purpose of thi november nums weather cur ient temperatu w num c within tractor shall e e inspection r regulations .
nd protection sive strength eriods of free n of moist curi or shall plan h allowed prior t perature of ma d concrete at c. sta ment of tr structu shall be prote repair or rep the elements bility of the c tructed and m ther than tha crete deck be hout the appro icaded from tr moved before num moved prior to wet until the c curing shall ying a continu s specification st and may numst .
ing and prote ure is at or be the next num ho ensure that all requirements shall continu is obtained on ezing tempera ing and then b hisher work o being subje aterial charge t the time of p andard s ransport ures ected from th place subjec or defaceme contractor to maintained for at required fo eing cured or oval of the en raffic until com num days withou o the completio curing period be carried o uous source o n cold weathe .
ection shall b elow num c or our period .
boilers used and operatin ue for num days n field cured c atures the pro be gradually w such that afte ected to applic ed in the mixer lacement doe specifica tation an e elements a ct to the app ent .
ensure that r the period of or actual curin portions of d ngineer .
mpletely cured ut the approva on of curing t is completed out by secur of moisture to er curing and be required o r in the engin for heating m ng conditions and until num cylinders .
otection shall withdrawn in a er completion cation of deic r shall be such es not exceed ations nd infras and from defa proval of the the system f time required ng operations decks on adja d. al of the engin the newly exp .
ring wet burla the burlap a protection sh utside of thes eers opinion materials and of all applica of the mini continue for accordance w of curing a m cing chemicals h that the tem num c nor sh tructur item num january num acement due t engineer an of curing an d. s shall not b acent spans neer .
posed concret ap against th nd sealing wit hall be in effe se dates if th is likely to fa d housing sha able provinci imum specifie num hours afte with num. minimum of num s. mperature of all it be less re num num to ny nd be of te he th ct he all all al ed er num depa conc janua num num .
num .
num .
artment crete in st ary num num .num .num num .num pla .num .num num .num enc .num .num num .num he .num .num .num .num stan of trans ructures .num the co tempera frozen lump water over num acing concrete sh formwork e ice and snow num oc for a m closed protec protective ho substantial f .num housing proceed use of roll permitted on .num their use .num the conc .num the resu ating within a housing sha num mm at a .num this mi columns by insula the heating of not less th these cond the minimum unvented he concrete .
.num all conc phenolp combus ndard sp portatio ontractor may ature limits sha ps of aggregat num c shall no all not be plac existing concr w and shall be inimum period ctive housing ousing shall b framework .
g shall be of d unhampered back sheetin n horizontal su e does not pre crete is covere ulting housing a housing all be construc all points .
nimum shall s and walls un ated formwork system shall han num c nor itions shall be m specified co eaters shall b crete surface phthalein carb tion products .
pecificat on and inf structures y heat water all be met .
te shall be exc ot be brought ced against fr rete at a cons e preheated t d of num hours be wind and w adequate siz d. ng or tarpaulin urfaces provid eclude the atta ed progressiv satisfies all th cted so that it include the nless the eng k. provide at al r more than num e maintained ompressive str be removed f es shall be c bonation indic .
tions frastruc s or water a cluded from th in direct conta rozen surfaces struction joint to and mainta prior to place weather tight ze so proper ns supported ded aining of the r vely as placed he specified p is clear of co underside of gineer has au ll times an ai num c. for a minimum rength is obta from the place checked prior cator to ensu cture nd aggregate he mix .
act with the ce s. and reinforc ained at a tem ement .
constructed o placing and f from screed required surfa and provisions of th oncrete and fo f bridge bea thorized the p ir temperature m of seven co ained .
ement area p r to acceptan ure that surfac p e to ensure ement .
cing steel sha mperature of n of suitable ma finishing proc rails or othe ace finish his item .
ormwork by a ams slabs c protection of t e throughout t ontinuous da prior to the pl nce into the ces are not d item num page num that these ll be free of ot less than aterials on a cedures can er means is minimum of cap beams these areas the housing ays and until lacement of work with damaged by co pag num num num num oncrete in ge num num num .num num .num num .num hot .num .num .num .num .num structure .num at the tim or an imp heaters .
.num whe and c .num the hou sufficient establish the speci insulation .num insulation procedur minimum the minim .num when th providing weather surface o a period obtained .num the prop least two .num insulating withdrawal o .num after com gradually the temp exceed num weather req for the purpo temperature i within the nex hot weather p the contract agree to prov when the dry defined by c engineer .
the tempera is to be place departm es me of placing a permeable me n dry heat is concrete surfa sing shall be t period prior and maintain ified curing pe n may be used res are such th m of num c and mum specified e ambient tem g an r value conditions a of the concrete of num continuo .
posed method weeks in adv g materials sh of protection mpletion of th y reduced at perature differ num c. quirements ose of this sp is at or above xt num hours .
placing of con tor must dem vide this prote ying condition cancsa a ture of the for ed shall not ex sta ment of tr structu and during cu embrane from used the prod aces shall be e completed to placing c n the specifie eriod .
d to protect co hat the tempe d a maximum d compressive mperatures a of not less nd insulation e is maintaine ous days and d of insulation vance of use .
hall be kept dr e specified c a rate not to rential betwee pecification ho e num c or in t ncrete shall no onstrate that ction before a ns meet mode anum the dr rmwork reinfo xceed num c. andard s ransport ures uring concrete m direct expos ducts of comb kept continuo and the heat oncrete to pr d curing cond oncrete provid erature of the s of num c for a e strength is o are anticipated than num may n procedures ed at a minim d until the min n shall be su ry .
uring period t exceed num c en ambient ai ot weather sha the opinion of ot proceed wit he can provi any approval c erate drying c rying protectio orcing steel a specifica tation an e surfaces sha sure to comb bustion shall ously wet .
ting system rove the ade ditions during ding weather surface of the a period of num c obtained .
d to be num y be used to are such th um of num c a nimum specif ubmitted to th the temperatu c per hour to ir temperature all be conside f the engineer thout the appr ide adequate can be given t conditions or on must mee and material ations nd infras all be protecte bustion gases be vented to shall be in o quacy of the the placing a conditions an e concrete is m continuous da c or lower protect conc hat the temp and a maximu fied compress he engineer f ure of the con o that of the s e and the con ered to be whe r is likely to ris roval of the en hot weather to start placin severe drying et with the a against which tructur item num january num ed by formwo or drying fro the outside a operation for e equipment t and througho nd insulation maintained at ays and until then insulatio crete providin perature of th um of num c fo sive strength for approval a ncrete shall b surrounding a ncrete shall no en the ambie se above num ngineer .
protection an g concrete .
g conditions a approval of th h new concret re num num rk m air a to ut a on ng he or is at be ir .
ot nt c nd as he te depa conc janua num .
num num .
artment crete in st ary num num .num the num .num exp from .num finishin num .num ge .num .num .num .num stan of trans ructures e mixing wate c. posed surface m direct wind .
ng hardened c neral the following .num abutmen .num columns .num vertical .num safety c all other con directed by t the contrac .num the refe .num with on t this con .num the pan reinforci .num the pan and prot .num the .num once th compari .num the con panel o for compon select an ar area is acce .num the sel complian ndard sp portatio er andor aggre es of concrete .
concrete g concrete su nt endposts b s and cap bea faces and bot curbs and side ncrete surfac the engineer .
ctor shall cast erence panel s h the approva the structure .
reference pa ntractors own nel shall be ca ng that shall b nel shall be ca tection that sh e surface finish he reference son in assess ntractor shall utside of the w nents other th rea of the com ptable to the ected finishe nce with the f pecificat on and inf structures egates shall b e shall be sha urfaces shall re barrierwalls a ams ttom side of ri ewalks with ex es shall rece for a barrierw shall be cast s al of the engin no further ba anel is not a expense .
ast in the sam be incorporate ast with the sa hall be applied h shall be revi panel is acc sing complian be responsibl work site .
han barrierwa mponent and engineer .
ed area shall finish required tions frastruc s be cooled whe aded from the eceive a hig and outside ed igid frame gra xposed concre eive an ordin wall a site ref separate from neer this num m arrier walls sh ccepted it sh me orientation ed into the wo ame concrete d for the barrie iewed for app cepted it sha ce of the high le for the remo alls the cont the contract be used for d for the comp cture en the temper e direct rays h quality surf dges of the de ade separation ete surfaces .
nary surface ference panel m the structure reference pa hall be placed hall be remov with the sam ork .
e mix and met erwalls .
proval by the e all remain on h quality finish oval and disp tractor and th tor shall finish r comparison ponent .
p rature of the m of the sun an face finish eck n structures a finish unles num m in length e. anel may be c d until this is ved and repla me formwork m thod of placem engineer .
nsite for the h for the barrie posal of the sit he engineer h the area su n purposes in item num page num mix exceeds nd sheltered and s otherwise h. cast in place accepted .
if aced at the material and ment curing purpose of erwalls .
te reference shall jointly uch that the n assessing co pag num num num num oncrete in ge num num .num num .
.num num .num num .num structure defects form .num immediat be clearly of the def .num the c .num c .num a a defects bridg .num isolated l area pro .num if rem main .num isolated follows .num if the cut c .num if the remo .num isolated l with an e ordinary surf .num all surfac removal grout mix incorpora .num all object totally rem .num if the con finish t designate high quality .num prior to fi surface to .num the surfa departm es med surfaces tely after the y marked and fect for herhis contractor sh cement wash all defects sha adjacent surfa ge deck ocal depressi vided the spe moval of the ntaining specif local depress e depression h chipped and p e depression h oved and repla ocal defects l engineer appro face finish ce voids large of the formw x of cement a ate a latex bon tionable fins moved to the ncrete surface he contracto ed portions o surface finish nishing and w o identify all a ace shall first sta ment of tr structu removal of fo d the contrac s review .
hall submit a re es of any kind all be finished ace .
ons less than ecified cover is e depression fied cover then sions more th has an area l patched with a has an area g aced per item ess than num m oved product er than num m work shall be and fine sand nding agent .
projections o engineers sa e does not ad or shall as or all of the con h without defaci air voids .
be given an o andard s ransport ures orms any part tor shall notify epair procedu d shall not be d smooth uni num mm deep s s maintained .
by means o n the affected han num mm d less than num an engineer a reater than num .
num as di mm in diamete compatible wi mm in diamete filled to their d from the sa offsets streak atisfaction .
dequately fulf directed by ncrete and re ing the surfac ordinary surfa specifica tation an of the work fy the enginee ure for approv used .
iformly colour shall be remov of grinding ca area shall be eep shall be num mnum then the approved repa .num mnum then th irected by eng er and less th ith the waterp er and cavitie r entire depth ame source a ks or other su fill the require the enginee eplace with ne ce the contra ace finish as ations nd infras which display er of the locat val .
r matched and ved by grindin annot be car e repaired per removed an e affected are air material .
he affected co gineer .
han num mm dee proofing system es or holes vi h with an app as used in the urface imperfe ements for or er entirely re ew concrete .
actor shall pres specified in num tructur item num january num ys defects sha tion and exte d flush with th ng the adjacen rried out whi num. nd replaced a ea shall be sa oncrete shall b ep may be fille m. isible upon th proved ceme e concrete an ections shall b rdinary surfac emove certa ssure wash th num .
re num num all nt he nt le as aw be ed he nt nd be ce in he depa conc janua num .
num .
num num .
num .
artment crete in st ary num num .num .num num .num brid .num .num .num .num .num .num quality num .num ge .num .num .num .num num .num qu .num stan of trans ructures small surfac filled to thei from the sam the entire s without pits o dge deck sur the entire d profile which any sharp pr the final co by the intern .num surface the conc .num con that areas where shall be cur manufacture the entire s compressed deck surfac and in acco applying me testing neral the contra proper curin facilities sh and process samples sh engineer .
the contrac final dischar ality control t the contra placement i .num results enginee ndard sp portatio ce voids due t ir entire depth me source as urface shall b or irregularitie rface preparat eck shall be s h is clean of a rotrusions and ncrete surface national concr profile shall n crete deck .
ntractor shall s are noncomp e rapid setting red for minim ers written spe surface shall d air to the sa ce shall be all ordance with t mbrane .
ctor shall pr ng of concrete all be provide ses used in th all be obtaine ctor is respon rge the chara testing ctor shall ca including air of quality c er .
pecificat on and inf structures to entrapped a h with an app used in the co be finished to es .
tion shot blasted all foreign ma d of laitance .
e profile shall rete repair in not interfere w submit a repa pliant .
g patching ma um of num hou ecifications p then be swe tisfaction of th owed to dry f the waterproo ovide and m e test specime ed by the con he manufactur ed at final po nsible for sup acteristics spe arry out qual temperature control tests tions frastruc s air shall be cl proved ceme oncrete and in produce a sm andor using aterials such l range betwe nstitute icri with the adhes air procedure aterials have b urs or longer prior to applyin ept and clean he engineer .
for a minimum ofing manufac maintain adeq ens on the pro ntractor for th re and delive oint of dischar pplying concr ecified in the c lity control s and slump te s shall be re cture eaned to rem nt grout mix ncorporating a mooth dense s equivalent m as asphalt o een a csp num technical gu sion of the wa to the engine been approved r when recom ng primer or in ned by pressu m of num days cturers writte quate facilitie oject site for t he engineer t ry of concrete rge unless ot rete which sh contract doc samplingtesti esting .
ecorded and p move surface l of cement an a latex bondin surface of un eans achieve oil grease an and a csp num uideline no .
num aterproofing m eer for approv d for use by th mmended by nstalling mem ure washing after cessatio en specificatio es for safe s the initial curi to inspect all e. herwise spec hall have at t cuments .
ing during th made availa item num page num aitance and nd fine sand ng agent .
iform colour e an anchor nd is free of num as defined num. membrane to val of areas he engineer the product mbrane .
and oilfree on of curing ons prior to storage and ng period .
ingredients cified by the the point of he concrete able to the co pag num num num num oncrete in ge num num num .num num .num num .num structure .num tests tech .num test spe .num the air c acceptab at the d frequenc content c quality assu .num the own .num if the shall .num t f .num density requirem age of comp .num the con concrete .num in th csa .num stren .num t r frequency of .num frequenc table num .num for each num .num a tes the m departm es s shall be co hnician grade cimens shall content of eac ble air conten iscretion of t cy of testing consistency is rance testing ner shall carry e measured s be made imm this concrete failed to meet and yield te ents of csa a pressive stren tractor shall d mix design .
e absence of a anum for the ngth tests sha the num day or request is less f compressiv cy of compre num and per num h age of comp .num shall be st as defined mix design .
sta ment of tr structu onducted by p e num or csa anum be sampled i ch load or b t is establishe the engineer shall return s reestablishe g y out quality a slump or air c mediately on e load in the e t the requirem ests shall be anumc .
ngth testing determine the f a contractor e specified ex all be perform r num day stren s. ve strength te essive strengt num. pressive stren required unl d in num .
andard s ransport ures personnel cer num. n accordance atch of conc ed at which p r. should a t to one test p ed .
assurance tes content falls o another portio event of a sec ments of this s made as r e age of test r initiated req xposure class med at num days ngth test may esting th testing sha ngth test num num less indicated .num to be bro specifica tation an rtified under a e with csa anum crete shall be point testing f test fail to m per load or sting .
outside the li on of the sam cond failure s specification required by t and shall be quest the age s shall apply .
num days num y be removed all conform to num num num da d on submitta oken at the sp ations nd infras aci concrete numc .
tested until c frequency ma meet the requ batch until imits specifie me sample .
shall be cons and shall be the engineer indicated on e requirement days and num d if the submit o the schedu ays two tests l. pecified age tructur item num january num e field testin consistent an ay be reduced uirements th acceptable a d a check te sidered to hav rejected .
r to meet th n the submitte ts stipulated num days .
tted age of te ule indicated s as defined submitted wit re num num ng nd d he air st ve he ed in st in in th depa conc janua num .
num .
artment crete in st ary num nu i note num .num ha .num .num .num .num .num num .num per .num .num stan of trans ructures fr umber of cub in placing o up to num num num num num over num e an addition rdened air vo a minimum placement a the hardene all tests mu material rati .num the ave no singl in the eve production o met on a co .num subseq out by th concrete ca engineer an expense .
rmeability tes a minimum and shall be .num the cyli .num whe con .num the permea .num results complet .num the ave single re ndard sp portatio requency of bic metres peration num num num num nal test shall b oid testing fr of two cylin and cured for ed air void tes ust be perfor os the harde erage of all te e test greater nt the harde of concrete sh nsistent basis uent testing to he contractor ast with a non nd may be s sting frequen of two cylinde e cured for num nders shall be ere sample ducted at an the age of c ability testing s are to be pro ted .
erage must fa esult greater t pecificat on and inf structures tab compressiv be taken for e requency nders shall be a minimum o sting shall be rmed as per ened air void s ests shall hav r than num m ened air voi hall cease un s. o achieve a sa at his own ex ncompliant ha subject to re ncy ers shall be ta days per cs e prepared fo preparation o age not to ex ure and the a shall be carrie ovided to the c ll within the p than num cou tions frastruc s ble num ve strength t minimum each additiona e taken for h of num days .
carried out b astm cnum system shall m ve a spacing mm .
id system d til it can be s atisfactory har xpense .
ardened air v moval and r aken for perm sa anum .
or testing imm or testing fa xceed num day age at test dat ed out by the contractor wi pay range esta ulombs above cture testing con no .
of truck num num num see note al num cubic m hardened air by the owner .
num .
regardless meet the follo factor not ex oes not me hown that the rdened air voi void system s replacement a meability testi mediately after alls on a wee ys .
te shall be re owner .
ithin num days o ablished in ta e the pay rang p crete ks to be test num metres of con void testing .
s of water to owing xceeding num eet these req ese requireme id system sha hall be evalu at the contra ng from each r the num days ekend testin ported .
of the test bei able num w ge .
item num page num ed ncrete placed .
from each cementing num mm with quirements ents can be all be carried ated by the actors own h placement of curing .
ng shall be ng with no .
co pag num num oncrete in ge num num num .num structure .num a p .num for conc shall esta without th the resul payment .num in the ev requeste .num a mi teste .num if ref refer compressive .num strength or three batch an .num test spe unless o anumc .num to meet specified .num whe any t and n .num conc adju .num if tests in concrete .num depe comp .num t t .num a t . .num i c a departm es a single resul payment bein crete mix desi ablish the rela he corrosion ts will be sub adjustments ent that testin ed and conduc nimum of two ed within num da eree testing i ree testing wil e strength te tests shall m companion num d tested at th ecimens shall therwise app c. the strength d strength .
n three or mo three consecu no individual crete that do stment per num ndicate that c in that placem ending upon t plete removal the contracto the engineer f any additiona the engineer .
num additional f the remedi concrete is a according to t sta ment of tr structu t greater than g reduced to gns containin ationship betw inhibitor using tracted from t . ng results in a cted by the c o cores shall b ays of the orig ndicates the o ll prevail .
sting mean the aver num mm by num e same age .
be tested at proved by the requirements ore tests of th utive tests sh test shall be l oes not mee num. concrete in a ment shall be the severity of or or may submi for considerat l testing reque l testing shall al measures allowed to re table num .
andard s ransport ures n num coulom the next lowe ng a calcium n ween concrete g an approved tests containi a reduction in ontractor .
be taken from ginal test date original test re rage strength num mm test c t the age of te e engineer a s of this item e same type hall be equal t less than num et specified placement do deemed nonc f the noncomp t a proposal f tion .
ested by the c be conducted are accepte main the co specifica tation an mbs above the er level .
nitrite corrosio e of similar m d testing plan ng corrosion payment ref m the compon e. esults are not h of twocomp cylinder speci est submitted nd shall mee the average of concrete a to or greater of the spec strength sha oes not meet compliant .
pliant concret for repair of th contractor sh d at the contra ed by the ow oncrete in the ations nd infras e pay range w on inhibitor th mix proportion n. the differe inhibitor for c feree testing m ent in questio t representati panion num m mens taken f d with concre et the require of all tests sh are available than the spec ified strength all be subjec t the specifie te the engine he noncomplia hall be subject actors own ex wner and the e placement tructur item num january num will result in th he contractor ns with and ence between calculation of may be on and shall b ive then the mm by num m from the sam ete mix desig ements of cs hall exceed th the average o cified strengt .
ct to payme d strength th eer may requir ant concrete t t to approval o xpense .
e noncomplia shall be pa re num num he n be m me n sa he of h nt he re to of nt id depa conc janua num .
num artment crete in st ary num num .num measure .num the qu metres .num the des pla .num for bea include .num on par actual q .num for foo be hand .num for bot des of t .num for foo dra bot .num .num the sp contain contrac accorda .num measur docum stan of trans ructures .num if the no the plac additional te check the ad .num test cyli test cylin moisture .num at the e weather .num all test c num numc condition ment for p uantity to be of concrete s e volume sha sign dimensio ced .
am supported the concrete rtial depth co quantity of con oting and work dled as follow r overexcava ttom of the fo sign plan foot the footing .
r overexcava oting the widt awing num ttom of the ex concrete re contractors ecified volum ed within cof ct documents ance with num rement of co ents shall no ndard sp portatio oncompliant co ement shall b ests of cylind dequacy of cu inders shall b nders represe e environment nd of the curi r in the same m cylinders sha c for num numh ns from cylind payment measured fo supplied plac all be the less ons presented concrete dec calculated ba ncrete remov ncrete placed king slab con ws ation down to oting the com ing dimension tion in excess th and length and the ave cavation up to equired to pr invoice price me of tremie c fferdams ass s and the bas num. ncrete in str t be affected pecificat on and inf structures oncrete is rem be paid accord ders cured e uring or cold w e stored as n ent and shall t as the struc ng period the manner as the ll be removed h immediately der to cylinder or payment s ced and finishe ser of the com d in the cont ck slabs the c ased on the ac val and repla .
crete where o o a maximum mputed volum ns presented s of num mm h of the work erage depth o o the specified rovide a wo from the sup concrete for w suming the th se and upper ructures calc by the formwo tions frastruc s moved and re ding to num ntirely under weather protec ear as possib be afforded cture .
e test cylinders e structure .
d from the fie y before time r. shall be the s ed in accorda mputed volum tract docume computed volu ctual beam ca cement unde overexcavatio m of num mm e of the footi in the contra below the sp king slab con of the workin d elevation of rking slab u plier .
which paymen heoretical hor surface eleva culated on the ork tolerances cture eplaced the co num. field conditio ction .
ble to the poin the same tem s shall be left ld storage an of testing to specified volu ance with this e of concrete ents or the ac ume of concre amber profile .
er item num t on in solid ro below the s ng concrete s act document pecified eleva ncrete will be g slab shall f the bottom of under footings nt shall be m rizontal dimen ations as mea e dimensions s listed in item p oncrete incorp ons may be nt in the struct mperature pro t in place exp nd stored in lim ensure unifor ume measur item .
e as determin ctual volume ete in structur the volume s ock occurs pa pecified eleva shall be deter ts and the ave ation of the bo as shown o be determine f the footing .
s shall be p ade shall be nsions as sh asured in the s shown in th m num .
item num page num porated into required to ture that the otection and posed to the me water at rm moisture red in cubic ed from the of concrete res d shall shall be the ayment shall ation of the rmined from erage depth ottom of the on standard ed from the paid at the the volume hown in the field and in he contract co pag num num num oncrete in ge num num .num the paym met num .num the tab coulom cor payment p num basis o .num pay as id .num the iden .num in th num .num .num .num the not c that .num .num whe conc .num whe to re structure price adjustm strength ment per cub re componen price adjustm le num num .
pr mbs after corr rrection ast per cubic met mnum of payment ment for wor dentified unde owner sha ntified in num he case that .num to dete if the test res incurred by th if the test res incurred by th .num the cos contracto contractor sh carried out .
f wet curing of this shall app ere noncompl crete incorpor ere concrete d emain in place departm es ment for cont price for co num m bic nt num ment for resis ice adjustme for exp rosion inhibit tm cnum tre for compo t rk under this er the contra ll make part num. the enginee ermine if the s sults indicate t he owner sha ults verify tha he owner sha t of any rete or .
hall be subjec for the purpos f concrete is n ply to each pla liant concrete rated into the does not mee e there will be sta ment of tr structu rol of strength tab e adjustment oncrete in st mpa num num stance to chlo tab ent for resis posure class tor num onent num item shall inc ct. ial payment er initiates fur specified stren that the speci all be borne by t the specified all be charged esting to res cted to a pena ses of this ite not being carri acement whic e is removed component sh et the requirem e no positive p andard s ransport ures h shall be paid ble num for control o tructures a b num mpa num num oride ion pen ble num tance to chlo s cxl in csa num num num clude a separ in accordanc rther testing ngth has been ified strength y the owner .
d strength has to the contra solve the spe alty of num. em an occurre ed out in acco ch is still being and replaced hall be paid in ments for stren payment adjus specifica tation an d in accordan of strength b c and d num mpa to num netration shall oride ion pen a anum num num rate unit price ce with num. in accordanc n attained the has been atta s not been att actor .
ecified streng .num per occurr ence shall be ordance with num g cured .
d in accordan n accordance ngth or harde stments for an ations nd infras ce with table less than o be reviewed removal o per num l be paid in ac netration num num num e for each typ num for associ ce with the re e following sh ained then th tained then th gth shall be rence if prope when an insp num nce with num. with table num ened air voids ny of the prop tructur item num january num e num .
nummpa d by engineer or num num ccordance wit num num num pe of concrete ated materia equirements all apply he testing cos he testing cos borne by th er wet curing pection revea .
.num th num. but is allowe perties .
re num num th e als in ts ts he is als he ed depa reinf janua num num num artment forcing st ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num reinfor .num all rein steel b .num re co .num reinfor reinforc standa .num hea eng .num re .num no .num welding be perm .num bars ar in can .num all stru supply .num bar spli .num tie wire reinforc submitta .num the co specifie .num the co comme .num all cer .num submitt stan of trans teel tion em consists of s erial shall be s rcing steel sha forcing steel ars for concre inforcing stee ntract docum rcing steel sh cing steel as r rd practice u ating shall no gineer .
inforcing stee field bending g or splicing s mitted .
re subject to r csa gnum uctures are de accordingly .
ice couplers s e used to tie cing bars shal als ontractor shal ed requiremen ontractor shal encing the wo welders sha rtification leve tals are requir ndard sp portatio f supplying an supplied by th all be designa shall be new ete reinforce el shall be in t ents .
hall be bent to ecommended nless otherwi ot be used as l shall be free of reinforcing shorter bars as rejection if the num grade numw esigned using shall be suppli stainless stee l be type num l submit the m nts at least num ll submit proo ork .
all be certifie el of qualified red in accorda pecificat on and inf structures nd placing of re he contractor .
ated as reinfo w billet steel c ement grade the form of d o proper sha d in the reinf se noted in c s an aid in be e of physical d g will be allow s a substitute eir actual weig w by more tha g metric si r ied in accorda el fiber rein numln or type num manufacturer num days in adv of of certificat d by the cw welder as is ance with any tions frastruc s reinforcing ste .
orcing steel a conforming to e numw with t eformed roun pe in a plant forcing steel i contract docum ending steel defects .
wed unless aut for supplying ght varies from an num. reinforcing ste ance with the nforced polym numl stainless s certification vance of the co tion for the w wb in accord ssued by the p y crossreferen cture eel .
a for noncoa o current can the following a nd bars unles t having suita institute of ca ments .
unless spec thorized by th g bars of the s m their theore eel bar sizes contract plan mer frp or s steel wire num. n that the mat ommencemen welders condu dance with c province of n nced item form ated reinforcin ncsa gnum additional req ss otherwise n able devices anada rsic ifically author e engineer .
specified lengt etical weight a and the cont ns .
other corrosio .num or num mm terials supplie nt of the work ucting the wo csa wnum a new brunswic ming part of th item num page num g steel .
num carbon uirements noted in the for bending manual of rized by the ths shall not as specified tractor shall on resistant in diameter .
ed meet the k. ork prior to andor to a k. his item .
re pag num num num inforcing ge num num const num .num gen .num .num .num .num .num num .num plac .num .num .num .num .num .num .num steel ruction neral the contract specifically d the work sh rsic manu the contract damaged or prior to deliv fashion .
.num tags sha reinforcing s cing and fast immediately excessive rus .num reinforci and reinf concrete .num bar supp reinforceme and side for tolerances be bars shall be num mm in ea other bars sh this shall hold in deck slabs prestressed c .num spacing beams .
the contract shall not occu work on part concrete has prior to the d be inspected departm tor shall carry irected by the all be in acco ual of standa tor shall hand contaminated very of reinfo all indicate de steel shall be tening before placin st or other co ng steel shal forcing steel a . ports shall be m nt shall be a rm spacers efore and dur e fastened to ach direction hall be permit d all the bars s the top bar concrete beam of the ties s tor shall ensu ur until the co tially embedd s attained a m deposition of c and approve sta ment of tr structu y out the wo e engineer .
ordance with c ard practice .
dle and store d with dirt or o orcing steel b esignation lett stored on ski ng reinforcin atings that wo l be maintain about to be e made of plast accurately pos to ensure pr ring placemen gether at all in which cas tted provided securely in p on the top m m or the conn shall not exc ure flexing of oncrete has a ed reinforcing minimum comp concrete the ed by the eng andard s ransport ures rk as indicate csa anum a the reinforcin other material bars or group ers and numb ds at least num g steel shall ould reduce b ed in this cle mbedded in c tic or stainless sitioned secu roper concre nt of concrete intersections e fastening a the contract osition .
mat shall be tie nectors on the ceed num mm the reinforcin ttained a min g steel shall c pressive stren positioning a ineer .
specifica tation an ed in the con and reinforcin ng steel in a m ls .
ps of bars sh ber assigned num mm above be free of o bond to concr ean condition concrete shal s steel .
ured and sup ete cover and e. s except whe at alternate int tor can demo ed securely to e steel beam .
m centre alon ng steel parti imum compre continue only ngth of num mp and securing o ations nd infras ntract docum ng steel instit manner that e hall be tagge to bars on th e ground .
oil dirt mill s rete .
until embedd ll be free of lo pported using d spacing w ere the spacin tersections of nstrate to the o the stirrups .
ng the entire ally embedde essive streng when the pre pa. of the reinforc tructur item num january num ents andor a tute of canad nsures it is no d in a durab e plans .
scale loose o ded in concret oose hardene g bar suppor ithin allowab ng is less tha f each bar wit e engineer tha s of the preca e length of th ed in the wo th of num mpa eviously place cing steel sha re num num as da ot le or te ed rts le an th at st he rk .
ed all depa reinf janua num num num num num artment forcing st ary num .num suppor num .num bar .num .num .num .num .num num .num sid .num .num num .num inte .num spa from .num .num welding .num co ele .num the ind stan of trans teel rt of reinforce r supports bar support reinforcemen significant de bar supports the specified bar supports .num comme equivale .num prec equ .num .num bar supports deter the mo bar supports de form spac side form s reinforcemen side form sp ernal spacers acers for main m reinforcing spacers sha shall not pro g lumn spirals ctrodes and i e welding of icated in the ndard sp portatio ement ts shall have nt constructio eformation .
s shall be spa d concrete cov s shall be mad rcially availa ent shall be u cast concrete al to that spec geometry of fastened .
stacking of b s shall be non ovement of mo s in contact w ers spacers shall nt .
pacers shall m s ntaining the s bars or steel r all be position otrude in the c shall be lap n accordance f reinforceme contract doc pecificat on and inf structures sufficient st on crew and c aced such tha ver .
de of plastic .
able precast sed for bar su e bar supports cified for the m f bar support bar supports s nconductive a oisture from th with the soil sh have provis meet the requi pecified dista rods .
ned and secu over concrete welded whe e with the req ent including cuments .
tions frastruc s trength and s concrete pres at any saggin concrete ba upports that a s shall be ma member into w or embedde shall not be pe and have a ge he surface to all have a bas ions to enab rements of num nce between rely fixed betw e. en so specifi uirements of g tack weld cture stiffness to c ssures withou ng between s ar supports re in contact w ade of concre which the bar d tie wires s ermitted .
eometry and the reinforcem se area of les ble them to b num bar s layers of rein tween the laye ied using enum csa wnum .
ing is prohi carry the load t failure displ supports shall or engineer with soil .
ete with a qua supports are hall keep reb bond charact ment .
s than num be firmly sec supports .
forcement sh ers of reinforc num series low ibited unless item num page num ds from the lacement or not reduce r approved ality at least integrated .
bar securely teristics that num mm² .
ured to the all be made cement and w hydrogen s otherwise re pag num num fa pl sp ba inforcing ge num num .num test .num num .num tole .num .num abrication tol acing toleran pacing tolera ar cover tole steel ting additional re the owner un be in nonco by the contra erances unless othe constructed w the toleranc not cumulativ c lerances s t c s t w s num nces num e r t f nces c d t rances departm inforcing stee nder the term nformance w actor .
erwise specif within toleran es listed in t ve .
cutting to len hooked bars spirals or circ ties column ties o stirrups reinforcing s tolerances un where the de smallest dime num mm or les num mm to num more than num longitudinal l ends of bars note cov reinforcing st tolerances un footings columns eck bars and tee beams sta ment of tr structu el required to ms of this item with the speci fied in the ces listed in t table num a tab reinforcing gth outto of hoo cular outto dimen or outto dimen steel shall be nless otherwis epth d of a fl ension of a co ss num mm num mm ocations of be ver may not b more tha teel shall be less otherwise notwit toleran be in c colum with st stirrup walls notwit toleran contac corner andard s ransport ures o replace that m unless the fications the contract d table num. and those pre ble num g steel tolera out oks out nsion out nsion e placed in s e noted in the exural memb lumn is ends and be reduced by an num mm at t spaced at the e noted in the hstanding the nce all colum contact with s ns and must tirrups and in ps for rectangu hstanding the nce all bars m ct with stirrups rs and hooks specifica tation an t altered by te reinforcing st n the reinforc documents r esented in ta ances num mm for numm bar for bars numm specified pos e contract do er the thickne y more than the end of a m e specified sp e contract doc e stated mn bars must spirals in round be in contact corners of ular columns e stated must be in s and in the ations nd infras esting shall b teel is shown cing steel sha reinforcing s able num for num mm rs or smaller larger than num mm num mm itions within ocuments ess of a wall num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm or inc member .
pacing within cuments num d t num num num num tructur item num january num be provided b n by testing t all be provide steel shall b r formwork ar num mm num mm num mm the following or slab or the creased by the following num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm re num num by to ed be re g e g depa reinf janua num num artment forcing st ary num measure .num the qu supplie basis of p .num paymen steel a .num the ow .num the cos disagre results the cos .num the by stan of trans teel ment for p uantity to be m d and placed payment nt for work u s identified un wner shall ma st of the provi eement betwe show that the t of the test .
e cost of any the contracto ndard sp portatio payment measured for in accordance nder this item nder the contr ake partial pay sion of mater een the owne e material do retesting to re or .
pecificat on and inf structures r payment sha e with this item m shall include ract .
yment for rein rials labour an r and the con es not meet t esolve the sup tions frastruc s all be the num m. e a separate nforcing steel nd equipment ntractor shall the specificat pply of the sp cture mber of kilog unit price for in accordanc t to test the re be borne by tions otherwi pecified reinfor rams of reinf r each type of ce with num. einforcing stee the contracto ise the owne rcing steel sha item num page num forcing steel f reinforcing .
el to resolve or if the test er shall bear all be borne depa tensi janua num num num num num num artment ion splices ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num tension of the b .num materia submitta .num the co data inf .num the co installa constru .num the co specific .num the pre instruct .num the to ma .num the en measure .num the qu accorda basis of .num paymen .num the ow .num the cos disagre results cost of .num the co stan of trans s tion m consists of s erials shall be n reinforcing b bars being spli als shall be sto als ontractor shal formation incl ontractor shal tion .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b eparation and ions .
e contractor ensure that anufacturer .
gineer reserve ment for p uantity to be m ance with this payment nt for work un wner shall ma st of the prov eement betwe show that the the test .
e cost of any ntractor .
ndard sp portatio f the splicing o supplied by t bar connection ced .
ored in a weat l submit the uding yield st ll submit the all carry out t by the engine d installation upon request preparations es the right to payment measured for item .
nder this item ake partial pay ision of mater een the owne e splice does retesting to r pecificat on and inf structures of reinforcing s he contractor ns shall be ab therproof enclo name of the ress at least manufacture the work as er .
of the splice shall make a s and installa o test any or al payment sha shall be at the yment for tens rials labour a r and the con not meet the resolve the ad tions frastruc s steel bars numm r. ble to develop osure .
supplier and num days in ad rs instruction indicated in e shall be in available at th ation proced ll splices .
all be the num e unit price .
sion splices in and equipmen ntractor shall specification dequacy of th cture m and larger .
a minimum of the manufac dvance of the ns and recom the contrac accordance he site a repr ures are as mber of tensio n accordance nt to test the t be borne by ns otherwise t e tension spli f num of the cturersupplier work .
mmended pro ct documents with the ma resentative of s recommend on splices co e with num. tension splice the contracto the owner sh ice shall be b item num page num yield stress rs technical cedures for s andor as anufacturers the supplier ded by the nstructed in s to resolve or if the test hall bear the borne by the depa steel janua artic num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
num num artment l h piles ary num cle .num descript .num material .num submitta .num constru .num gener .num pile in .num pile in .num h pile .num proce .num ge .num de .num inspec .num ins .num fr .num qu .num dynam .num measure .num basis of descript .num this ite and pile material .num the ste currie a .num ste gra at t .num all othe .num steel grade num stan of trans tion .
ls als uction ral stallation nstallation tole splices cap dures for shie eneral etails ction of welds spection and requency of in uality of weld mic pile testin ement for payment .. tion em consists o e points .
s eel h piles sh avenue in fre eel h piles s ade numw and the time of the er materials sh used for p numw .
ndard sp portatio content erances plate and pil elded metal a s testing of we nspection and s ng payment f the installati hall be made edericton nb hall be in ac d the stock len e contract .
hall be supplie pile cap pla pecificat on and inf structures ts e connection arc welding an elds testing ion of steel h available by fob during n ccordance wit ngths may var ed by the con ates shall m tions frastruc s ns and welds nd flux cored h piles and the the owner f normal workin th the require ry from num to num ntractor .
meet the re cture d arc welding e supply and from stock at ng hours .
ements of ca num metres depe equirements page num num num num num num .
num num g num num .
num .
num num num num num .
num num installation of the dti brid ancsa gnum ending on ava of cancs item num page num f cap plates ge yard on numgnum ailable stock a gnum ste pag num num eel h piles ge num num .num cap as s .num .num piles cap .num elec wel weld .num elec wel enum c. .num num submit .num the man .num the com .num .num the proc .num the deta spec .num .num .num sub s p plates and p shown on sta where there supply the p details presen s shall be stor ps and points s ctrodes for the ding bureau ding and be ctrodes for the ding bureau cxx with a electrodes sh ttals contractor s nufacturers ce contractor s mmencing the all welders sh qualified wel contractor s cess .
contractor s ailed descripti cifications for the submiss performance energy per bl mass of the materials .
the submissi .num the leads .num impact of .num leads sh accommo mittals are req departm pile points for ndard drawin is another p ile points and nted in the co red in an orga shall be accep e shielded me cwb confo classified as e e flux cored cwb confo specified min hall have a dif hall submit a ertification tha shall submit p work .
hall be certifie lder as issued shall submit fo shall submit f on and drawi r the hammer sion shall pr including bu low at the nor driving cap a ion shall also s employed sh f the pile drivin hall be immob odate changin quired in acco sta ment of tr structu hp numxnum ng num and pile size indic d the respect ontract docum anized straigh ptably stored etal arc weldi orm to csa w enum or enum d arc welding orm to csa w nimum charpy ffusible hydrog at least num day at the material proof of certif ed by the cw d by the provin or approval by for approval ng of the pro and driving s rovide the fu ut not limited rmal working nd the type a include but n hall be suppo ng hammer sh bile during ham ng the centre ordance with a andard s ransport ures hp numxnum num. cated in the c ive pile cap p ments .
ht and horizon on pallets or b ng smaw p wnum filler m num. g fcaw pro wnum and be y vnotch im gen designato ys in advance s supplied me fication for the wb to cancs nce of new br y the enginee at least num d posed driving system includ ull details of to the manu rate the mas and elastic pro ot be limited t rted independ hall be axial a mmer operati of gravity of th any crossrefe specifica tation an and hp numx contract docu plates fabrica ntal fashion to blocked at lea process shall metals and a ocess shall b classified as mpact property or of hnum or l e of the comm eet the specif e welders co sa wnum and runswick .
er the propos ays in advan g systems in ing the leads f characterist ufacturers na ss of the striki operties of th to the followin dent of the pile and square wi ion but shall b he driving sys erenced item f ations nd infras xnum piles sh ument the c ated in accord o avoid perma ast num mm of be certified by llied materials e certified by gas shielded y equal to num ess .
mencement of fied requireme onducting the dor to a certi sed electrodes ce of any pile ncluding the m proposed .
tics necessar ame type of ng parts of th he hammer an ng minimum re e th respect to be capable of stem during dr forming part o tructur item num january num all be supplie contractor sha dance with th anent distortio ff the ground .
y the canadia s for metal a y the canadia enumxtxx o num joules at num f the work th ents .
work prior t fication level o s for the fcaw e installation manufacturer ry to evaluat hammer rate he hammer th nd pile cushio equirements pile axis and f adjustment t riving .
f this item .
re num num ed all he n. an rc an or num he to of w a rs te ed he on to depa steel janua num num num artment l h piles ary num constru .num genera .num the spe .num the cap eng .num the pre .num the dra req .num pile ins .num the the dep .num the crit sys .num .num fol .num the com .num .num any reta stan of trans ction al e contractor ecifically direct e contractor s pacity as ind gineer .
e contractor esented on st e contracto awings num quirements in stallation e installation e sole judge o pth of penetra e contractor teria provide stems .
during drivi which indica to finalizing .num when th the pile .num if in the of own capacity imprope driving e lowers shall o e first pile d mmencing the this pile sh waste .
y piles which apped to ree ndard sp portatio shall carry ou ted by the eng shall carry out icated in the shall install tandard draw r shall spli num num and accordance w of each pile of the accept ation or other shall ensure ed by the e ng pile head ate that the pi and immedia he pile dama head shall be e opinion of th er supplied y and is a re er pile driving equipment or only be used driven at any e driving of ot hall be used h become dis establish the f pecificat on and inf structures ut the work a gineer .
t the work wit e contract d all cap plates wings num an ice the pile d num and with this item shall be subj tability of eac criteria used e that the pile engineer and ds showing le stiffness is ately prior to e age is evident e trimmed and he engineer material or sult of misali g technique t methods so t with the expr y pile group ther piles wit to determine splaced as th inalization cri tions frastruc s as indicated i th a pile drivin documents an s and pile po nd num. e sections d at the app .
ject to the ap ch pile with re to determine es are install d based on evidence of s compromise each retappin t only after re d the pile red the pile head causes exce gned worn o the contracto that further da ressed written location sha thin the same e pile length he result of t teria and the cture in the contra ng systems c ndor as spe oints in acco in accorda proved locatio pproval of the espect to the the capacity led in accord the contrac damage suc ed shall be tri ng sequence .
emoval of the riven to the s d damage res essive uncert or poorly fittin or shall adjus amage does n consent of t all be driven e group .
h and minimiz he driving of specified cap act documents capable of dev ecifically direc ordance with nce with th ons to meet e engineer w final driving of the pile .
dance with th ctors approv ch as curled immed immed e hammer fro pecified capa sults in unnec tainty in esti ng driving eq st modify or not occur .
he engineer .
to finalizatio ze splices an f adjacent pil pacity .
item num page num s andor as veloping the cted by the the details e standard t the work who shall be resistance he specified ved driving flange tips diately prior om the pile acity .
cessary loss mating pile uipment or replace the on prior to nd material es shall be ste pag num num num eel h piles ge num num .num .num num .num pile .num .num .num .num .num num .num h p .num .num .num s piles which demonstrated .num all retap blows on .num retaps s pile or an .num retaps s blows wh .num retaps s upon reta .num the con above pr the contrac specified cut specified gra the engineer installation t the contract the entire len all piles shal batter specifi in no case sh pile tolerance cases shall p for piles ou approval of t findings and .num the con ile splices c welding of fie be by the sm the enginee procedures o basic electro ovens shall b before being departm are subject d that the per s shall be co n a pile other t shall not be ca ny adjacent p hall as a min hichever occur shall continue ap this value tractor shall rovisions have tor shall ensu toff elevation ade in a horizo r. tolerances tor shall ensu ngth of the driv l be driven w ed in the con hall the total v es shall be m piles be loade tside the spe the engineer if required a tractor shall c ap plate and eld and shop maw or fcaw er may requ outlined in the odes of enum be dried for a used .
sta ment of tr structu to relaxation rmanent pile c onducted with than the pile t arried out wit iles within a nimum advan rs first .
e until num o does not fall keep detailed e been met p ure that a mi n after finaliz ontal plane o ure that the pi ven pile .
with a variation ntract docume variation exce measured at t d horizontally ecified tolera r stamped an any corrective carry out all re pile point co splices for st w process .
uest to have e specification classification at least one andard s ransport ures n shall be r capacity meet h a hammer to be tested o hin num hours a clear distanc ce the pile a d of the specifie below num o d field notes o prior to cutting inimum of num zation and th nly after final ile remains w n of not more ents .
eed num mm f the ground lin y to move the ances the co nd signed by e measures t emedial work onnections an teel h piles c e the welder ns .
n that are not hour at a tem specifica tation an retapped and ts or exceeds warmed by or any adjace of the end of ce of num m and distance of num ed pile capac of the specifie on all retappi g the piles to f num mm of pile he contracto ization of the within the spec e than num mm from the spec ne and at the pile within th ontractor sha y a professio to remedy the k. nd welds cap plate and r tested or t used within mperature be ations nd infras dor driven u s the specified applying a m nt piles .
f the previous d forming part num mm or rea city has been ed pile capac ing tests to co final grade .
e length rema or shall cut a pile has bee cified toleranc mm from verti cified location e cutoff eleva he specified to all submit a onal engineer e work .
pile point con approved on num hours after etween num tructur item num january num until it can b d capacity .
minimum of num s driving of tha t of the group ch a total of num n achieved an city .
onfirm that th ains above th all piles at th en approved b ces througho cal or from th .
ation and in n olerances .
report for th r detailing th nnections sha n the weldin r removal fro c and num re num num be num at .
num nd he he he by ut he no he he all ng m c depa steel janua num .
artment l h piles ary num num .num ro sur .num .num .num .num def app dee .num .num joi .num the .num we sha .num .num ste .num no .num the .num pro pre .num .num no eng .num wh not the stan of trans ughness of o rfaces rough roughness num mm deep grinding .
oxygen cut corrections exceeding num fects of oxyg proval of the ep .
these weld welding with smaw requ adjacent sur nt profiles sh e workmansh elding of stee all not require when base least numc a eel over num m welding shal e preheating z otection shall ecipitation .
all methods welding bein pile shall be gineer .
hen piles have t be removed e bare hand .
ndard sp portatio oxygen cut s hness value o exceeding th p on otherwis surfaces and of defects s in num. gen cut surfac engineer for d repairs sha h basic elect uirements of num rface to produ all be as deta hip of the asse l made of ca e preheating w metal tempe and maintaine m shall be pr l be done wh zone shall be be provided s of protection ng carried out e driven unti e been welde d from this en pecificat on and inf structures surfaces shal of num. his value and se satisfacto d edges shall shall be flare ces shall not correction of all be made rodes not ex num and g uce a satisfac ailed on stand embly shall m ancsa gnum when base me rature is numc ed at a minim eheated to num en the ambie e a minimum o for welding u n shall be su t. l the welded ed within a he nclosure until tions frastruc s ll not be gre d occasional ory surfaces be left free of ed to the ox t be repaired f occasional by suitably xceeding num m grinding the c ctory finish .
dard drawing meet the stand .num grade num etal temperat or lower the um temperatu numc before an ent temperatu of num mm on under advers bject to the a d joint has be eated enclosu the welded j cture eater than tha notches or shall be rem f adhering sla xygen cut su by welding e notches or g preparing no mm in diamete ompleted we gs num num dards of can numw of num m ture is above e base metal ure of numc d ny welding is re is lower tha each side of t se weather co approval of th een inspecte ure during col joint has coo at defined by gouges not moved by ma ag .
urface with a except with t ouges less th onconforming er observing ld smooth an num and num .
csa wnum .
mm thickness numc .
shall be preh during welding done .
an numc .
the joint .
onditions of w he engineer p d and appro ld weather th led so that it item num page num y the ansi more than achining or a slope not the express han num mm g surfaces g applicable d flush with .
and under heated to at g. wind andor prior to any oved by the he pile shall is warm to ste pag num num eel h piles ge num num .num proc num .num s cedures for sh general .num the det cancsa .num the num of .num the wor .num when we .num before w adjacent .num this bead .num classifica for thickn pertainin .num weld manu .num for sma maximum maxim siz of electr maxim thickne laye maxim onep fille departm hielded metal ails of weld a wnum .
design and c f cancsa w rk shall be pos elding in vertic welding over p base metal s requirement ds and to the c ation and size ness of mate g to the work ding current ufacturer .
aw the maxi m size of one criteria fo num mm num mm mum ze f rode num mm num mm mum ess of num m ers num m mum num m pass num m et num m sta ment of tr structu arc welding ing procedur construction p wnum shall app sitioned for fla cal positions previously de shall be brush shall apply n crater area wh e of electrode erial type of k. shall be w mum size of pass fillets s or prequalifie m all pas all pas all pas m root p openin root p all pas m root p root p openin m all pas welds m mm for roo being s mm for sub mm in the f mm in the h mm in the v andard s ransport ures and flux cor re workman provisions for ply .
at position we progression f posited meta hed clean .
not only to su hen welding is es arc length groove weld within the ra electrode th hall be as ind table num ed joints usi sses in vertica sses in overhe sses in horizon asses in groo ng is less than asses in groo sses for horizo asses for fillet asses in groo ng is greater th sses subseque made in the fl ot passes of g such as to pre bsequent laye flat position horizontal or o vertical positio specifica tation an red arc weldi nship and te r cyclically lo elding whenev for all passes l slag shall b uccessive lay s resumed aft voltage and ding positions ange recomm e maximum t dicated in tab num ing the smaw al fillet and gro ead fillet and g ntal groove we oves with back n num mm in flat oves without b ontal fillet weld ts in flat posit oves with back han num mm in f ent to root pas lat position groove welds w event cracking ers of welds m overhead pos on ations nd infras ng echnique sha oaded structu ver practical .
shall be upw be removed a yers but also ter interruption amperage sh s and other mended by thickness of ble num .
w process oove welds groove welds elds king where the position backing in flat ds ion king where the flat position sses for fillet a with the minim g made in any p sitions tructur item num january num all conform t ures of claus ward .
and welds an to successiv n. hall be suitab circumstance the electrod layers and th e root position e root and groove mum size osition re num num to se nd ve le es de he depa steel janua num .
num artment l h piles ary num num .num num .num det .num .num .num .num .num .num stan of trans for fcaw maximum si maximum size of electrode maximum thickness layers maximum onepass fillet weld tails butt joint gro of the initial w is started fro .num particula the rema .num defectiv base me groove weld with the bac steel h pile ensure soun .num extensio of the w when tack w preparing sto flux pin ho before depo stringer bea ndard sp portatio the maximum ize of onepas criteria for p m num mm num mm e num mm m of num mm m num mm s num mm d num mm oove welds ex weld air carbo om the second ar care shall aining weld m ve portions of etal .
ds made with king .
e splice groov nd welds by us ons shall be r eld made smo welds are use ops and starts oles craters siting the nex ads shall be us pecificat on and inf structures m size of elec ss fillets shall ta prequalified all pass m for the m for the m all weld a multip making layer ex m in the fl m in the h m in the o xcept those p onarc gouged d side .
be taken in th metal or base m f the weld sh the use of b ve welds shal se of extensio removed upon ooth and flush ed for alignme s to make con visual surface xt layer of weld sed for horizo tions frastruc s ctrode the m l be as indica able num joints using ses in flat and vertical posit overhead po d layers excep ple pass split g all multiple p xceeds num mm lat and vertica horizontal pos overhead posi produced with d chipped or he gouging c metal is not ni all be remove backing shall h ll be terminat on bars or run n completion a h with the edg ent care shal ntinuous weld e defects and d. ontal welds .
cture maximum thic ated in table num g the fcaw p d horizontal po tion osition pt for root and tlayer techniq pass welds wh m al positions sition ition the aid of ba ground to sou chipping or g icked or unde ed without su have the weld ted at ends o off tabs .
and cooling o ges of the abu ll be exercise ing satisfacto d excessive c ckness of laye num .
process ositions d surface laye que shall be u hen the width cking shall ha und metal bef rinding opera ercut .
ubstantial rem d metal thoro of a joint in a of the weld an utting parts .
d by properly ry .
crown shall b item num page num ers and the rs used in of the ave the root fore welding ation so that moval of the ughly fused a manner to nd the ends y grinding or be removed ste pag num num num eel h piles ge num num .num insp num .num num .num s pection of wel inspection an .num the pro accordan .num inspectio they prop requirem .num the brun .num the of w .num guided b section num .num runo as th .num guid coup .num if the hesh assu .num the splice .num the c .num the l frequency of .num all welds .num testing s .num a mi teste meth requi .num a mi mag quali departm ds nd testing of w cedure and nce with can on and testing pose to use fo ents methods for n swick .
welding insp elding inspec bend tests sha num and shall b off tabs requir he h pile .
ed bend test pon from a ste e engineer de he may then rance that the preparation o e is driven be contractor sh length of the w f inspection an shall be insp shall be carrie nimum of num ed by nonde hods and supp ired to assure nimum of num gnetic particle ty level of the sta ment of tr structu welds technique fo csa wnum c g organization or nondestruc nondestructiv pection organ ction organiza all be carried be tested by th red for bend te coupons may eel h pile splic termines that test sufficien e balance of th f these test co low the groun hall restore the weld on num m nd testing ected visually d out by the e of full pene estructive tes plemented by e the soundne of fillet wel andor liquid welds .
andard s ransport ures or visual an lauses num and ns shall demo ctive testing a ve testing sha ization shall b ations .
out on coupo he engineer .
ests shall be m y be taken fro ce .
a guided ben nt coupons as he welding is oupons shall nd .
e pile to its ori m long runoff y .
engineer as fo etration groov sting method y magnetic pa ess and qualit ds shall be te penetrant tes specifica tation an nd nondestru num. onstrate to the re suitable an ll be as appro be certified to ons in accord made of the s om the actual nd test coupo s shehe feel satisfactory .
be done by th ginal conditio f tabs shall be ollows ve welds and ds radiograp article or liquid ty level of the ested by non st methods to ations nd infras uctive testing e engineer th nd meet one o oved by the p o csa wnum .
dance with ca same materia l pile splice by n fails to mee s are necess he contractor n if the weld a minimum o steel h pile s phic andor d penetrant te welds .
destructive te o assure the s tructur item num january num g shall be at the method of the followin rovince of ne .num certificatio ancsa wnum l and thicknes y removing th et the standar sary to provid before the pi is acceptable of num mm .
splices shall b ultrasonic te est methods a esting method soundness an re num num in ds ng ew on .num ss he d de le e. be st as ds nd depa steel janua num num num artment l h piles ary num num num .num qu .num .num .num .num dynam .num pile eng mo end .num the acc .num the ope .num the .num the .num the atta .num .num stan of trans .num welds in made fro .num the flam .num all g .num non tests .num if defec enginee to ensur .num all corre ality of welds the quality section num c the accepta num and s the quality o wnum claus ic pile testin es as identi gineer shall obilized resista d of initial driv e engineer b ceptance crite e contractor erations .
e contractor s e testing proc e contractor aching instrum the contrac of being rais the engine instruments ndard sp portatio n steel h pile om a portion o ese specimens me cutting to w guided bend te ndestructive t s. cts are identi er shall determ re the soundn ected welds ar s of welds in s clause num ance criteria f shall meet the of weld requir ses num and num g ified in the be dynamica ance hamme ving and durin based on the r eria .
shall notify shall assist th cedure shall b shall provide ments with th ctor shall prov sed to the top eer shall requ .
pecificat on and inf structures splices may of field spliced s shall have within num mm of est coupons s testing may b ified that are mine the addit ess and quali re to be retest teel h pile sp .
for defects sh limits describ red for guided num .
contract do ally tested du er performanc ng all retaps .
results of dyn the engineer he engineer in be carried out the enginee he pile in the l vide a work p of the pile .
uire approxim tions frastruc s also be teste d material rem the backing r f its thickness shall be stamp be performed e outside the tional percent ity level of all ted .
plices shall be hall be in acc bed in this clau d bend tests s cuments and uring driving ce pile stres namic testing r at least num n carrying out in accordanc er with reason leads .
platform minim mately one h cture d by guided b moved from th removed by m followed by g ped by the we d on coupons e criteria spe tage of testing the welds .
e in accordan cordance with use for tensio shall be in ac dor as spec for measure ss and soil dy and analysis days in adva t the testing .
ce with aash nable means mum size of our per pile bend tests on he h pile .
mechanical m grinding or ma elder .
instead of g ecified in num g that shall be nce with can h cancsa w on welds .
ccordance with cifically direc ement and es ynamic prope shall determ ance of the hto tnum .
of access to num m by num per test to item num page num n specimens means or by achining .
guided bend num the e carried out ncsa wnum wnum clause h cancsa cted by the stimation of erties at the mine the pile pile driving .
the pile for m capable attach the ste pag num num eel h piles ge num num .num .num .num .num num measu .num the acco .num all p othe .num the and .num the fabr .num s the contrac num hz ac fo .num field gen shall only the contract of the pile tes .num the shel of num m a with the dyna initial driving engineer .
stresses in t exceed num .num if directe the pile b of the ha .num if nonax realign th rement fo quantity to b ordance with t piles shall be m er pile have be length to be m the actual fiel quantity of icated in acco the owner re materials as w departm ctor shall su or use by the nerators shall y supply elect tor shall prov st or a shelter ter shall have nd the interio amic testing e and retap th the pile shall of the pile ste ed by the eng by means of c ammer .
xial driving is he driving sys or payment be measured f this item .
measured for een finalized a measured for ld toe elevatio splices to be ordance with th eserves the rig well as to limit sta ment of tr structu upply an ele engineer dur l be equipped trical power fo ide the engin r within the sa e a minimum or temperature equipment att he pile with be monitore eel yield stres gineer the co cushion or he indicated by stem .
t for payment s payment only and no further payment shal on measured a e measured fo his item .
ght to specify t the amount o andard s ransport ures ectrical powe ring the tests .
d with functio or the pile tes neer with acce ame distance floor size of e shall be ma tached to the a hammer of ed during driv ss .
ontractor sha elmet modifica the measure hall be the nu y after all piles driving in the ll be the differ along the cent or payment s the number o of waste in pile specifica tation an er supply of ning voltage sting .
ess for a moto .
num m by num m aintained abov e pile the con f the specifie ving to ensur ll reduce the ations or by ements the c umber of linea s in any group pile group sh rence between treline axis of shall be the n of splices to e e cutoffs .
ations nd infras f num amper and frequenc or vehicle va m a minimum ve numc .
ntractor shall ed size as d re that the st driving energ reducing the contractor sha ar metres of pi p or in close p hall be required n the design c the pile .
number of ap nsure the eco tructur item num january num re num volt cy meters an an within num m ceiling heig drive to end o directed by th tresses do no gy delivered t energy outp all immediate iles installed proximity to an d. cutoff elevatio pproved splice onomical use re num num ts nd m ht of he ot to ut ely in ny on es of depa steel janua num artment l h piles ary num basis of .num paymen as iden .num the ow work s .num splices .num the cos the con otherwi .num the .num retapp stan of trans payment nt for work un tified under th wner shall ma site .
approved by st of the prov ntractor if the se the owner e cost of any t ping in excess ndard sp portatio nder this item he contract .
ake partial pa y the enginee vision of mate test results s r shall bear th testing to reso of four opera pecificat on and inf structures m shall include ayment in acc r shall be pai erials labour a how that the e cost of the t olve the qualit ations if requir tions frastruc s e a separate u cordance with id in accordan and equipme material does test .
ty of welds sh red shall be p cture unit price for h num for s nce with item nt to test the s not meet the hall be borne b paid for in acc p each size of s teel h pile st num. welds shall b e specified re by the contrac cordance with item num page num steel h pile tored at the be borne by quirements ctor .
item num .
depa steel janua artic num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
num num artment l pipe piles ary num cle .num descript .num material .num submitta .num constru .num gener .num protec .num ge .num su .num ino .num co .num ins .num pile in .num pile in .num pipe p .num proce weld .num ge .num de .num inspec .num ins .num fr .num qu .num dynam .num measure .num basis of descript .num this ite and the material .num all mate .num steel p anum g stan of trans s tion ls als uction ral ctive coating s eneral urface prepar organic zinc c oal tar epoxy spection of co nstallation nstallation tole pile splices p edures for s ing eneral etails ction of welds spection and requency of in uality of weld mic pile testin ement for payment .. tion em consists of e supply and in s erials shall be pipe piles sha grade num or as ndard sp portatio content system ration coating y coating oatings erances pile point con hielded meta s testing of we nspection and s ng payment f the supply a nstallation of p e supplied by t ll be nominal otherwise ind pecificat on and inf structures ts nections and al arc weldi elds testing and installatio pile points .
the contracto num mm od dicated in the tions frastruc s d welds ing and flux on of steel pip or .
d with num mm contract doc cture x cored arc pe piles includ m wall thickne cuments .
page .
num num .
num num num num num .
num num num num num .
num num c num num .
num .
num num num num num .
num num ding splicing a ess conformin item num page num as required ng to astm ste pag num num eel pipe pil ge num num .num pile poin .num piles bloc acce be u .num elec wel weld .num elec wel enum c. .num .num the coat .num the num submit .num the man .num the com .num .num the proc .num the cert met .num the app .num les points shall nts shall meet s shall be sto cked at least eptably stored used to handle ctrodes for sh ding bureau ding and be ctrodes for the ding bureau cxx with a electrodes sh protective c tings and can coal tar epox ttals contractor s nufacturers ce contractor s mmencing the all welders s of qualified w contractor s cess .
contractor s ification from hod equipme contractor lication the a the method repair .
departm be supplied a the requireme ored in an org num mm off t d on pallets or e the pipe pile hielded metal cwb confo classified as e e flux cored cwb confo specified min hall have a dif coating shall ncgsbnum xy coating sha hall submit a ertification tha shall submit p work .
shall be certifi welder as iss shall submit fo shall submit m the manufa ent and mate shall submit applicators na of repair of a sta ment of tr structu as shown on ents of canc ganized strai the ground a r stored at lea es .
arc welding orm to csa w enum or enum d arc welding orm to csa w nimum charpy ffusible hydrog meet the re num for coal tar all be compat at least num day at the material proof of certif ied by the cw ued by the pr or approval by prior to the acturer of the erials used in t for approv ame and sche a coating shal andard s ransport ures standard dr csa gnum g ight and horiz nd stickers p ast num mm of g smaw pro wnum filler m num. g fcaw pro wnum and be y vnotch im gen designato equirements o epoxy coating tible with the ys in advance s supplied me fication for the wb to canc rovince of ne y the enginee commencem e inorganic z the blast clea val at least edule of work ll be submitte specifica tation an rawing num grade numw .
zontal fashion placed betwee ff the ground .
ocess shall b metals and a ocess shall b classified as mpact property or of hnum or le of cancgs gs .
inorganic zinc e of the comm eet the specif e welders co csa wnum a ew brunswick .
er the propos ent of the in zinc coating aning are acc num days in k. ed for approva ations nd infras and the stee n with the bo en the tiers .
p nylon or canv be certified by llied materials e certified by gas shielded y equal to num ess .
sbnum for c coating .
mencement of fied requireme onducting the andor to a ce .
sed electrodes organic zinc stating that ceptable .
n advance o al num days in a tructur item num january num el used for pi ottom tier bein points shall b vas slings sha y the canadia s for metal a y the canadia enumxtxx o num joules at num inorganic zin f the work th ents .
work prior t ertification lev s for the fcaw coating wor the propose of any coatin advance of th re num num le ng be all an rc an or num nc he to vel w rk ed ng he depa steel janua num num num artment l pipe piles ary num .num the co detailed specific .num the per ene ma ma .num the .num .num .num .num submitt constru .num genera .num the spe .num the cap eng .num the pre .num the num item .num the dam .num stan of trans s ontractor shal d description cations for the e submission rformance inc ergy per blow ass of the driv aterials .
e submission the leads em impact of the leads shall accommoda tals are requir ction al e contractor ecifically direct e contractor s pacity as ind gineer .
e contractor esented on st e contractor num and at the m. e contractor mage to the p any damag satisfaction ndard sp portatio l submit for a and drawing e hammer and n shall provid cluding but n at the norma ving cap and shall also incl mployed shall e pile driving h be immobile ate changing t red in accorda shall carry ou ted by the eng shall carry out icated in the shall fabrica tandard draw r shall splice e approved lo must take sp pile protective e done to th of the engine pecificat on and inf structures approval at le of the propos d driving syst de the full d not limited to al working rate the type and ude but not b be supported hammer shall during hamm he centre of g ance with any ut the work a gineer .
t the work wit e contract d ate and insta wing num. e the pile s ocations to me pecial care du e coatings .
he coatings o eer prior to dri tions frastruc s east num days sed driving sy tem including details of ch the manufac e the mass o elastic prope be limited to t d independent l be axial and mer operation gravity of the d crossreferen as indicated i th a pile drivin documents an all all pile po sections in a eet the work uring handlin of the pipe p iving the pile .
cture s in advance ystems inclu the leads pro haracteristics cturers name of the striking erties of the h he following m t of the pile .
square with r but shall be c driving system nced item form in the contra ng systems c ndor as spe oints in acco accordance w requirements g and driving pile casings s . of any pile in uding the man oposed .
necessary t type of ham parts of the h hammer and p minimum requ respect to pile capable of ad m during drivin ming part of th act documents capable of dev ecifically direc ordance with with standar s in accordan g operations t shall be repa item num page num stallation a nufacturers to evaluate mmer rated hammer the pile cushion uirements e axis .
djustment to ng .
is item .
s andor as veloping the cted by the the details rd drawing nce with this to minimize aired to the ste pag num num num num eel pipe pil ge num num .num prot num .num num .num num .num les tective coatin general .num steel pip applicatio .num all w .num each recom surface prep .num the exte num white .num the blas surface p .num no c damp .num the occu .num unde .num if the meta .num all surfac a coating inorganic zin .num the inorg airless s period in .num the inorg coat with .num before a tape num m .num the acco departm g system pe piles shall on of inorgan work shall be h coating mmendations paration erior of all stee metal blast c sting medium profile accepta cleaning shall p. blasted surfa rs .
er no circums e blast cleane al after drying ces shall be f g. nc coating ganic zinc co pray equipme n accordance ganic zinc co h tolerance of applying the in mm on each e inorganic zinc ordance with t sta ment of tr structu l be supplied ic zinc coating performed in shall be c s prior to trans el pipe piles s cleaning .
silica sand able to the m be carried ou ces must be stances are bl ed areas beco .
ree of dust d oating shall b ent and cured with the man ating shall be f num µm .
norganic zinc end of the ste c coating sha this item .
andard s ransport ures d with a prote g and coal ta a heated wea cured in a sport .
shall be blast grit or shot anufacturer o ut when the s coated with i ast cleaned s ome damp th dirt moisture e mixed and d at the prop nufacturers re e applied to o c coating the eel piles to fac ll be applied t specifica tation an ective coating ar epoxy coat atherproof en accordance cleaned to co used shall be of the inorgan surface of the norganic zinc surfaces to be ese surfaces oil and greas applied to th per temperatu ecommendati obtain a dry fi e coating app cilitate pile sp to the splice a ations nd infras g system co ting .
nclosure .
with the m onform to ssp e of a size th nic zinc coatin e steel pipe p c coating befo e left uncoate shall be reb se prior to the he white meta ure for the m ions .
lm thickness plicator shall plicing in the f and the taped tructur item num january num onsisting of a manufacturer pc spnum no hat produces ng being used ile casings ar ore any rustin ed overnight .
blasted to whit e application o al surface wit minimum curin of num µm on be required t field .
d area in re num num an rs o. a d. re ng te of th ng ne to depa steel janua num .
num .
artment l pipe piles ary num num .num co .num .num .num .num num .num ins .num .num .num .num .num stan of trans s al tar epoxy a coal tar e pipe piles .
the coal ta cured in acc before appl tape num mm .num the coa accorda if a postcur inorganic zin with the reco pection of co each days application o blast cleane of the inorga inspection o detector rea .num inadequ the eng .num if such a zone .
.num the re enginee where rejec quality of the of all previou at the discre chisel or ot coating thick .num where s ndard sp portatio coating epoxy coating r epoxy shall cordance with ying the coal m on each en al tar epoxy co ance with this red inorganic nc coated pip ommendation oatings work shall b of the coating ed surfaces a anic zinc coat of the comple adings .
uately coated ineer .
areas are clo coated zone er .
ction of a coa e work or ma usly applied m etion of the e her means to kness as a p such tests are pecificat on and inf structures g shall be app l have dry film h the coal tar e l tar epoxy co nd of the steel oating shall b item .
zinc coating pe pile until al ns of the man be inspected gs .
are to be appr ting applicatio ted coatings sections and ose together e shall be re ating is due aterials the c material prior engineer an o remove a s proof test .
e made the a tions frastruc s plied over the m thickness epoxy manufa oating the co l piles to facili be applied to t is used no c l curing solut ufacturer of th by the engin roved by the on .
shall be base d areas requ the engineer einspected a to poor work contractor sha to reapplicat occasional s small section o areas shall be cture e inorganic z of num µm a acturers reco oating applica itate pile splic the splice and coal tar epox tion has been he coatings .
neer not later engineer bef ed upon elco iring recoatin r may require and shall me kmanship or all remove the tion .
pot test may of the coating e recoated .
zinc coating o nd shall be a ommendation ator shall be cing in the fiel d the taped ar xy shall be ap n removed in a r than the da fore the comm ometer or othe ng shall be id e recoating o eet the appro similar deficie e entire defec be made us g to physically item num page num on the steel applied and ns .
required to ld .
rea in pplied to the accordance ay following mencement er magnetic dentified by of the entire oval of the ency in the ctive section ing a sharp y gauge the ste pag num eel pipe pil ge num num .num pile .num .num .num .num .num .num les installation the installati the sole judg depth of pene the contrac criteria prov systems .
.num during d as curled trimmed sequence .num whe the p .num if in unce fitting adjus does .num immedia num times .num the ratio .num drivi .num a b followers sh the first pile commencing any piles wh retapped to r piles which demonstrated .num all retap blows on .num retaps s pile or an .num retaps s num blows departm ion of each p ge of the acc etration or oth ctor shall ens vided by the riving with an d pipe wall w immediately e. n the pile da pile head shal the opinion ertainty in esti g driving equ st modify or s not occur .
tely prior to in s the pile diam ratio of ceme of num. ng shall be di after num minu be added .
all only be us e driven at a the driving o hich become reestablish th are subject d that the per s shall be co n a pile other t shall not be ca ny adjacent p shall as a min s whichever o sta ment of tr structu pile shall be s ceptability of e her criteria us sure that the e engineer n external ham which indicat y prior to fin amage is evid ll be trimmed n of the en imating pile c uipment or im replace the d nternal driving meter shall be entstonesand iscontinued o tes a smaller sed with the e any pile gro f other piles displaced as he finalization to relaxation rmanent pile c onducted with than the pile t arried out wit iles within a nimum adva ccurs first .
andard s ransport ures subject to the each pile with sed to determ piles are ins and based mmer pile he te that the p nalizing and dent only afte and the pile r gineer the capacity and mproper pile driving equipm g a plug of dry e deposited in d shall be num on a plug after charge num xpress conse up location s within the sa s the result o n criteria and t n shall be r capacity meet h a hammer to be tested o hin num hours a clear distanc nce the pile a specifica tation an e approval of h respect to mine the capac stalled in acc on the con eads showing pile stiffness immediately er removal of redriven to th pile head d is a result of driving techn ment or meth y concrete ha n the base of t num with a wa r num minutes f of initial volu ent of the eng shall be driv ame group .
of the driving the specified retapped and ts or exceeds warmed by or any adjace of the end of ce of num m and a distance of ations nd infras the enginee the final driv city of the pile cordance with ntractors app g evidence of is comprom y prior to e f the hammer e specified ca damage caus misaligned w nique the c ods so that fu aving a compa the pile .
atertocemen from the time ume of fresh gineer .
ven to finaliz g of adjacent capacity .
dor driven u s the specified applying a m nt piles .
f the previous d forming part num mm or r tructur item num january num r who shall b ing resistance e. h the specifie proved drivin f damage suc mised shall b ach retappin r from the pile apacity .
ses excessiv worn or poor ontractor sha urther damag acted height o nting materia e of mixing .
concrete sha zation prior t piles shall b until it can b d capacity .
minimum of num s driving of tha t of the group reach a total o re num num be e ed ng ch be ng e ve rly all ge of als all to be be num at .
of depa steel janua num .
num num artment l pipe piles ary num num .num .num .num the spe spe the .num pile ins .num the the .num the the .num all bat .num in n .num pile cas .num for app find .num .num pipe pi .num we the .num the out .num bas ove bef .num ro sur .num .num .num stan of trans s retaps shal upon retap t the contrac above provis e contractor ecified cutoff ecified grade e engineer .
stallation tole e contractor e entire length e contractor e entire length piles shall be tter specified no case shall e tolerances s ses shall piles r piles outsid proval of the dings and if r the contrac le splices pi elding of field e smaw or fc e engineer m tlined in the s sic electrodes ens shall be fore being use ughness of o rfaces rough roughness mm deep o grinding .
oxygen cut corrections exceeding num ndard sp portatio ll continue un this value doe ctor shall kee sions have be shall ensure f elevation a in a horizonta erances shall ensure t h of the driven shall be resp h of the pile .
e driven with in the contra the total varia shall be mea s be loaded h de the specif engineer st required any ctor shall carr le point conn and shop sp caw process may request to specifications s of enum cla dried for at ed .
oxygen cut s hness value o exceeding th on otherwise surfaces and of defects s in num .
pecificat on and inf structures ntil num of th es not fall belo ep detailed fie een met prior that a minim after finalizatio al plane only that the pile r n pile .
ponsible to re a variation of ct documents ation exceed sured at the orizontally to fied tolerance tamped and corrective me ry out all reme nections and plices for stee s. o test or other .
assification th least one ho surfaces shal of num. his value and e satisfactory d edges shall shall be flare tions frastruc s he specified ow num of t eld notes on a r to cutting th mum of num m on and the after finalizat remains withi emove all fore f not more tha s. num mm from ground line a move the pile es the contr signed by a easures to re edial work .
welds el pipe piles a rwise have the at are not us our at a temp ll not be gre d occasional y surfaces s be left free of ed to the ox cture pile capacity he specified p all retapping e piles to fina mm of pile le contractor s tion of the pile n the specifie eign material an num mmm m the specifie and at the cu e within the s ractor shall s professional medy the wo and pile point e welder app sed within num h perature betw eater than tha notches or g shall be rem f adhering sla xygen cut su has been ac pile capacity .
tests to conf al grade .
ngth remains hall cut all p e has been a ed tolerances ls and water from vertical d location .
utoff elevation specified toler submit a rep l engineer d ork .
connections roved on the hours after re ween numc at defined by ouges not m moved by ma ag .
urface with a item num page num chieved and firm that the s above the piles at the approved by throughout from within or from the n and in no rances .
port for the detailing the shall be by procedures emoval from and numc y the ansi more than num achining or a slope not ste pag num num num eel pipe pil ge num num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num .num proc num .num les defects of ox approval of t deep .
.num these w welding w smaw re adjacent the joint det be that show the workman welding of s above numc .
.num when ba least num no welding s the preheati no welding s protection is .num all metho welding b no pile shal engineer .
when piles h not be remov the bare han cedure for sh general .num the det cancsa .num the num of .num the w .num whe .num befo and a .num t b departm xygen cut su the engineer weld repairs with basic el equirements surface to pr ail of the com wn on standar nship of the a steel pipe pile ase metal tem c and mainta shall be done ng zone shall shall be don provided .
ods of protec being carried l be driven u have been we ved from this d. ielded metal a ails of weld a wnum .
design and c f cancsa w work shall be n welding in v re welding ov adjacent base this requirem beads and to t sta ment of tr structu urfaces shall for correction shall be ma ectrodes not of num an roduce a satis mplete penetr rd drawing num assembly sha es shall not mperature is num ained at this m when the am l be a minimu e when there ction shall be out .
until the weld elded within a s enclosure u arc welding a ing procedur construction p wnum shall app e positioned fo vertical positio ver previously e metal shall ment shall app the crater are andard s ransport ures not be repair n of occasion de by suitab exceeding num nd grinding th sfactory finish ration groove num. ll meet the sta require prehe numc or lower minimum tem mbient tempera um of num mm e is a wind a subject to th ded joint has a heated encl ntil the welde and flux core re workman provisions for ply .
or flat position ons progress y deposited m be brushed c ly not only to ea when weldi specifica tation an red by weldin nal notches o bly preparing num mm in diam e completed h. weld for the andards of ca eating when the base me perature duri ature is lower on each side andor when he approval o s been inspe osure during ed joint has c ed arc welding nship and te r cyclically lo n welding wh ion for all pas metal slag sh clean .
successive la ng is resumed ations nd infras ng except wit or gouges les g nonconform meter observ weld smooth butt joint in p ancsa wnum base metal t etal shall be p ng welding .
r than numc .
of the joint .
it is raining of the engine ected and ap cold weather cooled so tha g echnique sha oaded structu enever practi sses shall be hall be remov ayers but also d after interru tructur item num january num th the expres ss than num m ming surface ving applicab and flush wit pipe piles sha num. temperature preheated to a unless prope er prior to an proved by th r the pile sha at it is warm t all conform t ures of claus ical .
upward .
ved and weld o to successiv ption .
re num num ss m s le th all is at er ny he all to to se ds ve depa steel janua num .
artment l pipe piles ary num num stan of trans s .num classific suitable circums .num wel man .num for sma the max .num for fca the max maximum size of electrode maximum thickness layers maximum onepass fillet maximum size of electrode maximum thickness layers maximum onepass fillet weld ndard sp portatio cation and si for thicknes tances pertai lding current nufacturer .
aw the max ximum size of aw the maxi ximum size of criteria for p m e num mm num mm num mm num mm m of num mm num mm m num mm s num mm num mm criteria for p m num mm num mm e num mm m of num mm m num mm s num mm d num mm pecificat on and inf structures ze of electro ss of materia ning to the w shall be wi ximum size of f onepass fille mum size of f onepass fille ta prequalified j all passes all passes all passes root pass opening is root pass all passes root pass root pass opening is all passes welds mad for root pa being such for subse in the flat in the hori in the vert ta prequalified all pass m for the m for the m all weld a multip making layer ex m in the fl m in the h m in the o tions frastruc s odes arc len al type of g work .
ithin the ran f electrode th ets shall be a electrode th ets shall be a able num joints using s in vertical fill s in overhead s in horizontal ses in grooves s less than num m ses in grooves s for horizonta ses for fillets in ses in grooves s greater than s subsequent de in the flat p asses of groo h as to preven equent layers position izontal or ove tical position able num joints using ses in flat and vertical posit overhead po d layers excep ple pass split g all multiple p xceeds num mm lat and vertica horizontal pos overhead posi cture gth voltage groove weldi nge recomme he maximum as indicated in he maximum as indicated in the smaw p let and groove fillet and groo groove welds s with backing mm in flat pos s without back al fillet welds n flat position s with backing n num mm in flat p to root passe position ove welds with nt cracking of welds mad rhead position g the fcaw p d horizontal po tion osition pt for root and tlayer techniq pass welds wh m al positions sition ition and amperag ing positions ended by the thickness of n table num thickness of n table num process e welds ove welds s g where the ro sition king in flat pos g where the ro position es for fillet and h the minimum de in any posit ns process ositions d surface laye que shall be u hen the width item num page num ge shall be and other e electrode f layers and .
f layers and num. oot sition oot d groove m size tion rs used in of the ste pag num num num eel pipe pil ge num num .num num .num insp num .num les details .num butt joint of the init is started .num parti the re .num defe base .num groove w with the b .num when tac preparing .num flux pin before de .num stringer b pection of wel inspection an .num the pro accordan .num inspectio they prop requirem .num the brun .num the of w .num guided cancsa .num guid coup .num if the hesh assu .num the splice .num the c departm groove welds tial weld air ca d from the sec cular care sh emaining weld ctive portions e metal .
welds made w backing .
ck welds are g stops and st holes crate epositing the n beads shall be ds nd testing of w cedure and nce with can on and testing pose to use fo ents methods for n swick .
welding insp elding inspec bend tests a wnum sect ed bend test pon from a ste e engineer de he may then rance that the preparation o e is driven be contractor sh sta ment of tr structu s except thos arbonarc gou cond side .
all be taken d metal or bas s of the weld with the use o used for align tarts to make rs visual sur next layer of w e used for hor welds technique fo csa wnum c g organization or nondestruc nondestructiv pection organ ction organiza shall be tion num and s coupons may eel pipe pile sp termines that test sufficien e balance of th f these test co low the groun hall restore the andard s ransport ures se produced w uged chipped in the gougin se metal is no shall be rem of backing sha nment care s continuous w rface defects weld .
rizontal welds or visual an lauses num and ns shall demo ctive testing a ve testing sha ization shall b ations .
carried out hall be tested y be taken fro plice .
a guided ben nt coupons as he welding is oupons shall nd .
e pile to its ori specifica tation an with the aid of d or ground to ng chipping o ot nicked or un moved without all have the w shall be exerc welding satisfa and excessiv s. nd nondestru num. onstrate to the re suitable an ll be as appro be certified to t on coupo d by the engin om the actual nd test coupo s shehe feel satisfactory .
be done by th ginal conditio ations nd infras f backing sha sound metal or grinding op ndercut .
t substantial weld metal tho cised by prope actory .
ve crown sha uctive testing e engineer th nd meet one o oved by the p o csa wnum .
ons in acc neer .
l pile splice by n fails to mee s are necess he contractor n if the weld tructur item num january num ll have the roo before weldin peration so tha removal of th oroughly fuse erly grinding o all be remove g shall be at the method of the followin rovince of ne .num certificatio cordance wit y removing th et the standar sary to provid before the pi is acceptable re num num ot ng at he ed or ed in ds ng ew on th he d de le e. depa steel janua num num num artment l pipe piles ary num num .num fre .num .num num .num qu .num .num .num .num dynam .num pile eng mo end .num .num the acc stan of trans s equency of ins all welds sha testing shal .num a minim tested methods required .num a minim magnet quality le .num welds i specime .num the flam .num all g .num non tests .num if defec enginee to ensur .num all corre ality of welds the quality o section num c the accepta num and s the quality o wnum claus ic pile testin es as identi gineer shall obilized resista d of initial driv piles to be t e engineer b ceptance crite ndard sp portatio spection and t all be inspecte l be carried o mum of num of by nondestr s and supplem d to assure th mum of num tic particle and evel of the we in steel pipe ens made from ese specimens me cutting to w guided bend te ndestructive t s. cts are identi er shall determ re the soundn ected welds ar s of welds in ste clause num ance criteria f shall meet the of weld requir ses num and num g ified in the be dynamica ance hamme ving and durin ested shall be based on the r eria .
pecificat on and inf structures testing ed visually .
ut by the eng f full penetrati ructive testin mented by ma he soundness fillet welds m dor liquid pen elds .
e pile splices m a portion of s shall have within num mm of est coupons s testing may b ified that are mine the addit ess and quali re to be retest eel pipe pile s . for defects sh limits describ red for guided num .
contract do ally tested du er performanc ng all retaps .
e driven with results of dyn tions frastruc s ineer as follow on groove we g methods agnetic partic and quality le may be tested netrant test m s may also b field spliced m the backing r f its thickness shall be stamp be performed e outside the tional percent ity level of all ted .
splices shall b hall be in acc bed in this clau d bend tests s cuments and uring driving ce pile stres an external h namic testing cture ws elds and steel radiographic cle or liquid pe evel of the we d by nondes methods to as be tested by material remo removed by m followed by g ped by the we d on coupons e criteria spe tage of testing the welds .
be in accordan cordance with use for tensio shall be in ac dor as spec for measure ss and soil dy hammer .
and analysis p pipe pile splic c andor ultr enetrant test elds .
structive testin ssure the sou y guided ben oved from the mechanical m grinding or ma elder .
s in lieu of g ecified in num g that shall be nce with can h cancsa w on welds .
ccordance with cifically direc ement and es ynamic prope shall determ item num page num ces shall be asonic test methods as ng methods ndness and nd tests on pipe pile .
means or by achining .
uided bend num the e carried out ncsa wnum wnum clause h cancsa cted by the stimation of erties at the mine the pile ste pag num num eel pipe pil ge num num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num measu .num the and .num all p othe .num the and les the contrac operations .
the contract the testing p the contract attaching ins .num the con of being .num the eng instrume the contrac num hz ac fo .num field gen shall only the contract of the pile tes .num the shel of num m a with the dyna initial driving engineer .
stresses in t exceed num .num if directe the pile b of the ha .num if nonax realign th rement fo quantity to b installed in ac piles shall be m er pile have be length to be m the actual fiel departm ctor shall not tor shall assis procedure sha tor shall prov truments with tractor shall p raised to the gineer shall r nts .
ctor shall su or use by the nerators shall y supply elect tor shall prov st or a shelter ter shall have nd the interio amic testing e and retap th the pile shall of the pile ste ed by the eng by means of c ammer .
xial driving is he driving sys or payment be measured ccordance wit measured for een finalized a measured for ld toe elevatio sta ment of tr structu ify the engin st the enginee all be carried vide the engin h the pile in th provide a wor top of the pile require appro upply an ele engineer dur l be equipped trical power fo ide the engin r within the sa e a minimum or temperature equipment att he pile with be monitore eel yield stres gineer the co cushion or he indicated by stem .
t for payment h this item .
payment only and no further payment shal on measured a andard s ransport ures neer at least er in carrying out in accord neer with rea he leads .
rk platform m e. oximately one ectrical powe ring the tests .
d with functio or the pile tes neer with acce ame distance floor size of e shall be ma tached to the a hammer of ed during driv ss .
ontractor sha elmet modifica the measure shall be the n y after all piles driving in the ll be the differ along the cent specifica tation an num days in a out the testin ance with aa asonable mea minimum size e hour per p er supply of ning voltage sting .
ess for a moto .
num m by num m aintained abov e pile the con f the specifie ving to ensur ll reduce the ations or by ements the c number of line s in any group pile group sh rence between treline axis of ations nd infras advance of th ng .
ashto tnum ans of access of num m by num pile per test f num amper and frequenc or vehicle va m a minimum ve numc .
ntractor shall ed size as d re that the st driving energ reducing the contractor sha ear metres of p or in close p hall be required n the design c the pile .
tructur item num january num he pile drivin num. s to the pile fo num m capab to attach th re num volt cy meters an an within num m ceiling heig drive to end o directed by th tresses do no gy delivered t energy outp all immediate f piles supplie proximity to an d. cutoff elevatio re num num ng or le he ts nd m ht of he ot to ut ely ed ny on depa steel janua num artment l pipe piles ary num basis of .num paymen pile as .num the ow work s .num the cos the con otherwi .num the .num retapp item num stan of trans s payment nt for work u identified und wner shall ma site .
st of the prov ntractor if the se the owner e cost of any t ping in exces num .
ndard sp portatio under this item der the contra ake partial pay vision of mate test results s r shall bear th testing to reso ss of four op pecificat on and inf structures m shall includ act .
yment in acco erials labour a how that the e cost of the t olve the qualit perations if tions frastruc s e a separate ordance with and equipme material does test .
ty of welds sh required sh cture unit price fo num for ste nt to test the s not meet the hall be borne b hall be paid p or each size o eel pipe pile s welds shall b e specified re by the contrac for in accor item num page num of steel pipe tored at the be borne by quirements ctor .
rdance with depa steel janua num num num artment l sheet pil ary num descript .num this ite required material .num all mate .num all stee grade num .num the co contrac flooding .num the co .num we .num we .num upo she .num the ca .num .num .num the co supplie .num materia deforma submitta .num the co shall su .num the larg .num .num submitt stan of trans le cofferd tion em consists o d in the contr s erials shall be el sheet pile s numw steel .
ontractor shal ct documents g elevation wit ontractor may elded splices i elded steel she on the reques eet pile splices e acceptance ancsa wnum f if unaccepta shall reject t subject to th defects corre ontractor shal d. als shall be s ation .
als ontractor shall ubmit the desi e contractor ge as that sho the sheet p commercially to determine tals are requir ndard sp portatio dams of the design ract .
e supplied by t shall conform l supply the s s is achieved a th due consid use welded s n steel sheet eet pile splice st of the engin s by radiograp e for welded for tension we able weld defe he pile section he approval o ected and the l supply the c stored in an o l be responsib gn in accorda shall ensure own in the con piling sections y available pr e the specified red in accorda pecificat on and inf structures n supply and the contracto to cancsa sheet pile in l and an undam eration given steel sheet pile pile shall con es shall be pre neer the con phic inspectio steel sheet p elds in dynam ects are foun n or of the enginee e splices retes corners for th organized st ble for the de ance with item that the dime ntract docum s and corner roduct selecte d volume of th ance with any tions frastruc s d construction or .
a gnum and engths such maged pile is p to driving .
e sections p form to the re equalified full p tractor shall te on .
pile splices s mically loaded nd in welded er the contra sted .
he cofferdam traight and ho esign of the c m num. ensions of th ents .
details shown ed to determin he tremie conc crossreferen cture n of all steel gnum and that the toe e provided up to rovided that equirements o penetration gr est a minimum hall be as sp structures .
steel sheet p actor may und in lengths a orizontal fash cofferdam and he cofferdam n on the draw ne the minimu crete in accord nced item form sheet pile c as a minimu elevation spe o the specified of cancsa w roove welds .
m of num of w pecified in cl pile splices th dertake to ha as long as the hion to avoid d associated b shall remain wings are ba um size of the dance with num ming part of th item num page num cofferdams um shall be cified in the d cofferdam wnum .
welded steel lause num of he engineer ve the weld e sheet pile permanent bracing and at least as sed on one footing and num. is item .
ste pag num eel sheet ge num num const .num the spec .num the antic .num stee be p appr .num wor writi .num stee and .num coff enla .num coff spec .num cros desi .num exca struc writi .num stee rem .num .num sup coffe havi pile coffe ruction contractor s cifically directe contractor sh cipated design el sheet piles pulled or cut roved in writin rk on cofferda ng .
el sheet piles as defined by horizon vertical misplac ferdams tilted arged to provid ferdam walls cified cofferda ss struts or br ign and having avation shall cture shall no ng by the eng el sheet piles oved at the op when the ste the contracto contract doc perimposed lo erdam unless ing been subm departm erdams shall carry o ed by the eng hall design an n loadings an in cofferdam off to final e ng .
ams may not shall be drive y num and c ntal alignment alignment of cement or ecc d or moved o de necessary shall be vente am high water racing may ex g been appro not be made ot be disturbe gineer .
s may remain ption of the c eel sheet pile or shall cut o cuments .
oads shall no s specifically mitted as part sta ment of tr structu ut the work gineer .
nd construct a d to be as wa s constructed elevation befo start until the en to conform are subject to tab cofferdam sh of walls walls centricity out of positio clearance an ed to permit c r design eleva xtend through ved by the en outside of co ed unless sp n in place as ontractor .
s are to rema off the steel ot be placed permitted in t of num .
andard s ransport ures as indicated all cofferdams atertight as pra d before or du ore march numst e june numth of m with the lim o the toleranc ble num heet pile tole num mm per me num mm per m num mm para bridge num mm perpe bridge n as per num nd proper loca cofferdam floo ation .
h foundation c ngineer .
offerdams and pecifically per s a part of th ain in place a sheet piles e d on the su the contract d specifica tation an d in the cont to be adequa actically possi uring the wint t of the follow each year un mits as shown ces indicated i erances etre of plan len metre of vertica rallel to build endicular to b num during ation .
oding at an e concrete when d the existing rmitted in the he permanen and form part evenly at the rrounding so documents in ations nd infras tract docume ately braced to ible .
ter months of wing year un nless otherwis in the contra in table num ngth of wall al length of wa ding line or uilding line or driving shall elevation not h n indicated on g stream bed e contract do t structure or of the perma e elevation in oil immediate n writing by th tructur item num january num ents andor a o withstand th any year sha nless otherwis se approved act documen num. all centreline of r centreline of be righted o higher than th n the cofferda adjacent to th ocuments or r they may b anent structure ndicated in th ly adjacent t he engineer o re num num as he all se in ts f f or he m he in be e he to or depa steel janua num num num artment l sheet pil ary num .num the co underw approve .num the co on top o .num the co conditio others .num the dew req the .num the pro of t .num a c sub dew measure .num the de item sh basis of .num payme .num the ow .num par pur .num the co owner .num in the e and rep .num if the c which a be resp of the s stan of trans le cofferd ontractor sha water tremie ed in writing b ontractor shall of the tremie c ontractor sha ons at the site influence the e contractor s watering disch quired to verify period of the e contractor ogram and this the work .
copy of all re bmission of th watering disch ment for p esign supply hall be on a lum payment nt for work u wner shall ma rtial payment rchase price f st of carrying and the cont event that wel pair and retes contractors c are larger tha ponsible at h specified dime ndard sp portatio dams ll wait a min concrete be by the enginee ensure that a concrete is pla all familiarize e prior to the c chosen style shall be solely harge and sh y and confirm work .
shall submit s program sha ecords shall b is data does n harge .
payment and construc mp sum basis nder this item ake partial pay t for used st for new steel out the radio tractor .
lded steel she sting of these offerdam des an the dimens herhis own ex ension to com pecificat on and inf structures nimum of num efore dewater er .
adequate dew aced in the dr himself with commenceme of operations y responsible hall maintain r m continuous a work plan all be of a form be submitted not relieve the ction of all ste s. m shall be at t yment for stee teel sheet pi sheet pile .
ographic testi eet pile splice splices shall sign submitte sions specifie xpense to su mplete the wo tions frastruc s hours follow ring the coffe watering is pro ry .
h all permits ent of the dew s. for all compl records of all compliance w n outlining th m acceptable to the engin e contractor o eel sheet pile the lump sum el sheet pile i le shall be c ng under num es are deficien be at the con ed under num d in the cont upply and pla ork .
cture ing the comp erdam unless ovided so that s item num watering which iance and un l pertinent de with the perm he scope of t e to delg prio neer on a we of any respons cofferdams m price .
n accordance calculated on num shall b nt under num. ntractors own .num results i tract docume ace the additio pletion of the s otherwise a all concrete t and any en h may at the d dertakings re ewatering disc it parameters the proposed or to the com eekly basis h sibility with re in accordan e with num. n num of the be shared eq num all additi n expense .
in cofferdam ents the cont onal concrete item num page num e placing of altered and to be placed vironmental discretion of lating to the charge data s throughout monitoring mencement however the espect to the ce with this e estimated ually by the onal testing dimensions tractor shall e in excess depa excav janua num num num num num num artment vation wit ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num all mate .num all exca and sha .num preexc requirem measure .num the qu excava basis of p .num payme stan of trans thin coffer tion em consists of s dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b erial shall be e avated mater all be dispose cavation of th ment in the c ment for p uantity to be ted within coff payment nt for work un ndard sp portatio rdams f the excavatio all carry out t by the engine excavated to t rials from insi ed of outside o he riverbed m ontract docum payment measured f ferdams in ac nder this item pecificat on and inf structures on of all mate the work as er .
the full dimen de the coffer of the work si material shall ments .
for payment s ccordance with shall be at th tions frastruc s rials within co indicated in nsion of the co rdam shall be ite .
not be perm shall be the h this item .
he unit price .
cture offerdams .
the contrac offerdam .
ecome the pr mitted unless volume in c ct documents roperty of the specifically cubic metres item num page num s andor as e contractor noted as a of material depa preca janua artic num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
num num num num .
artment ast prestr ary num cle num descript num material num submitta num constru .num gener .num curing .num finishi .num testin .num reinfo .num tensio .num identif .num tolera .num handli num measure num basis for descript .num this ite .num prestre hollow the pre .num all prec material .num genera .num all .num ma .num materia num .num agg .num stan of trans ressed co tion ls als ction ral g of concrete .
ing of concret g and inspect orcing steel oning and stre fication of pref ances ing storage a ement for p r payment .. tion em consists of essing metho core slabs s tensioning me cast prestress s al materials and aterial propert al properties gregates aggregates with num .
ndard sp portatio ncrete be c te surfaces ion ess transfer .. fabricated bea and shipping .. payment f the supply an d this spe single and do ethod and in sed concrete d procedures ies shall conf used in conc pecificat on and inf eams structures ontents ams nd installation ecification ref ouble tsectio accordance w bridge eleme shall be supp form to csa a crete shall me tions frastruc s n of the precas fers to bulb ons and simil with cancsa ents under thi plied by the c anum if not o eet the materi cture st prestressed tees ibea lar bridge pro a snum .
s item shall b contractor .
otherwise spe ial properties page num .
num num .
num num num num num .
num num num num num .
num num d concrete be ms box gird oducts manu be referred to ecified herein .
specified in a item num page num ams .
ders slabs factured by as beams. . accordance pr pag num num num num ecast pre ge num num .num num .num num .num num .num stressed c admixtures .num a written the admi .num the calc calcium n water .num water us shall cau composition .num concrete .num concrete .num no mate compoun .num a calcium lmnum .
.num the c be pr of co .num a f d stranded wir .num prestres the requ unless o .num wire prest .num all pr paint bond .num in pr the s splice departm concrete statement sh xture contain cium nitrite co nitrite by weigh sed in produc use discolorat of mix e shall meet th e shall have a rials shall be nds in any qua m nitrite corros calcium nitrite rovided to the oncrete .
acceptable ve from compute dispensing un re ssing strands uirements of a otherwise spe welds break tressing cable restressing st t mill scale l d between ste etensioning s splice is not l es shall not be sta ment of tr beams structu hall be provid s no purpose orrosion inhib ht of solution .
ction and curi ion or harmfu he requireme a slump not gr e used in the antity .
sion inhibitor e shall be adde engineer for erification sha erized batch its .
shall be of th astm anumm cified in the c ks nicks ben e. teel must be f oose rust co el and concre strands one ap located within e permitted in andard s ransport ures ed to the eng ely added calc biting admixtu ing shall be c ul effects to th ents of csa a reater than num mix design t shall be adde ed at the conc the quantity o all include bu plants or p he num wire stres m and have a contract docu nds or any ot free of delete orrosion and a ete .
pproved splic n the concrete n any reel or c specifica tation an gineer from th cium chloride .
ure shall con clean and fre he concrete .
anum exposu num mm .
that contain p ed to the conc crete ready m of the calcium ut is not nece printouts from ssrelieved st an ultimate te uments .
ther defect sh rious materia any foreign m ce per strand e member .
w coil of strand .
ations nd infras he manufactu .
ntain between e from any m ure class cxl purposefully a crete at a dos mix plant and v m nitrite added essarily limite m computeriz tabilized type ensile strength hall not be pe als such as oil material whic shall be perm welded strand tructur item num january num urer stating tha n num to num materials whic l. added chlorid sage rate of num verification sha d to each batc ed to printou zed admixtur and shall mee h of num mp ermitted in an l grease fros ch may preve mitted provide d joints or wir re num num at ch de num all ch ts re et pa ny st nt ed re depa preca janua num .
num num .
num artment ast prestr ary num num .num .num num .num re .num .num num .num ins .num submitta .num the co num .
.num the ma ord .num all pre qualifie .num the co prior to .num sta spe .num the .num the pre but not submitt .num sam of inve stan of trans ressed co all stranded .num the man .num the hea .num the coil .num each co .num the .num ultim .num the .num the the shipping contains hig inforcing stee reinforcing welding of permission o erts inserts shall placed in the als ontractor shal e submission anufacture siz der to provide stressing wo ed in accordan ontractor shall commencing andard test da ecification req e manufacture estressing sys t limited to p ted for approv mples submitt manufacture estigation .
ndard sp portatio ncrete be wire shall be nufacturers n at number number and oil shall be acc corresponding mate strength date of manuf stressstrain c g package or hstrength pre el steel shall be reinforcing s of the engine l be of sufficie e locations a l submit shop shall show th ze type and u prestressing f ork shall be nce with item l provide the f prestressing ata certifying t uirements ind er shall provid stem is subjec prestress stee val when requ ted shall be a and technic pecificat on and inf eams structures delivered in c ame companied by g information facture and curve from ze form shall be estressing ste e supplied in a steel includin er .
ent capacity a as indicated b p drawings fo he proposed a ultimate stren forces and ec carried out num. following info work that all compo dicated for the de quality cont ct to approval el holddown uested by the accompanied cal informatio tions frastruc s coils with a me y a stressstra of the metal t ero stress to u e clearly mark eel and the ca accordance w ng tack weldi and of an app by location in r the prestres arrangement gth of tendon ccentricities as by a qualifie rmational item onents of the s ese componen trol procedure l by the engin nholdup dev engineer .
by all necess on to enable cture etal tag attach ain curve show tag ltimate .
ked with a sta are to be used with num. ing is prohib proved type a the contract ssing system location and d ns sequence s detailed in th ed contractor ms for review stressing syst nts .
es for review .
neer and sam vices anchors ary certificate e the engine hed to each co wing atement that t d in handling .
bited without as specified a documents .
in accordanc details indica and rate of te he contract d r or subcont w a minimum tem conform mples of mater s and couplin es source of s eer to carry item num page num oil showing he package the written and shall be ce with item ating inserts ensioning in documents .
ractor pre of num days to minimum rial such as ngs shall be supply date out a full pr pag num num ecast pre ge num num .num .num the in fo the b .num the .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num sub part num const .num gen .num .num .num .num .num .num .num stressed c sufficient tes owner to det .num with eac manufact number a beam manuf orce during the beams .
contractor at date of tensio beam mark n identification required tota initial tension anticipated a anticipated a any problems mittals are re of this item .
ruction neral the contract specifically di the contract specified in c the contra canadian pre the contract certification re the contract reports of th precast plan reinforcemen the prestress .num only stee members .num forms sh outlined u departm concrete t specimens m ermine compl ch prestress turers minim and the date o facturer shall e period of be t the conclusio oning numbers and i of jacking eq al load per stra nd actual gau nd actual elon s encountered equired in acc tor shall carry rected by the tor shall provid csa anum an ctor shall estressed con tor shall provid equirements t tor shall upo he reinforcing ts shall keep nt prestressing sing plant sha el side forms s. hall be clean under this item sta ment of tr beams structu may be taken liance with the ing steel sa um guarante of manufactur provide the e eam manufact on of the pres identification a uipment and uge pressure f ngation and d. cordance with y out the wo engineer and de certified co nd astm anum inspect pres ncrete institut de records fro to the enginee n request of steel supplied p complete re g steel and sh all conform to s and steel o and of a co m and the con andard s ransport ures n from each co e requirement ample a cert eed ultimate t re .
engineer in w ture prior to t stressing shall and location in for each stran any crossref rk as indicate d in accordanc opies of qualit numm .
stressed con e cpci .
om inhouse q er for inspecti the engineer d showing ph ecords of su hall provide th the following or concrete bo onfiguration to ntract docum specifica tation an oil of prestres ts of this spec tificate shall tensile streng writing the saf he commence l provide a co n the structur nd or strand gr ferenced item ed in the con ce with csa a ty control test ncrete tendo quality control on and review r provide cer hysical and ch upply source his information minimum req ottom forms o ensure com ents .
ations nd infras ssing steel and cification .
be submitte gth the corre fety procedure ement of the opy of following re roup m and referred ntract docum anum .
ts related to th ons in acc programs ba w. rtified copies hemical analys of concrete n to the engin uirements shall be use mpliance with tructur item num january num d tested by th ed stating th esponding re es that shall b manufacture o g records d to as formin ents andor a his contract a cordance wit ased upon pla of the mill te ses .
material ste eer .
ed for standar the tolerance re num num he he el be of ng as as th nt st el rd es depa preca janua num .
num artment ast prestr ary num num .num .num .num .num .num co hav dra .num the of p .num .num the pre .num .num .num the or c .num curing .num wh ma pro .num acc as .num wh .num .num .num .num wh stan of trans ressed co hydraulic jac only accurat all chucks approved typ safety devic shield for the cold weath provided bet ncrete shall n ve been chec awings submit e concrete pla partially harde for multiple plastic throu e contractor estressing plan the office s furnished wit .num the offic convenient also be prov e contractor s change in fab of concrete hen the amb anufacturing fa otection may b celerated stre defined in cs hen heated co heated conc the maximu the maximu hen accelerate ndard sp portatio ncrete be cks and pump tely calibrated used for stre pe of sufficien ces shall be i e protection o er facilities t tween octobe not be placed cked and app tted under item acement oper ened layers of beam setups ghout the ent shall provid nt to accomm pace so prov th a suitable s ce room temp telephone fa vided .
shall provide rication sched bient tempera acilities are p be performed ength develop sa anum .
oncrete metho crete shall hav um temperatur um cooling rat ed curing met pecificat on and inf eams structures ps of sufficien gauges for re essing depre nt capacity and installed near f workmen du to enable co er numst to may d until all form proved for co m num. ration shall be f concrete .
s the mix des ire placement de regular a odate the eng ided shall be standard office perature shall acsimile phot num days writte dule .
ature in the rotected from in accordanc ment may be od is used for a ve a maximum re of the hard te of the concr hod is used fo tions frastruc s nt capacity sh egistering the essing or liftin d in good wor r the stressin uring stressing omplete fabric numst .
ms inserts re ompliance wit e in one contin sign shall be t. and practica gineer or the o ventilated he e desk and ch be maintained tocopy mail a en notice prior plant does m the wind and ce with csa a e attained by a accelerated s m plastic conc ened concret rete shall not or accelerated cture hall be used f stressing forc ng pretension rking order .
g bed to prov g operations .
cation out of einforcing stee th the contra nuous operati adjusted so th lly located o owners repre eated lighted hair .
d at numc .
and message r to commenc not fall belo d direct rays f anum and anum accelerated c strength devel crete tempera te shall not ex exceed numc d strength dev for tensioning ces shall be u ning cables s vide an adeq f the elemen el and prestre act documen on without th hat the concre office space esentative .
d and clean a e handling se cement of any ow numc and from the sun num and per num curing or heate opment ature of numc .
xceed numc .
per hour .
velopment item num page num cables and used .
shall be an quate safety nts shall be essing steel nts and any he formation ete remains at hisher and shall be ervices shall y fabrication where the curing and num. ed concrete pr pag num ecast pre ge num num .num .num .num .num .num stressed c .num the acce .num the acce .num in no ins concrete .num the beam to ensure with a mi .num during t temperat .num for the n rate not numc .
.num this tem prestress the exposed curing period .num if water i concrete numc .
stress transf .num maximum shall be num .num additiona insulated and stres after transfe hour until the .num the bea undergon the contrac the entire cu spaced one enclosures .
.num the max numc .
.num shop gir a daily ba forms shall n departm concrete elerated curing elerated curing stance shall forms or test ms shall be m e full circulat inimum loss o the initial curi ture within the next stage of to exceed mperature sha s is reached .
d surfaces of d. is applied for temperature fer shall take p m temperature numc .
al measures d tarps with ssing cables .
r of stress th e beam is at th ams shall no ne two days o tormanufactu uring period per beam t . ximum permis rder and encl asis during pr not be remove sta ment of tr beams structu g shall not beg g shall provide the steam r t cylinders .
maintained on tion of thorou of moisture an ing period ty e enclosure s curing the t numc per h all be mainta the concrete this purpose e by more place when th e differential may be req or without an he temperatur he ambient ai ot be expose of drying in w urer shall pro by means o to record the ssible temper losure tempe roduction .
ed until the co andard s ransport ures gin before the e excess mois radiant heat n the casting b ughly saturate nd heat .
ypically num to num hall be mainta emperature w hour to a m ained until th e shall have a e then this wa than numc he concrete te between the quired to pre n additional h re shall be lo ir temperature ed to temper warm tempera ovide a contin of approved e temperatur rature variatio rature record oncrete has o specifica tation an e initial set .
sture for prop or forced air bed in an app ed air andor num hours after ained at appr within the enc minimum of num he required s an excess of ater tempera nor shall emperature is girder and th event thermal heating sourc owered at a e. ratures below tures after the nuous record accurate au re throughout on within the ds shall be su obtained the s ations nd infras er hydration o r be directly proved enclos r steam arou r completion o roximately num closure shall numc and a strength for t f moisture du ture shall not this temper s above numc he surroundin l shock .
this ce draped ov maximum rat w freezing u e transfer of s of curing tem tomatic reco t the length enclosure sh ubmitted to th specified relea tructur item num january num of the cement applied to th sure designe und the beam of casting th c. be raised at maximum o the transfer o uring the entir t vary from th rature excee c. ng environme s may includ ver the girde te of numc pe ntil they hav stress .
mperatures fo ording device of the curin hall not excee he engineer o ase strength .
re num num . he ed ms he a of of re he ed nt de rs er ve or s ng ed on depa preca janua num artment ast prestr ary num .num finishin .num the am .num imm bea .num .num .num .num the sta .num the .num sm san age .num .num all line .num the sur .num .num the be .num co tem app .num co the stan of trans ressed co ng of concret e top surface mplitude of app mediately afte ams require p proposed pa for approval the engine transfer of p beams with the load carr .num repairs enginee .num inve .num esta .num rec e permanently in and laitanc e contractor s mall surface v nd from the ent .
the beams period of num bearing surfa es and grades e prestressing rfaces of the b holddown de e end surface coated with a ncrete repairs mperature env proved by the ncrete surfac e beam .
ndard sp portatio ncrete be te surfaces e of precast proximately num er the strippin patching .
atching mate of the engine eer shall dete prestressing fo structural def rying capacity of a structu er has carried estigated the ablished the c ceived approv y exposed su ce .
shall pressure oids shall be same source shall remain hours after c aces must be s. g steel shall b beam shall the evices in the b es of all beam an approved a s shall be car vironment as e engineer .
ces not meeti pecificat on and inf eams structures beams shall mm .
ng of forms t rials and met eer .
ermine wheth orce .
fects including y or durability a ural nature s out and obta structural imp cause of the d val of the prop urfaces of all b e wash the su e filled with an e as used in n in a controll completion of constructed i be ground off en be finished bottom of the ms except as asphalt or bitum rried out and recommende ng the appro tions frastruc s be rough cl the engineer thods for non her patching g cracks and are reduced .
shall not be ained the follo plications of th defect or the d posed repair f beams shall b urface to iden n approved c the concrete led temperatu the repair .
in such a man with an inset d flush in an ap beam shall b specifically n minous coatin allowed to cu ed by the ma oval of the en cture lean and fre shall be info nstructural re shall be do honeycomb undertaken u owing he defect or t damage .
from the own be smooth an ntify all air void cement grout e and incorp ure environm nner to give a t at the ends o pproved man be finished sim noted in the c ng .
ure for a minim anufacturer of ngineer may b ee of laitance rmed of all ca epairs shall be one before o are subject to until the man he damage .
ner .
nd free from h ds prior to fin mix of ceme porating a lat ment for a min a smooth surf of the beam a ner .
milarly .
contract docu mum time in a f the repair m be cause for item num page num e with a full ases where e submitted or after the o rejection if nufacturers honeycomb al finishing .
ent and fine tex bonding nimum time face true to and the end uments shall a controlled material and rejection of pr pag num num num ecast pre ge num num .num test .num num .num rein .num .num .num num .num ten .num stressed c ting and inspe concrete stre anum and as .num in the pr carry out beam co and two num .num each tran numday st conducte the same .num stress tra test has indicated .num stres cylind .num the initia of the me .num the aver shall be e .num the num mp .num the num mp nforcing steel the contrac tolerances in all reinforcing loose or forei supporting ch subject to the sioning and s the tensionin csa anum a .num when str prestress .num the requi departm concrete ection ength at trans s follows resence of th t a minimum o ntaining less numday streng nsfer strength trength test s ed in pairs tha e portions of th ansfer shall n reached a str in the contra ss transfer sh ders meets or al curing of the ean temperatu rage of all cyl equal to or gre allowable s pa below the s average stre pa below the s ctor shall be accordance w g steel protru gn material an hairs for reinfo e approval of t stress transfe ng and stress nd as follows ressing is do s force shall b theoretical ja ired prestress sta ment of tr beams structu sfer shall be d e engineer t of one transfe than num mnum c gth tests for ea h test shall co hall consist of at is transfer he same batc ot take place rength not les act document hall not take r exceeds the e stress relea ure of the enc linders of an eater than the trength for specified mini ength for ea specified mini responsible t with num a uding from the nd excessive orcing steel an the engineer .
er s transfer sha ne by jacking e additionally cking force m s force at the f andard s ransport ures determined by the contracto er strength te concrete and ach beam con onsist of two c f two cylinder strength tests hes .
until at least ss than num mpa s. place until t specified rele ase cylinders s losure .
y one beam e specified min each individ mum .
ach test of t mum .
to position th and num. e precast me concrete .
nd prestressin ll be carried o g the strands measured on may be increa far end of the specifica tation an y the contrac or shall cast st and one num not less than ntaining more cylinders from rs from the sa s and numday one cylinder a below the s the average ease strength shall take plac tested to det nimum numday ual cylinder two cylinders he reinforcing ember shall be ng cable shall out by the co from one en n at least two ased by a ma prestress bed ations nd infras ctor in accorda cylinders and numday strengt n two transfer than num mnum co m the same b ame batch and strength test from each tra specified relea strength of a . ce in an area termine the num y strength .
shall not b s shall not b g steel within e free from o l be heavy pla ontractor in ac nd of the stre strands at the aximum of num d. tructur item num january num ance with cs d subsequent th test for eac r strength tes oncrete .
batch and eac d tests shall b s shall be fro ansfer strengt ase strength a all release te representativ numday strengt be more tha be more tha n the specifie oil grease an astic tipped an ccordance wit essing bed th e far end .
to attain th re num num sa tly ch ts ch be m th as st ve th an an ed ny nd th he he depa preca janua num num artment ast prestr ary num num .num .num the min .num .num .num ga dia .num .num .num bef lub .num .num afte stre stre .num stre end .num identific .num the dra .num du .num ide eac stan of trans ressed co .num if th from .num if th spec to ov .num anchorage s jacking force e tensioning nimum shall b each strand tensioning s if the differ determined f before contin uges shall be l reading can the hydrau piping valve fluctuations .
gauging de requested by fore each pr ricated and re chucks and be used .
er the concre ess transfer esses in the c ess transfer is ds and while a cation of prefa e contractor awing of the sh ring construct entification an ch beam .
ndard sp portatio ncrete be he required pr m the far end o e measured e cified prestres vercome fricti such overstr num of the sp set shall not re e. procedure a e in accordan d may be sea hall be measu rence betwee from elongatio nuing with the e calibrated to be converted lic pressure es and fitting evices shall b y the enginee restressing o eassembled .
jaws with ham te in the beam the strands oncrete at no s to be perfor all beams are abricated bea shall adopt hop drawings tion the date nd fabrication pecificat on and inf eams structures restress force of the bed to g elongation is n ss force is ap on .
ressing shall pecified tensil esult in prestr and sequence nce with the fo ated by applic ured by elong en the stres on exceeds num e stressing op o read directly to kn .
system activa gs to enable be calibrated er and in all c operation all mmer marks a m has reache shall be rele time exceed rmed simultan warm and mo ams and show a whereby ide of fabrication numbers sh tions frastruc s e is still not a give the requi not within num pplied the str not induce a le strength of ress losses ex e shall be a ollowing cation of an i ation and ver ssing force m num the source eration .
y in kn or acc ating the gau the gauge p by an appr cases at interv chucks and andor nicks o ed the specifie eased in suc those provide neously at bot oist .
beam identi entical beams shall be indic all be painte cture achieved the red prestress of the theore rand may be a stress befo the strand .
xceeding five pproved by initial tension rified by jackp measured by e of error sha companied by uges shall ha pointer to mo roved author vals of not mo d jaws shall on their intern ed minimum c ch a manner ed for in the d th ends of the ification syste have identica cated on each d on the side strands shal .
tical elongatio temporarily o ore anchoring percent of the the engineer of num kn and pressure .
y the gauges ll be found an y a chart from ave appropria ove steadily a rity and reca ore than one y be inspected al working pa compressive and sequen esign .
e bed and betw em on the b al numbers .
beam .
e of the uppe item num page num ll be jacked on when the overstressed g exceeding e theoretical r and as a d all further s and that nd corrected m which the ate bypass and without alibrated as year .
d cleaned arts shall not strength for ce that the ween beam beam layout er flange of pr pag num num ecast pre ge num num .num num .num tole b e d o s s b b b b s h c c s i p p s p d p b stressed c each beam e erances beam dimens exposed beam deviation from or designated side inserts skew angle v bearing plates bearing plates bearing p bearing area stirrup bars horizontal alig camber centre of g strand gro ndividual ten position of points for strands position of device position of t bracing insert departm concrete end shall be id d d sions d w l m ends m square skew h v s fr th variation s s b b s s b late or d p b gnment d th d gravity of oup and ndons deflection deflected d w f lifting temporary t lo sta ment of tr beams structu dentified by pa depth flange depth overall depth flanges width web length of bea horizontal vertical spacing betwe rom centres he beam spacing betw bearing plate beams spacing betw bearing plates deviation from projection abo beam deviation from he centre line differential bet deflection poi with respect to ongitudinal andard s ransport ures ainting on the web and fille s plus fillet m een centres o of inserts to ween the c es to the en ween the c s m plane ove theoretica m a straight line e of beam tween adjacen nts are to be o the middle o specifica tation an approximate ets of insert and the end of centres of nds of the centres of al top of the e parallel to nt beams e concentric of the beam ations nd infras compass dire num num m num m num mm num mm p greater than num num mm p height num num num mm pe but not great num num num mm p num mm per maximum of num num num num tructur item num january num ection .
num mm mm num mm mm num mm m num mm per m but n num mm num mm per m of bea num mm numo num mm r m of spaci ter than num m num mm num mm per m of span m of span f num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm re num num not am ng m to depa preca janua num num num artment ast prestr ary num .num handlin num .num ge .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num .num lift .num stan of trans ressed co ng storage an neral beams shall day strength the beams s when the b supported a from the end if the finishe wood or rubb beams dam rejection if th beams shall the use of s where beam submit the d work .
should the b blocks leave contractor s ing devices lifting devic andor as sp .num beams steel pla and aas .num beams steel pla beams .
.num lifting d by the e .num beams adequat ndard sp portatio ncrete be nd shipping l not be shipp h. shall be hand eams are in at a distance d of the beam ed beam is to ber shall be u maged by impr heir load carry l be handlede slings which re ms are propos detailed work bearing surfac e a gap betwe shall grind to f ces shall be s pecified in the having a mas ate as indica shto type iv having a mas ate as indicat evices for be engineer and s shall be sto tely braced an pecificat on and inf eams structures ed until the co led and store their final po equal to the or as indicat o be stored on sed between roper handling ying capacity o erected by two esult in a horiz sed to be hand k plan and sh ces of the pres een the surfac it .
supplied in th e contract do ss of more tha ated on the s vbeams .
ss of more tha ted on the sta eams having a shall be subm ored on block nd secured to tions frastruc s oncrete in the ed so that the osition excep depth of the ted on the sho n concrete su the beam and g storage tra or service life o or more cra zontal force c dlederected hall obtain wr stressed beam ce of the bea he beam as i ocuments and an num tonnes standard draw an num tonnes andard drawin a mass of mo mitted for appro ks at least num prevent overt cture e beams has r points of supp pt that for tra beam meas op drawings .
upports then a d the support ansportation o has been red nes .
omponent into by a single cr ritten approva ms or finishing ring pad and indicated in s d and less than wing num ty and less than ng num typi ore than num to roval as part o num mm off turning .
p reached the s port shall be t ansporting th ured along its a softer mate .
or erection ar duced .
o the beam is rane the con al prior to con g of the concr bottom of the standard dra n num tonnes s ypical for the n num tonnes s ical for the bu onnes must b of num. solid level g item num page num specified num the same as hey may be s centreline rial such as e subject to s prohibited .
tractor shall nducting the rete bearing e beam the awing num shall have a dti type i shall have a ulbtee type be approved ground and pr pag num num ecast pre ge num num measu .num the acco num basis o .num pay pres .num the stressed c rement fo quantity to b ordance with t of payment ment for wor stressed conc owner shall m departm concrete or payment be measured f this item .
t rk under this rete beam as make partial p sta ment of tr beams structu t for payment s item shall in s identified und payment for be andard s ransport ures shall be the nu nclude a sepa der the contra eams in accor specifica tation an umber of bea arate unit pri act .
rdance with num ations nd infras ams supplied a ce for each s num .
tructur item num january num and installed size of preca re num num in ast depa post janua num num artment tensionin ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num concre concret the con .num grout recomm .num gro of num ext .num gro ten .num .num .num grout s the spe the follo .num an form .num a w .num a m tes the .num reinfor .num postte of ast the con .num postte prestre where anchore stan of trans g system tion em consists o s erials and pro ete shall be te requiremen ntract docum shall be a mended by th out shall conf num num secon tended workin out shall not sioning steel chlorides sh when testi csa anum shall be dete shall also be s ecified proper owing propert approved ex mulation water cement minimum com ted at num day e num and numda rcing steel sha nsioning stran m anum and ntract docume ensioning wire ssed concret coldend def ed by wedges ndard sp portatio of the supply a ocedures sha supplied in nts of the stru ents .
prepackage e manufactur form to astm nds as per as ng time of num contain chlor .
hall be determ ng for nitrat numb clauses ermined in ac supplied in ac rties as indica ties xpanding ag ratio between mpressive stre ys in accorda ay requiremen all be supplie nds shall be o have an ultim ents .
e shall be a h te and shall m formation is s. pecificat on and inf structures and installation ll be supplied accordance ucture into wh ed natural a rer .
m cnum grad stm cnum at minutes .
rides or othe mined in acco tes the sam num num num a ccordance wit ccordance wit ated in the c ent additive n num and num. ength of num m ance with cs nts when test ed in accordan of the numwire st mate tensile st high tensile s meet the requ used for an tions frastruc s n of the comp d by the contr with item num hich it is bein aggregate gr de b or grade t temperature r chemicals k rdance with c mpling proced and num then th astm dnum th csa anum ontract docu or approved num and pa at num day sa anum whe ted and cured nce with item tressrelieved trength of num strength wire uirements as choring purp cture plete posttens ractor .
num and sh ng incorporate rout mixed e c when test e extremes of known to be csa anumb dure shall b n the nitrates num .
num and shall be ments and a d premanufa num mpa at num en cured at num d at the numc a num. d type and sha num mpa unle specifically m stm anum an poses or typ sioning system all match th ed andor as placed and ted at a fluid c f num c and num deleterious t b. be in accord s in water so e proportioned s a minimum ctured nons days and num numc and shal and numc limit all meet the re ss otherwise manufactured nd shall be of pe wa where item num page num m. e specified specified in cured as consistency c and an to the post dance with o extracted d to provide m shall have shrink grout num mpa when ll also meet ts .
equirements specified in d for use in f a type ba e ends are po pag num num osttension ge num num .num pos can .num anc .num the grou num submit .num the the d .num all p qua .num .num .num the prior .num .num .num .num .num .num the wob ultim force .num the as p appr .num ning syste ttensioning ncsa snum .
horages and contractor s ut tight .
ttals contractor sh design in acc posttensionin lified in accor the contract the posttens materials and the required p contractor s r to commenc a loadstrain steel the physical the materials a mill certifica hardness tes any other sta minimum spe .num the man submission bble coefficien mate strength es and eccen posttensioni posttensionin roval when re samples sub of manufactu investigation .
departm m tendons sha couplings sha hall supply br hall be respon cordance with ng work sha rdance with ite tor shall provid sioning firm s d suitably train posttensionin hall provide th cing posttens curve certify properties an conform to th ate for anchor st results for andard test d ecification req ufacturer sha shall also s nts and belt f of tendons s tricities as det ing system is g steel ancho equested by t bmitted shall b ure and tech sta ment of tr structu all also be s all be supplie right or galvan nsible for the item num. ll be carried em num. de the engine hall show to t ned and expe ng system .
he following i ioning work ying physical nd chemical c he minimum s rages and xr heat treated a data required uirements ind ll provide qua how the pro friction for sh sequence and tailed in the c subject to ap ors couplings he engineer .
be accompani hnical inform andard s ransport ures supplied in a ed in accordan nized sheet s design of the out by a qua eer with the na the engineers rienced staff t nformational properties for omposition fo pecification re rays of each m anchorages to certify tha dicated for the ality control pro posed arrang heathing and d rate of tensi contract docu pproval by the s sheath and ed by all nece ation to ena specifica tation an accordance w nce with csa steel sheaths e posttension alified contra ame of the pro s satisfaction to supply and items for rev r each mill he or bar steel an equirements i multistrand si at all compone ese componen ocedures for r gement loca couplings m ioning in orde uments .
e engineer an grout compo essary certific able the en ations nd infras with cancs a anum .
fabricated an ing system an actor or subc oposed postt that he has t d supervise the view a minim eat of bar ste ndor wire stee ndicated ngle wire anc ents of syste nts and review .
ation and det manufacture er to provide p nd samples o onents shall be cates source gineer to ca tructur item num january num sa gnum an nd placed to b nd shall subm contractor pre tensioning firm the equipmen e installation o um of num day eel andor wir el verifying tha chorage m conforms t tails indicatin size type an posttensionin f material suc e submitted fo of supply dat arry out a fu re num num nd be mit e m. nt of ys re at to ng nd ng ch or te ull depa post janua num num num num artment tensionin ary num num .num suf the .num .num all stra manufa .num each co of the m zero str .num the shi highstr amount for use .
.num the co records .num dat .num ide .num ide .num req .num init .num ant .num ant .num any .num submitt constru .num genera .num the spe .num all .num postte .num all mill ste .num the .num du sha stan of trans g system fficient test sp owner to det with each certificate st correspondin nded wire sh acturers name oil shall be ac metal tag the ress to ultimat ipping packag rength postte t of corrosion .
ontractor at t s te of tensionin ntification and ntification of j quired total lo ial tension ticipated and ticipated and y problems en tals are requir ction al e contractor ecifically direct concrete wor nsioning stee posttensionin l scale loose el and concre e use of post ring all stages all be thorough ndard sp portatio pecimens may termine comp sample of p tating the ma ng reel numbe all be deliver e the heat nu ccompanied b e ultimate stre te .
ge or form sha ensioning cabl inhibitor used he conclusion ng d number of e acking equipm oad per strand actual gauge actual elonga ncountered .
red in accorda shall carry ou ted by the eng rk shall be car el ng steel must rust corrosio ete .
tensioning ste s of transport hly protected pecificat on and inf structures y be taken fro pliance with th posttensioning nufacturers m er and the dat red in coils w mber and the by a stressst ength the dat all be clearly m le the type of d including th n of the post elements ment d pressure for e ation and ance with any ut the work a gineer .
rried out in ac t be free of de on or any fore eel having kin handling sto against corro tions frastruc s om each coil he requiremen g cable for minimum gua te of manufac with a metal ta e coil number .
train curve sh te of manufac marked with a f care to be us he date when ttensioning s each strand o y cross referen as indicated i ccordance with eleterious mat eign material nks bends nic orage and con sion crushing cture of posttensio nts of this spec testing there aranteed ultim cture .
ag attached to howing the co cture and the a statement th sed in handlin placed safet shall provide or strand grou nced item form in the contra h item num. terials such a which may p cks or other d nstruction all p g or other dam oning steel an cification .
e shall be s mate tensile s o each coil s orresponding e stressstrain hat the packa ng and the typ ty orders and a copy of th p ming part of th act documents as oil grease prevent bondin efects is not p posttensionin mage .
item num page num nd tested by submitted a trength the howing the information curve from age contains pe kind and instructions he following his item .
s andor as frost paint ng between permitted .
ng materials po pag num num osttension ge num num .num .num .num .num .num num .num plac .num .num .num .num ning syste all water use calcium hydr .num all compr when wires the axis of the .num the butto .num no cold f posttensioni shall be con inhibitor place when postte stressing and tensioning ste .num posttens the use steel .
.num post the re in tensioning not located w .num welded s cement of cab posttensioni position and a cables shall attached to th the contract become punc during the pla where the en devices shall anchoring de otherwise ind .num following material a departm m ed for flushing roxide in the ressed air use are to be but e wire .
ons shall deve forming proce ng steel whic tinuously pro ed in the ducts ensioning stee d grouting a eel rust which sioning steel of a corrosio tensioning st equirements p strands one within the conc strand joints o bles ng cables sh all kinks and u be supporte he vertical stir tor shall repa ctured or cru acement of co nd of a postt l be recessed evices will be dicated in the c g posttension and finished f sta ment of tr structu ducts shall c amount of num ed to blow out ttonheaded elop the minim ss shall be us h is installed otected agains s or applied to el is installed re completed h may form sh installed tens on inhibitor in teel installed pertaining to c approved spl crete member or wire splices hall be place undulations sh ed on rigid m rrups without w ir the sheath shed at any oncrete .
tensioned ass d so that the at least num m contract docu ning the rece flush .
andard s ransport ures contain either kgmnum .
t ducts shall b the buttons s mum guarante sed that cause in members p st rust or oth o the steel in t in the ducts a d within num d hall not be cau sioned and g the duct foll but not grout corrosion prot lice per strand .
shall not be p d within a to hall be avoide metal supports welding .
to the satisfa time during t sembly will no ends of the p mm inside of uments .
esses shall be specifica tation an quick lime ca be oil free .
shall be cold f eed ultimate te es indentation prior to placing her corrosion the duct until after completio days after th use for rejecti grouted within lowing installa ted within num tection and ru d shall be per permitted in a olerance of ed .
s not exceed action of the the placemen ot be covered posttensionin the end surfa e filled with an ations nd infras alcium oxide formed symm ensile strength ns in the wire .
g and curing n by means grouted .
on of concrete he installation on of the stee n num days sh ation of the p days shall be st. rmitted provid any reel or coi num mm of th ding a spacin engineer sho nt of cables a d by concrete ng steel and ace of the me n approved ty tructur item num january num or slaked lim metrically abo h of the wire .
of the concret of a corrosio e curing and n of the pos el .
hall not requir posttensionin e subject to a ed the splice l of strand .
heir theoretic ng of num m an ould the sheat and prior to o the anchorin all parts of th embers unles ype of dry pac re num num me ut te on if st re ng all is cal nd th or ng he ss ck depa post janua num num num num num artment tensionin ary num .num anchor .num all typ .num anc con .num the ass .num ben sha pla .num anc .num sheath .num the .num tension .num hyd .num all cer .num .num .num cold w .num co .num the gro of num .num superv .num the pos ten pla stan of trans g system rages and cou posttensioni e anchoring d chorages sha ncrete without e final unit sembly shall n nding stresse all not exceed te when num chorages sha e sheath shall ning equipme draulic jacks a gauges or lo rtified within th if a pressure diameter an shall be acco if a load cell the posttens weather requi ld weather req e temperature outing and the numc for not les ision e contracto sttensionedp sioning syste cing stressing ndard sp portatio uplings ng steel shal device .
all be capab t distress to th compressive not exceed num es in the plate d the yield po of the ultima all be provided l be provided ent and pumps of oad cells use he previous num e gauge is u nd each jack ompanied in t l is used it sh sioning force rements quirements fo e of the conc e temperature ss than num day or shall ret prestressed co em being used g and grouting pecificat on and inf structures l be secured le of transfe he concrete .
stress on t mpa .
es or assembl oint of the ma ate load is app d with suitable with air vents f sufficient cap ed for registe num months of th sed it shall h and its corre the field by a c hall be calibrat in the cables or grout shall b crete surround e of the surrou s after groutin tain personn oncrete const d and this pe g. tions frastruc s at the ends b erring the ma the concrete lies induced b aterial nor cau plied .
e ports for the s at all high po pacity shall be ering the stre he time of the have an accu sponding gau certified calibr ted and shall may be deter be the same a ding the shea unding concre ng .
nel on site ruction and w ersons shal cture by means of aximum post directly und by the pull of use visible dis injection of gr oints in the cab e used for tens essing forces work .
urate reading uge shall be ration chart .
have an indi rmined .
as for concrete ath shall not ete shall be m e with ext who is thoroug l be present an approved tensioning fo derneath the the posttens stortion in the rout .
bles .
sioning of cab shall be cal dial at least calibrated as cator by mea e as outlined be less than maintained at tensive expe ghly familiar w at all times d item num page num permanent orce to the anchorage sioning steel e anchorage bles .
ibrated and num mm in s a unit and ans of which in num .
numc during a minimum erience in with the post during cable po pag num num num num osttension ge num num .num pos .num .num .num num .num grou .num .num .num .num .num .num num measu .num the shal num basis o .num pay ning syste ttensioning no stressing reached the s prior to po posttensionin stress in the by elongation ut all cable duc stressing .
during freezin the grouting num mpa and fullscale read standby flush sufficient cap all grout shal introduced int if a breakdow flushed out a rement fo supply and i ll be on a lum of payment ment for wor departm m by posttens strength spec osttensioning ng steel is fre cables shall n based on the cts shall be fil ng weather th g equipment d the grouting ding of not mo hing equipme pacity to flush ll pass throug to the grout p wn of the grou nd the entire c or payment nstallation of p sum basis .
t rk under this i sta ment of tr structu sioning shall b ified in the co any memb e and unbond be measured e stressstrain lled with grou he grout shall t shall be g equipment ore than num mp ent capable o out any partia h a screen w ump .
t pump occur cable duct reg t the complete tem shall be andard s ransport ures be undertake ontract docum ber the co ded in the duc d with a dynam n characteristi ut in one cont be kept at a m capable of shall be furn pa. of developing ally grouted ca ith num mm m rs during the g grouted .
e posttension at the lump s specifica tation an en until all co ments .
ontractor sh ct. mometer accu ics of the wire tinuous opera minimum of num grouting at nished with a a pumping p able ducts sha maximum clear grouting opera ning system in sum price .
ations nd infras oncrete in the all demonst urate to num e. ation after the numc for not les a minimum a pressure ga pressure of num all be provided r opening size ation the cab n accordance tructur item num january num e structure ha rate that th num and verifie e completion o ss than num days m pressure auge having .num mpa and o d. e prior to bein le duct shall b e with this ite re num num as he ed of s. of a of ng be m depa steel janua artic num .
num .
num .
num .
artment l superstr ary num cle num descript num material .num gener .num structu .num high t .num weldin .num stud s .num formw num submitta .num qualifi .num shop d .num weldin .num confor .num erectio num constru .num gener .num fabric .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num fractu .num .num stan of trans ructure tion ls ral ural steel tensile bolts .. ng electrodes shear connect work als ications of fab drawings ng procedures rmance on ction ral cation num fabrication num workmans num storage an num shipping o num camber num girder spl num reentrant num thermal c num fabrication num preassem num hole drille num welding g num repair we num blast clea num blast clea num surface co num facing of b re control num general num identificatio ndard sp portatio str c tions bricator s n standards ship and finish nd handling of of material ices t cuts cutting n tolerances .
mbly of field c ed using nume general elding ning painted ning unpaint ondition of bo bearing surfac n pecificat on and inf ructures ontents h f material connections erically contro d areas ted areas lted parts ces tions frastruc olled machines cture s . p page .. num num num num .. num .. num .. num .. num .. num .. num .. num num num .. num num num num num .. num .. num .. num num num num num num .. num .. num .
num num num num num .. num num num num item num page num ste pag a num num num num num num num num num eel supers ge num article num .num tra num .num sto num .num ere num .num qua num measu num basis f num descr .num this deliv .num the load num mater num .num gen .num .num structure ansportation orage ection .num general .num erection .num erection .num falsewo .num field as .num high str ality control .. .num respons .num inspectio .num owners .num samples .num transfer .num inspectio .num repair o .num standard urement fo for paymen iption s item consist very and erect bridge supe ding and all w ials neral all materials s the supply o necessary fo maintain stab departm e and construc methods and ork and guys .
sembling of s rength bolts sibility on s representati s and testing r of heat num on of welds .. of welds ds of acceptan r payment nt ts of the supp tion of steel s rstructure has ork shall confo shall be suppl of any addition r the erection bility shall be a stan ment of tr structures contents ction stresses d equipment .. teel ve bers nce of defects ply including b uperstructure s been design orm to this ex ied by the co nal structural n condition in at the contrac dard spe ransport s s but not limited to the work s ned according xcept as noted ntractor .
steel not sho ncluding false ctors own exp ecificatio tation an d to the fabr site .
g to cancsa d in the contra own on the co ework and gu pense .
ons nd infras page num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num rication surfac asnum with a c act document ontract docum uys that may tructur item num january num e num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ce preparatio clnumont liv ts .
ments deeme be required t re num num n ve ed to depa steel janua num num num num num artment l superstr ary num .num structu .num all me co anum .num .num all ca .num sam gnum .num all .num stru gnum ship .num all con .num high te .num hig the typ .num nut su .num anum .num welding .num ele .num fille .num dep min .num the num o .num stud sh .num stu ca .num formwo .num all stan of trans ructure ral steel structural stee eet the requir rrosion resis num when cha this materia tested at min tee sections ancsa gnum mple prepara num. steel shall be uctural shape num or can pped in bundl anchor and a nform to can ensile bolts gh tensile bolts contract do pe num for unpain ts shall be g itable for unp num nuts and b g electrodes ectrodes shall er metal shall posited weld nus numc .
e selection su f cancsa w hear connecto ud shear conn ancsa wnum .
ork formwork sha ndard sp portatio str el with the ex rements of c tant structura rpy impact en al shall posses nus numc as e s channels num m grade num ation and testi delivered in a s and angles csa gnum es and tagged anchor bolt as csa gnum s nuts and w cuments .
ast nted corrosion grade anum d painted applica olts shall be s conform to ca be in accorda metal shall upply and stor wnumm .
ors nectors shall b all be carried o pecificat on and inf ructures xception of sec cancsa gnum al steel with nergy test dem ss a minimum evidenced by r rolled beam numa or astm ing shall be i accordance wi shall be indiv when shape d in bundles .
ssemblies inc grade numa .
washers shall c tm anumm bo nresistant ste dh for galvan ations .
shipped togeth ancsa wnum ance with can have a min rage of electro be of a headed out in accorda tions frastruc condary mem num grade improved lo monstrates ad m charpy v no rolling mill cer and angle s anum .
in accordance ith cancsa vidually colour es under num cluding fabrica conform to as olts shall be eel .
nized applicat her as an asse num .
ncsa wnum t nimum char odes and flux d stud type in nce with item cture mbers compris num at ca ow temperatu dequate tough otch impact e rtificates .
shapes and e with the re gnum .
r marked in ac mm in cross ated sections stm anumm o galvanized ty ions and cnum embly .
table num. rpy impact e xes shall be in n accordance num .
p sed of rolled s ategory num a ure properties hness .
energy of num j pintles shall quirements o ccordance with s sectional dim nuts and wa or anumm as ype i for pain recommend energy of num n accordance e with the requ item num page num shapes shall atmospheric s or astm joules when conform to of cancsa h cancsa mension are ashers shall specified in nted steel or ed or dhnum num joules at with clause uirements of ste pag num num num num eel supers ge num num submit num .num qua .num num .num sho .num num .num structure ttals alifications of f within num da submit the fol .num documen fabricator .num documen certified t op drawings the contract limited to the .num the con copies of for review .num for s must revie .num the con five num w .num after the transpare revisions .num no fabric the cont .num the revie contracto .num all shop such doc shop details .num shop dra .num full d .num t s d .num all ne .num ident departm e fabricator ays after tend llowing ntation from r has been ce ntation from th to the requirem tor shall subm e following add ntractor shall f the shop dra w. steel delivere t submit certi ew num hours p ntractor shall weeks prior to e engineers encies to the have been m cation shall be ractor .
ew of the co or of herhis re drawings er cuments shall awings shall p detail dimens these dimen shrinkage ca differ from init ecessary spe tification of ar stan ment of tr structures der closing an the canadian rtified with the he canadian ments of can mit shop draw ditional require provide shop awings and th ed to the fabr ified mill test prior to cutting arrange to ha the start of fa review the c e engineer fo made .
e undertaken ontractors sh esponsibility f rection drawin be stamped provide shop d ions and size sions shall m amber and an tial dimension ecifications for reas requiring dard spe ransport nd prior to aw n institute of e cisc steel b welding bure csa wnum wings in acco ements p drawings of hree num copie rication shop reports and g steel or usin ave the shop abrication .
contractor sh or hisher rec until the eng hop drawings for the correct ngs welding and signed b details which es of all comp make allowan ny other effec ns .
r the materials g special surfa ecificatio tation an ward of the c f steel const bridge certific eau indicating division num or ordance with f all metal wo es of certified during produ nestingcuttin ng the steel in p drawings in hall submit o cords of the gineer has ret s by the eng tness of hishe procedures by a professio h includes ponents and p nce for chan cts which ca s to be used ace treatment ons nd infras contract the c truction indica cation .
g the fabricatio num .
item num and ork and shall mill reports to uction work ng bills to the n production .
the hands o one complete asbuilt draw turned the sho gineer shall n er drawings .
design briefs onal engineer parts of the st ges in shape use finished t tructur item num january num contractor sha ating the ste on shop is ful d with but n submit six num o the enginee the contracto e engineer fo of the enginee set of plast wings after a op drawings t not relieve th s and all othe r. tructure e due to we dimensions t re num num all el lly ot num er or or er tic all to he er ld to depa steel janua num .
num .
num num num artment l superstr ary num num num .num sym the .num welding .num the she wee .num .num conform .num the fab num .num erection .num the ere in t ere .num the wee eng stan of trans ructure .num identific .num bolt inst .num details o mbols for wel e provisions of g procedures e contractor s eets conform eks in advanc the followin .num the weld if require tempera electrica .num all g cert ene can .num .num the met .num measure residual .num the prop .num the weld mance e contractor rication three num. n e contractor ection procedu the various s ection he prop e whole of th eks before th gineer .
ndard sp portatio str ation of fractu tallation requi of all welds .
lding and non f cancsa w shall submit th ming to canc ce of fabricatio ng shall be inc ding process ed joint conf atures if requi al stickout and groove welds ified by the c ergy of num jou ncsa wnum this shall inc cvn impac specimens .
thods that sha es which sha stresses .
posed method ding equipme shall submit t e num copies o shall prior to ure drawings stages of ere oses to use .
his informatio e work of ere pecificat on and inf ructures ure critical an rements and ndestructive t wnum .
he welding pr csa wnum an on and review cluded but no to be used th figurations nu red sequenc d polarity and shall be con canadian wel les at minus num annex e. clude the test ct test specim all be used for all be taken t ds and sequen ent used shall to the engine of a letter ce o commencin together with ction and sha n shall be su ection is to co tions frastruc d primary ten d test on shop rocedure spec nd cancsa must be obta ot limited to he position of umber and si ce of passes d methods of s nsidered as pr lding bureau numc in accor ting of five su mens and fiv r the preparati to control the nce of assem be calibrated eer at least tw rtifying that th g the work o complete cal all inform the ubmitted to th ommence an cture nsion member drawings sha cifications and wnum to th ained before c welding filler ze of passes current rate storing consum rimary tension to provide a rdance with th ubsurface wel ve subsurface on of the edge e effects of d bling .
as stated in s wo num weeks he stud shea of erection fu lculations of s e engineer fu he engineer d shall be sta p rs and compo all be in acco d welding proc he engineer a commencing th metal flux sh s preheat and of pass ele mables .
n members a minimum cha he testing requ d metal char e haz cvn es .
distortion shr section aws d s in advance ar connectors urnish the en stresses in the ully as to the for review a amped by a p item num page num onent parts rdance with cedure data at least two he work .
hielding gas d interpass ctrode size and shall be arpy impact uirements of rpy v notch test impact rinkage and dnum .
of the steel conform to ngineer with e steelworks e method of at least four professional ste pag num num num num num num num num num eel supers ge num num .num sub spec num const num .num gen .num .num num .num fab num .num num .num num .num num .num num .num structure mittals are re cific phase of ruction neral the contract specifically di the contract in production rication fabrication s .num the fabr specifica welding s workmanship .num all edges view or w mm minim storage and h .num structura elsewher kept free .num structura corrosion .num long me .num plates da shipping of m .num damage camber .num all plate vertical c documen .num the can departm e equired for th the work bein tor shall carry rected by the tor shall notify to allow for th standards rication of a ation aws d shall conform p and finish s of all memb weather in the mum radius b handling of m al materials e re above the g from dirt and al materials ei n. mbers shall b amaged due to material ed members s girders shall curve as ma nts .
maximum csa wnum ex stan ment of tr structures his item that ng undertaken y out the wo engineer .
y the enginee he scheduling all structural dnum bridge w to cancsa w bers and plate e finished asse y grinding pri material either plain or ground upon p other foreign ither plain or f e supported to o handling tec hall be repaire be cambered ay be require error in gi xcept that the dard spe ransport are containe n separate an rk as indicate r a minimum g of qa testing steel shall c welding code wnum and can es whether ro embly and ar or to blast cle fabricated s platforms skip matter .
fabricated sha o prevent yield chniques or de ed or replaced d to compensa ed by the pr rder cambe e error shall no ecificatio tation an ed within the nd distinct to t ed in the con of num hours p g. conform to t e and to can ncsa wnum olled cut or s re to be coate eaning andor hall be stored ps or other su all be protecte ding of the ma evices may be d as required ate for full de rofile grade r shall con ot exceed num ons nd infras sections ap those listed h ntract docum prior to any pl the aashto ncsa wnum .
heared that a ed shall be ro fit up .
d at the fabric uitable suppor ed as far as p aterial .
e subject to re by the engine ead load defle as shown in nform to c num mm .
tructur item num january num plicable to th ere .
ents andor a ate being use o constructio except that a are exposed t ounded to a num cators shop o rts and shall b practicable fro ejection .
eer .
ections and th n the contra lause num o re num num he as ed on all to .num or be m he act of depa steel janua num num num num num .
num .
artment l superstr ary num num .num num .num gir .num .num num .num re .num num .num the .num .num .num num .num fab num .num stan of trans ructure rolled sectio shall have th due to cuttin der splices the location .num addition allowed .
the location .num no othe enginee .num welded .num the loca contract .num should weld sp the engi .num the loca shall be entrant cuts a fillet of no cuts and the ermal cutting steel may be guide .
flame cuttin shall be mad the quality a brication tole structural m .num structur toleranc by more .num a variat length o ndard sp portatio str ons may be h he required c g welding an s of the field b al field splice .
s of the shop er shopwelde er .
field splices o ations of the m t documents .
the contracto lices in the fla ineer .
ation of comp subject to the ot less than num e fillet shall be e flamecut p g by hand sha de smooth by and repair of t erances members ral members ces of canc e than num tion of not m of members w pecificat on and inf ructures heat cambered amber cut int nd heatcurvin bolted main gi es or the reloc welded splice d splices sha of the main gir main girder sh or require add anges these plete penetra e approval of t num mm radius e formed befor provided a sm all be done on planing chipp the cut edges consisting of sa gnum e of the length ore than num m which have bo tions frastruc d using an ap to the web wi ng .
irder splices a cation of the es are shown all be permitte rders shall not hop welded sp ditional shop shall only be ation shop we the engineer .
shall be prov re the cuts are mooth surface nly when appr ping or grindin shall conform a single rolle except that co h between poi mm from the oth ends finish cture pproved proce ith suitable al are shown in th main bolted in the contrac ed without prio t be allowed .
plices for the f welded com permitted wit elded groove .
vided at the j e made .
is secured by roved by the e ng .
m to clause num ed shape sha olumns shall ints of lateral detailed leng hed for contac p edure while p lowance for c he contract d field splices s ct documents or written app flanges are sh plete penetra th the written welds for the junctions of a y the use of a engineer and of cancsa all meet the s not deviate fr support .
gth is permis ct bearing .
item num page num plate girders camber loss documents .
shall not be s. proval of the hown on the ation groove approval of e web plate all reentrant mechanical the surface wnum .
straightness rom straight sible in the ste pag num num num num eel supers ge num num num num num structure .num othe of no for m .num abutting .num whe conta .num t b r .num at joi betw .num bearing p .num bear .num r p .num rolle by p bear .num rolle surfa and a .num fabricate .num toler .num dime presc .num built can .num bear with .num c .num all in num .num c .num use appr departm e er members w ot more than num members over joints n compressio act faces sha the complete bearing defin remainder sha ints where loa ween main me plates ring plates sh rolled steel b planing provid ed steel beari ressing or by ing .
ed steel beari aces except f are grouted to ed componen rances for we ensional tole cribed in clau up bolted s csa gnum ring stiffeners a maximum s contact is def ntermediate s and a maxim contact is def of force to oved by the e stan ment of tr structures without finishe num mm for mem r num m in leng on members ll be milled or ed joint shall ed as not mo all not exceed ads are not tra mbers shall n all meet the fo bearing plate ded that a sat ing plates ove y planing on ng plates ove for those surf o ensure full b nts elded compon rances of w uses num and structural me num for rolled wid s fitted to bea separation of fined as a gap tiffeners shal mum separati fined as a gap move flange engineer .
dard spe ransport ed ends may h mbers num m o gth .
are butted to r sawcut .
have at leas ore than num m num mm .
ansferred in b not exceed num ollowing requ es num mm or tisfactory cont er num mm bu all bearing s er num mm in faces which a bearing .
nents shall co welded structu num of can embers shall de flanged sh r shall have a num mm over th p less than num. l be fitted hav on of num mm .
p less than num. es inward to ecificatio tation an have a variat or less in leng ogether to tra st num of the mm separation bearing the no mm .
uirements less in thick tact bearing i t not over num surface to ob thickness sh are in contac onform to clau ural member ncsa wnum .
satisfy the hapes .
a minimum be he remaining .num mm .
ving a minim .num mm .
o achieve fit ons nd infras tion from the d gth or not mo ansmit loads e entire conta n and the se ominal dimen kness may be s obtained .
num mm may b btain a satisf hall be planed ct with concre use num of ca rs shall conf straightness earing contac area .
um bearing c up tolerance tructur item num january num detailed lengt ore than num m in bearing th act area in fu eparation of th sion of the ga e used witho be straightene factory conta d on all bearin ete foundation ancsa wnum .
form to thos tolerances o ct area of num contact area o e shall be a re num num th m he ull he ap ut ed ct ng ns .
se of of as depa steel janua num num num artment l superstr ary num num .num pre num .num num .num hol .num .num .num stan of trans ructure eassembly of shop trial a .num girders verify the .num compon the brid required .num holes in size whi .num the ream .num drift disto .num if re .num where a bridge t the prec .num trial ass .num eac of ho .num the prio .num le drilled usin as an altern numerically c be demonstr be made .
if the check required .
if the check repaired in a .num further demons ndard sp portatio str f field connec assembly and other ma e fieldsplices nents shall be dge as define d to offset the e n the webs an le in assembly components ming or drilling ting done duri ort the steel .
quired reamin a number of s the second an ceding assemb semblies are r ch assembly s oles and fitu engineer sh r to drilling re corrective w the engineer g numerically ative to the a controlled dril rated by a ch k assembly is k assembly is a manner acce check asse trate that the pecificat on and inf ructures ctions ain componen .
e supported in ed in the con effects of dea nd flanges of m y. s shall be pi g. ing assembly ng shall be us sequential ass nd subsequen bly to provide required when hall be checke p of welded jo all be given t eaming or cutti work if necess .
y controlled m bove trial ass ling or using a eck assembly s satisfactory s unsatisfacto eptable to the mblies shall required accu tions frastruc ts shall be pre n a manner co ntract docum adload deflect main compon inned and fir shall only be sed to enlarge semblies are nt assemblies continuity of a n the fieldsplic ed by the fabr oints and mille the opportunit ing .
sary shall be machines sembly when a suitable tem y consisting o y further ass ory for any re engineer .
be required uracy of fitup cture eassembled onsistent with ments with all tion .
ents shall be rmly drawn t sufficient to a e holes .
required beca shall include alignment .
ces are bolted ricator for cam ed surfaces .
ty to verify al carried out in the bolt holes mplate the acc of the first com semblies of li eason the w d as specifie has been ach p in the shop to the finished g lowance for a reamed or dr ogether by b align the holes ause of the le at least one s d. mber alignmen ignment and n a manner ac s have been p curacy of the mponents of e ike compone work shall be ed by the e hieved .
item num page num o prepare or geometry of any camber rilled to final bolts before s and not to ength of the section from nt accuracy dimensions cceptable to prepared by drilling may each type to nts are not e redone or engineer to ste pag num num num eel supers ge num num .num num .num num .num .
structure welding gen .num all weldin requirem .num the wnum comp .num groo wnum when .num all gr to the .num no fie repair weldin .num all weldin num pe .num repair of blast cleanin .num all steel painting c .num all oil and requirem started .
.num the blas surface p .num the con manufact cleaning .num no b .num no blast .num the blast .num under no .num if the bla after the s .num the con blast clea num all surfac departm e eral ng including ents of canc electroslag a shall not be ponents of me ove weld proc and cwb ce n tested at mi roove welds i e welding of f eld groove we ng ng corrections ertaining to fra f base metal b g painted ar that is to be council spec d grease and ents of sspc sting medium profile accepta ntractor shall turer stating th is acceptable last cleaning s cleaning shall t cleaned surfa o circumstance ast cleaned ar steel has dried ntractor shall aning operatio ces to be paint stan ment of tr structures workmanshi csa wnum exc and electroga e used for we embers subje cedures shall ertified to pro nus numc per n web and fla flanges to the elds shall be a s and repairs acture critical m by welding at reas painted shall cification sspc any other su c spnum solve silica sand able to the ma supply the o hat the propos .
shall commen l be carried ou aces shall be es are blast cl reas become d. ensure that a on .
ted shall be fr dard spe ransport p technique cept where mo as welding p elding quench ect to tension be prequalif ovide a minim r cancsa w ange plates s e web plates .
allowed .
shall be perfo members .
the producing be blast clea c spnum no .
num rface contami ent cleaning grit or shot nufacturer of t owner with a sed method e nce until the o ut when the su coated with in leaned surface damp ando all applicable ee from any o ecificatio tation an qualification odified by the processes s hed and temp stress or stre fied welds in mum charpy i wnum annex hall be done ormed accord g mill shall not aned to confo num nearwhite ination shall b before any o used shall be the inorganic a letter from equipment an owner is in pos urfaces of the norganic zinc es to be left u r rusted thes safety preca or all contamin ons nd infras etc .
shall c e following con ee clause num pered steels n ess reversal .
accordance w mpact energ e. to the individu ding to canc t be permitted orm to the s e blast cleani be removed a other surface e of a size th zinc coating b the inorgani nd materials us ssession of th steel are dam before any ru uncoated over se areas shal utions are ta nants .
tructur item num january num conform to th nditions num of cancs nor for weldin with cancs gy of num joule ual plates prio csa snum claus .
steel structure ing .
according to th e preparation hat produces being used .
ic zinc coatin sed in the bla his letter .
mp .
sting occurs .
night .
ll be reblaste ken during th re num num he sa ng sa es or se es he is a ng ast ed he depa steel janua num num num .
num num num num artment l superstr ary num num .num bla .num .num num .num sur .num .num num .num fac .num .num .num fracture num .num ge .num .num num .num ide .num .num transp .num a s tie .num prim .num prim dam stan of trans ructure ast cleaning all exposed painting cou the blast c structural ste completed p marks or oth rface conditio all bolted co bolts .
the surface joints shall b cing of bearin the surface surfaces of with cancs .num outside .num the bea e control neral all bridge m shapes sha num .
attachments welded to th entification for each co heat numbe ortation shipping plan down points f mary membe mary membe mage or place ndard sp portatio str unpainted ar steel surface uncil specifica cleaning shall eel but may provided the her foreign ma on of bolted pa onnections ar e condition for be blast cleane ng surfaces finish of beari flanges which sa wnum .
this area num m aring surface members with all be treated s having a le he members s omponent of a r of the mater shall be prov for primary m rs shall be sh ers shall be e excessive s pecificat on and inf ructures eas es shall be b ation sspc s preferably b be carried o contractor cl aterial after the arts re friction type r bolted frictio ed and coated ing and base h are in conta mm deviation shall be perp h the except d as fracture ength of mor shall be treate a fracture criti rial and its co vided by the members durin hipped upright loaded supp stress on the m tions frastruc blast cleaned spnum commerc be carried ou out in the sho eans the stee e completion o e connections on connection d with class b plates shall be act with beari from flat is ac pendicular to t tion of secon critical in ac re than num ed as part of t ical member orresponding contractor in ng transportat t unless othe ported and member .
cture to conform t cial blast clea ut after the c op after all fa el work of all of the erection s and are de ns for painted b inorganic zin e in accordan ng sole plate cceptable .
the web and b ndary membe ccordance wit mm in the d the member .
records are mill test certif ndicating supp tion to the wo erwise approv unloaded in p to the stee aning .
complete erec abrication wor cutting oil d n. esigned for sta d structures nc silicate coa nce with can s shall be in bearing stiffen ers comprise th cancsa direction of t to be kept to ficate .
port lateral b ork site .
ved by the en a manner th item num page num l structures ction of the rk has been dirt erection andard size with coated ating .
csa snum .
accordance ners .
ed of rolled snum clause ension and identify the bracing and ngineer .
hat will not ste pag num num num num eel supers ge num num .num .num num .num stor .num .num .num num .num erec num .num structure any damage engineer .
all fastener c the content c rage fabricated m supports and primary mem all members ction general .num the erec of erectio members .num deta .num calcu durin .num the con supplies .num the cont aashto aashto .num compone bracing g .num additiona capacitie .num all falsew bridge sh .num the c for te .num all tempo steelwork .num any add documen the cont .num the co cancsa departm e d members s components clearly labelled material shall d shall be kep mbers shall be shall be store tion procedure on including s and the loca ils of tempora ulations shall ng erection .
ntractor shall under the con tractor shall e o load and r o bridge cons ents shall be guys or stiffen al permanent s are not exce work includin hall be design contractor sh emporary purp orary falsewor ks following co ditional bracin nts to mainta ractor at a tim mpany unde a wnum .
stan ment of tr structures shall be repai shall be ship d on the outs be stored ab t clean from d e stored uprig ed in a manne e drawings an the sequenc ation and lifting ary bracing and be provided t erect the wh ntract .
erect the struc resistance fa struction spec lifted and pl ning devices s material may eeded during g necessary ned furnished all not use an poses during e rk towers cab omplete erecti ng or guys ain the stabilit me that is mut ertaking fiel dard spe ransport red or replac ped and stor ide .
bove ground dirt and other ght and braced er to prevent nd calculations ce of erection g capacities o d bents to be to show the m hole of the fa ctural steel in ctor design ifications and laced using o that they are y be provided erection .
foundations d maintained ny of the mate erection unles bles dampers ion of the stee required oth ty for the cons tually suitable dwelding s ecificatio tation an ced by the co red in sealed on platforms r foreign matte d to ensure s permanent d s shall fully illu n the weight of the cranes u used during c members and abricated stru accordance w lrfd bridge d cancsa s appropriate li e at no time o if approved required for t d and removed erial intended f ss such use is s etc .
shall b elworks .
her than thos struction stag e to the engin shall be ce ons nd infras ontractor as r watertight c blocking or er .
stability .
amage .
ustrate the pro ts and lifting used to lift the construction s supports are ctural steel w with the requi e design spe snum .
ifting equipm overloaded or to ensure th the safe cons d by the cont for use in the s approved .
be removed fro se shown in ge shall only b neer and the c ertified to d tructur item num january num required by th containers wit other suitab oposed metho points of th em .
hall be shown not overloade work which h irements of th ecifications th ent tempora unstable .
at the membe struction of th tractor .
finished bridg om the erecte n the contra be removed b contractor .
division num o re num num he th le od he n. ed he he he ry er he ge ed ct by of depa steel janua num .
num num artment l superstr ary num num .num .num .num num .num ere .num .num .num .num .num num .num ere .num .num .num .num stan of trans ructure tack welds unless they the use of documents the substru the contract ection and con the contrac stresses and erection proc the contrac these calcula .num review maintain under no cir the basic allo .num all allow design c release of te circumstance the method engineer bu the safety of the work in f .num the co obtained ection method the contrac and properly the contrac to carry out t the enginee satisfy himse equipment th .num the insp contract methods all structura impact loadin ndard sp portatio str used for att subsequently f tack welds shall not be cture shall be t documents nstruction stre ctor shall assu d shall provid cedure .
ctor shall not c ations along w of these calcu n overall stabil rcumstances owable stress wable stresses code or the a emporary sup es shall a sud of erection p ut such autho f the propose full accordanc ontractor shall d. s and equipm ctor shall ensu y maintained a ctor shall ensu the required s er shall have elf that such hat is in hish pection of the tor of herhis s and equipm l steelworks s ngs to any ste pecificat on and inf ructures tachments or y become par which are made on any e protected pri against rusts esses ume full respo de any addit commence ere with erection s ulations shall lity of the stee may stresses ses except wit s shall be bas aashto lrfd pports or temp dden release b proposed to b orization shall ed method of ce with the co l not start an ment ure that all cr at all times dur ure that all cra teel erection .
the right to in equipment is her opinion in e erection equ primary respo ent .
shall be hand eel member or tions frastruc r for any oth rt of welds de not part of y portion of th ior to erection staining by wa onsibility to ve tional steel a ection until the stresses and e not relieve the el in the constr s occurring in th the express sed upon ca d bridge desi porary membe be permissible be used shall not relieve th erection or o ontract .
ny erection o ranes rigging ring the period anes rigging a nspect all equ of good qual any way fault uipment by the onsibility for th dled in such a r substructure cture her purpose etailed in the c the welds d e girders .
under a sep ater run off from erify all bridge ndor bracing e engineer ha erection meth e contractor o ruction phase the members s permission o ancsa snum c ign specificat ers etc .
must e. be subject to he contractor of the equipm operation bef and equipme d of the work .
and equipmen uipment to be lity and he m ty .
e engineer sh he safety and a manner so e component .
p are expressly contract docu detailed in th arate item as m the bridge .
components g if required as received an hods .
of herhis resp .
s of the struct of the enginee canadian high ions .
be gradual an o the authoriz r of any respo ment or from c fore this auth ent are in goo .
nt is of adequa e used for the may forbid the hall in no way d adequacy of o as to preve item num page num y forbidden uments .
he contract specified in .
for erection for hisher nd reviewed ponsibility to ture exceed er .
hway bridge nd under no zation of the onsibility for carrying out horization is od condition ate capacity e erection to e use of any y relieve the f all erection ent shock or ste pag num num num num num num num eel supers ge num num num .num num .num num .num num .num qua num .num num .num structure .num slings an type whic falsework an .num the con all falsew .num falsewor designed come upo .num falsewor field assemb .num insofar as a membe further m .num cylindrica to obtain .num shop rea high strength .num high stre structura council specificat .num the turn .num the conn docu .num the con additiona ality control responsibility .num it is the maintain testing by obligation inspection .num inspectio preparati departm e nd other lifting ch will not dam nd guys tractor shall c work and guys rk shall includ d and substan on it .
rk shall be car bling of steel s the cantileve er to the part embers are p al erection pin an accurate m amed holes sh h bolts ength bolts sh al joints using on bolted s tions with late nofthenut m contractor sh nections for uments .
ntractor shall al test requirem y contractors the work in s y the enginee ns .
n by the en on fabrication stan ment of tr structures apparatus us mage shop pri construct erec required for th de all tempor ntially constru rried out in acc er method of e t of the struc ut in place .
ns for use in sh matching of co hall not be rer hall be install g astm anum structural joi st revisions .
method per ca hall supply pe conformance pay particula ments required responsibility strict accordan er shall not b ngineer may n or manufact dard spe ransport sed in the han med or painte ct maintain a he erection of rary supports cted and ma cordance with erection is foll cture already hopreamed h orresponding reamed on the ed and inspe num or astm ints of the ancsa snum s ersonnel to as to the job r attention to d for galvanize y to supply th nce with the t be deemed to extend to al ure of any of t ecificatio tation an ndling of struct ed surfaces of and subseque f the work .
s and foundat intained to su h item num. lowed the spl erected shal holes shall be holes .
e site .
ected in acco anum bolts engineering hall be used f ssist in inspec b inspection o the lubrican ed bolts .
he material a terms of the c o relieve the c ll or any par the materials .
ons nd infras tural steelwor f fabricated ste ently remove tions and sha ustain the loa lice or splices l be fully bolt machined to ordance to s approved by foundation for tightening b cting all high torque and nt required for and execute contract and contractor of rt of the wo tructur item num january num ks shall be of eelworks .
and dispose all be proper ads which sha s which conne ted before an a push fit so a specification fo the researc and aasht bolts .
strength bolte the contra r the nuts an complete an inspection an f any of hishe ork and to th re num num f a of rly all ect ny as or ch to ed act nd nd nd er he depa steel janua num num num num artment l superstr ary num num .num .num num .num ow .num .num .num .num .num num .num sam .num .num .num num .num tra .num stan of trans ructure the enginee make a com phases of th any work do be ordered to wners represe an owners progress of secure adhe contractor to to such failur testing engi to those of t the testing o the enginee them by the with the req authority to r no represen contractors the contrac fabrication p .num the offic be furnis .num the .num conven services mples and te the enginee that are in h the work .
the contrac and specime not meeting the owner s of the engine ansfer of heat the contrac plates and d ndard sp portatio str er shall be fur mplete and de e work .
one or materi o be removed entative representative the work as erence to the r o fulfil the req re .
ineers and ins the engineer f materials an ers representa e engineer ha uirements of revoke alter e ntative of the behalf .
ctor shall prov lant to accom ce space so p shed with a su e office room te ient telephon s shall also be sting er shall have hisher opinion ctor shall bea ens including the requireme shall bear the eer .
numbers ctor shall tran iaphragm plat pecificat on and inf ructures rnished by the etailed inspec ials used with d and replaced e shall be ass a whole and requirements uirements of spectors may in connection nd work .
atives shall ave authority the contract enlarge relax e engineer s vide regular a modate the e provided shal uitable standa emperature s e internet fa e provided .
the right to ca n necessary r all costs for the costs of r ents of the co costs and fee sfer heat num tes in the pres tions frastruc e contractor w ction and sha hout supervisi d at the contra signed to the p the manner of the contrac the contract a be appointed n with various within the lim to reject mat but no repre x or release an shall perform and practically engineer or the l be ventilated ard office desk shall be mainta facsimile pho all for any add to secure pro r the provision reinspection ontract docum es of the testi mbers on plate sence of the e cture with such info all be allowed on or inspect actors own ex project to repo in which they ct to report on and to direct t d by the engin aspects of th mits of the writt terial or work esentative of ny requiremen m any duty o y located offic e owners rep d heated lig k and chair .
ained at numc otocopy mail ditional samp oper quality co n preparation and retesting ments .
ng engineer a es for flanges engineers repr p ormation as is d access to a tion by the en xpense .
ort to the eng y are being pe n any noted fa the contracto neer to fulfil d he work and ten authorizat k that is not in the engineer nt of the contr or managem ce space at h presentative .
hted and clea c. and messag les specimen ontrol of the m n and testing as associated and other repr s webs stiffe resentative .
item num page num s required to all parts and ngineer may ineer on the erformed to ailure by the ors attention uties similar to carry out tion given to n conformity r shall have ract .
ent on the herhis steel an and shall ge handling ns and tests material and of samples d with work resentatives eners splice ste pag num num eel supers ge num num num .num structure .num heat num pieces o marked w .num chal .num the con compone inspection of .num the eng testing .
.num if fau sheh work .num any weld own expe .num the amo .num in genera .num all w .num groo partic .num a num .num w m a .num f i .num a .num web acco .num fillet of the departm e mbers or any r plates unle with chalk or c k or crayon sh tractor shall p ents of the stee welds ineer reserve ults in the weld he may cons kmanship of th ds found to be ense .
unt and locati al the followin elds shall be v ove welds in f cle radiograp all flange tens num radiogra web splices s minimum of ha and num of th flange comp nspection .
all groove wel to flange f rdance with t s s welds for atta e total tested b stan ment of tr structures y other identif ss authorized crayon in the p hall be a nono prepare a dra el superstruct es the right to ds are discove sider necessa he welded con e faulty shall b on of nondes ng minimum te visually inspec flanges and w phically ando sion splices an aphic andor u shall receive alf of the dept e remainder o ression splice ds shall receiv fillet welds s table num .
magnetic p submerged ar semiautomati manual we aching gusset by magnetic p dard spe ransport fication numbe d in writing b presence of th oil based prod awing indicatin ture .
o submit weld ered the engi ary to satisfy nstruction .
be removed re structive testin esting shall be cted .
webs of builtu or ultrasonicall nd flange splic ultrasonic insp num radiog th beginning a of the web spl es shall rece ve num mag shall be subj table num particle inspe rc welds c welds elds plates diaph particle inspec ecificatio tation an ers are not to by the engine he engineers r duct .
ng the heat n ds chosen at ineer may ord y himself as ewelded and ng shall be det e conducted .
up members ly as follows ces subject to pection .
graphic andor at the point or ice shall be so eive num rad gnetic particle ject to magn num ection seque num per num per num pe ragm welds a ction .
ons nd infras o be stamped eer .
heat num representative number of ste random to n der such addit to the overa d retested at th termined by th shall be teste stress revers r ultrasonic in r points of ma o tested .
diographic an inspection .
netic particle ence rcent of length rcent of length ercent of length and stiffeners s tructur item num january num d on individu mbers shall b e. eel used for a nondestructiv tional testing a all quality an he contractor he engineer .
ed by magnet sal shall receiv nspection for aximum tensio ndor ultrason inspection h h h shall have num re num num al be all ve as nd rs tic ve a on nic in depa steel janua num num num num num artment l superstr ary num num .num .num num .num re .num .num num .num sta .num measure .num the lab fabricat accorda basis of .num paymen .num the co section .num the bre por pla and fas .num the pay ma .num stan of trans ructure .num all trans .num all guss num of radiographi to the web .
in the event corrected an pair of welds any welds w retested at t the repair a shall be in ac andards of acc the standar welded ste ment for p bour equipme tion surface ance with this payment nt for work un ontractor may num and e contractor eakdown of th rtion of the pr te and rolled d erection ex teners .
e owner sha yment howe aintenance for the contrac any materia period of th the work .
ndard sp portatio str verse welds o set plates and f the length fro c andor ultra that defects a nd retested at s which do not m the contracto and nondest ccordance wit ceptance of d rds of accept eel constructio payment ent and mater preparation item shall be nder this item be granted p shall provid he lump sum rice attributab shapes stee xcluding tem all take owne ver the con r all such mat ctor shall be s ls or compon e progress p pecificat on and inf ructures on flanges sha d stiffeners fo om the mid de sonic testing are found all w t the contracto meet the acce rs expense .
ructive testing th num .
defects tance of defe on metal arc rials required delivery and on a lump su shall be at the progress paym de the engin m price inclu ble to the sup el fabrication mporary acces ership of the tractor shall terials until pla solely respon nents of the w ayment and tions frastruc all receive num or attaching d epth of the we shall be perfo welds shall be ors own expe eptance stand g of fracture ects shall be welding clau for but not lim erection of t m basis .
e lump sum ments in acco neer at the ding but not pply of materia shop paintin ss structures e materials a assume the aced and acc nsible to repai work which b the inclusion cture num magnetic p diaphragm bra b to the tensio ormed prior to e tested and a ense .
dards shall be critical and p e in accordan use num cycli mited to the l the complete price .
ordance with t time of sign necessarily l als to the fab ng preparation s temporary and work co full respons cepted in the s ir or replace become dama of the mater p particle inspec acing shall be on flange .
o assembly of all inferior weld removed re primarytensio nce with can cally loaded loading shipp e steel super the terms of ning of the c imited to ide bricators shop n material tra y erection su overed by th sibility for the structure .
at hisher ow aged or lost b rials or comp item num page num ction .
e tested for f the flanges ding shall be welded and on members ncsa wnum structures .
ping supply rstructure in payment a contract a entifying the p structural ansportation upports and he progress e care and wn expense between the ponents into depa steel janua num num num num artment l laminate ary num descript .num this ite material .num genera .num all ca .num the and .num the num .num the beh .num the min thic .num the .num .num bea to t .num wh loc .num .num the sha num .
.num bea .num elastom .num the .num .num stan of trans ed bearing tion em consists of s al materials sha ancsa snum .
e bearings sh d movement c e elastomer u num durameter h e elastomer c haviour .
e steel lamina nimum yield ckness .
e rubberstee vulcanizing shall not be aring pressur the limits as s here indicated ating dowels the minimu penetration .
e effective rub all be the sum arings shall b mers e elastomers virgin natura the physica table num ndard sp portatio s f the supply an all be supplie hall be of an capacities ind used in the be ardness havi compound us ations incorpo strength of num l bearings mu or otherwise accepted .
res compress specified in ca d on referen and pvc cap m effective ru bber thickness m of the thickn be stored at le shall conform al polyisopren al properties o . ecificati on and inf structures nd installation ed by the con approved typ dicated in the earings shall b ng properties sed in the be orated into the num mpa an ust be moulde e bonding rub sive deflectio ancsa snum .
nce bearings ps .
ubber thickne s denoted as nesses of all l east num mm o m to the follow ne shall be th of the polyiso ions frastruc s n of steel reinf ntractor and pe sufficient t contract doc be num virg s conforming t earings shall c e bearings sh d not less th ed as comple bber sheet to ns rotation a s all bearing ess shall take t in csa sta laminates with off the ground wing e only raw po oprene used cture forced bearing shall conform o provide as cuments .
gin natural pol to the require conform to g hall be rolled han num mm n te units .
o bearings c and shear def gs shall be into consider andard csa s h a shape fac d in a weathe olymer permit shall conform gs .
m to the requ a minimum lyisoprene of ements of can grade num low t mild steel sh nor more tha cut from large formations sh supplied com ration the effe snum and te in t ctor less than erproof enclos tted and m to the requ item num page num irements of the loading nominal num ncsa snum .
emperature eets with a n num mm in er moldings hall conform mplete with ect of dowel table num or equal to sure .
irements of ste pag num eel lamina ge num hardne tensile ultimat heat r chan chan chan compre ozone bond b elastom brittlen low tem increas shore num submit .num only the e .num .num the man .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num the certi deta ated beari prope ess shore a e strength mpa e elongation esistance nge in hardnes nge in tensile s nge in ultimate ession set between steel a mer laminates ess at numc mperature crys se in hardness e a ttals y bearings wh engineer in w the contract name of the number and t contractor s nufacturer sha individual lam part numbers maximum loa compression maximum mo installation de load capacity .num maximum .num compress .num shear stif number of ste rotational ca material prop properties .
contractor s ification as a ailed in the co departm ngs physic rty a ss shore a strength elongation and n. mmnum stallization hich comply w writing shall be or shall subm e preapprove the physical d hall submit sh all provide the minate and tota s for bearings ad capacity in n stiffness ovement capa etails y at serviceab m compressive sive stiffness ffness eel plates in e apacity of each perties of the b shall submit t written affida ontract docum sta ment of tr structu table num cal properties as a a a a a mount num a a p as with the contra e considered it in writing a ed manufactu imensions of t hop drawings full data for th al bearing dim compression acity in shear bility limit state e permanent a and each bearing h bearing und bearing compo o the engine avit that the m ments .
andard s ransport ures num s of polyisop test stm dnum astm dnum astm dnum astm dnum astm dnum method b astm dnum ting procedure num strain num numc astm dnum method b astm dnum procedure b stm dnum act document acceptable fo minimum of num urer supplying the bearing to for the bearin he bearings in mension es combinatio and total loads der maximum onents and te eer in advanc materials sup specifica tation an prene req m num m num a num n n num m ts and have p or supply .
num days in ad g the bearing o be supplied .
ngs in accord cluding as a m n num including s and minimum est procedures ce of the inst plied meet th ations nd infras quirements num num min .
num min .
num numh at numc max .
num max .
num max .
num numh at numc max .
num pphm num h no cracks min .
num no failure num h at numc max .
num previously bee dvance of the gs the manu dance with ite minimum the f m load and s employed to tallation the e specified re tructur item num january num en approved b installation th ufacturers pa m num and th following o determine th manufacturer equirements a re num num by he art he he rs as depa steel janua num num num num artment l laminate ary num .num all bear placem constru .num genera .num the spe .num fabrica .num the .num wh one .num eac alp the num .num .num the beari beari thick devia cove pintle relat note stan of trans ed bearing rings being su ent of the bea ction al e contractor ecifically direct ation e fabrication o here pintles ar e steel plate .
ch laminated hanumeric id e supplier and mber .
the charact adjacent sid mm in depth e tolerances s ng thickness ng plan dime ness of indivi ation from pla r to embedde e hole diamete ive position o num the toleran a the d measu bearin bearin b the d shall b c the c effecti ndard sp portatio s upplied for the aring into the s shall carry ou ted by the eng of the steel lam re specified th bearing shall entification .
t source follow ters shall be n des with the in h. shall be as ind b nsion dual layers o ne parallel to ed steel er of pintle holes nce of steel la istance from ured .
measur ngs and at the ngs .
ifference betw be recorded .
umulative tota ive rubber thi ecificati on and inf structures e work shall structure .
ut the work a gineer .
minated bearin he depth of th be marked w the latter sha wed by the let not less than ndentations o dicated in ta table num bearing toler f elastomer theoretical su ste to each othe aminates sha the base of th rements shall e extremities o ween the high al of the differ ckness of the ions frastruc s be approved as indicated i ngs shall conf he pintle holes with the date o all consist of t tter i for poly num mm high or protrusions ble num .
num rances num mm num mm urface top sides eel laminates r ll be determin he bearing to be taken at e of two perpen hest and lowe rences record e bearing sha cture in writing by in the contra form to canc s shall be suc of manufactu the designate yisoprene an stamped or e s not less than m num m num num p s s num .
num ned as follows the bottom o each corner o ndicular diam est measurem ded expresse all be recorde the engineer act documents csa snum .
ch as to fully e re and an ind ed identificatio d a sequentia engraved into n num mm in wid mm to num mm mm to num mm mm to num mm num num in num num in num num te note num num mm mm to num mm num mm s of every plate of rectangular eters of circu ments for ever ed as a fractio ed .
item num page num prior to the s andor as engage only dividual on letter of al five digit two dth and num m m m m shall be r lar ry plate on of the ste pag num num num eel lamina ge num num .num insta .num .num .num num measu .num the supp num basis o .num pay .num the ated beari allation the contract level and smo bearing block bearing thickn the tolerance struc conc stee box g devia rement fo quantity to plied and insta of payment ment for work owner shall m departm ngs tor shall place ooth bearing s k elevations s ness shown in es shall be as toler cture type crete structure l structures girders ation from lev or payment be measured alled in accord t k under this ite make partial p sta ment of tr structu e bearings ac surfaces as in shall be adjus n the contract s indicated in t ta rance for top es el t d for paymen dance with this em shall be at payment for st andard s ransport ures ccurately with ndicated in the sted when bea t documents .
table num. ble num p of bearing top of nt shall be th s item .
t the unit pric teel laminated specifica tation an respect to th e contract do aring thicknes g elevations bearing elev num mm num mm num mm num he number o ce .
d bearings in a ations nd infras e location an cuments .
ss varies from vation m of steel lamin accordance w tructur item num january num d elevation o m the referenc nated bearing ith num .
re num num on ce gs depa bridg janua artic num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
artment ge pot bea ary num cle num descript num material num submitta .num gener .num approv num constru .num design .num ge .num tr .num sl .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num gu .num to .num fa .num re .num du .num co .num fabric .num w .num fa .num an .num ma .num ro .num at .num co .num ide .num to .num .num .num installa .num ge .num gr num measure num basis of stan of trans arings tion ls als ral val of supplier uction n requiremen eneral ranslation rota iding surfaces num general num tfe eleme num stainless st num lubrication num thickness o num contact pre num coefficient o uide for latera op and base p asteners and a eplaceability .. urability oncrete bearin cation elding asteners nchors achining oughness of m tachment of t orrosion prote entification lerances num general num elastomer .. ation eneral routing of bea ement for p payment ndard sp portatio co r nts ation s nt teel of tfe and de essure of friction al restraint plates anchorage ng pressure .. metal surface tfe ction rings payment pecificat on and inf structures ontents epth of recess tions frastruc s s cture page num num num num num num num .
num .
num .
num num .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
num .
num .
num num num num num num num num num num .
num .
num .
num num item num page num br pag num num ridge pot b ge num num descr .num this brid num mater .num all m .num bea cons .num .num .num .num bea .num the poly can .num stee the .num stai ast .num stee gnum .num .num bras .num poly be num .num tfe ast .num bearings iption s item consis ge bearings r ials materials shal arings shall p structed for th the rotationa transmit all lo translations o at serviceabi which would at ultimate lim the factored l aring material allowable ytetrafluoroeth ncsa snum .
el component requirements nless steel fo tm anum type el fasteners s num .
for centre gu ss sealing ring yisoprene n num num .
e resin for tm dnum .
it shall be un departm sts of the fab required in the ll be supplied possess the he movement al bearings an oads includin of the structu ility limit state affect their pe mit states the loads and acc and workman bearing pre hylene polym ts of the bear s of cancsa or sliding sur e num. shall conform uide bars alte gs for confine atural rubbe use in slidi filled and con sta ment of tr structu brication sup e contract .
by the contr minimum ho t capacities a nd sliding sur ng uplift and re .
e the design s erformance .
e strength an commodate m nship shall co essures on mer tfe el rings other t a gnumm g rfaces shall h to astm anum rnative steel f ed elastomer er shall con ing surfaces nform to the p andard s ransport ures pply and inst ractor .
orizontal and as indicated in rfaces shall c d accommoda shall be such nd stability of movements of omply with ca the confine lements are han stainless grade numa .
have a minim num and shall fasteners ma bearings sha nform to num shall be v physical requir specifica tation an tallation of a d vertical loa n the contrac consist of com ate the rotatio h that the bea the bearings f the structur ancsa snum .
ed elastome to be as s s steel sliding mum corrosio l be galvanize ay be approve all conform to num except virgin materi rements indic ations nd infras ll confined e ad capacity ct documents mponents arra ons and whe rings will not shall be ade re .
er and bon stipulated in g surfaces sh n resistance ed to conform ed .
astm bnum h that the h ial and sha cated in table tructur item num january num elastomer po and shall b . anged so as t ere necessar suffer damag equate to resi nded confine clause num o hall conform t conforming t m to cancs halfhard .
hardness ma ll conform t e num .
re num num ot be to ry ge st ed of to to sa ay to depa bridg janua num artment ge pot bea ary num physical tensile s elongatio relative .num materia .num unf .num tfe .num lea .num lubrica .num adhesiv nmm w service .num all stee with a microns limited .num all surf unders item num paint c .num ea .num the org steel s cleanin .num all surfa .num the bo galvani .num at full exceed .num grout s numday stan of trans arings property strength mpa on density al used as ma filled tfe e filled with u ad filled tfe ant shall be si ves for bond width when te e environment el bearing co primer coat o s or num mic d or approved faces with th ide of the tap num shall be carbomastic num ach of these to ganic zinc pr structures pa ng .
ace preparati olts for attach zed .
design load d num of the dia shall be inpa strength of num ndard sp portatio physical r a ating surface f p to num by m in a bronze m licone grease ing tfe to m ested in accor t. mponents ot of inorganic z crons of ca d equivalent in e exception o pered shoe pla top coated w num in accorda op coats shal imer shall be ainting coun on and painti hing the bea the maximu ameter of the kt nonshrink num mpa .
pecificat on and inf structures table num requirements astm test m d num d num d num for guides for mass of glass matrix .
e and shall co metal shall pro rdance with a ther than the zinc silicate p arbo zinc num n accordance of the faying ate attached t with two coat ance with num ll have a film t e applied to a ncil specifica ng shall confo ring top plate m rotation a e elastomeric premix grout tions frastruc s num s for tfe re method num num num r lateral restra s fibres or onform to ops oduce a bond astm dnum m e stainless ste paint with a d manufactur e with num a surface betw to the bottom ts of high bui num and num thickness of num a surface that ation sspcs form to num e to the gird andor the ec disc .
t or approved cture esin require minimum minimum num num aint may be ss num d with a mini method b and eel sliding su dry film thickn red by corro and num. ween the top m flange of the ild modified num .
num microns t is blast clea spnum no .
and num. der shoe plat ccentricity of equivalent an ment m num m num num num. imum peel st d shall not deg urfaces shall ness of num m osion service of the top pla e girders sup aluminum ep num microns .
aned to confo num near w te shall be a the axial loa nd shall have item num page num trength of num grade in the be painted microns num e company ate and the pplied under poxy mastic .
orm to the white blast anumtype i ad shall not a minimum br pag num num num ridge pot b ge num num .num the the slidi the sup .num .num bea num submit num .num gen .num .num .num .num bearings entire bearin base plate us ng interface concrete we perstructure m bearings sha arings shall be ttals neral the contrac translation an .num notwiths limited to .num bear .num the t .num insta .num meth .num load .num m .num m .num m a .num the .num the con during sit upon reque performed by pot bearing the contrac procedures fo the contract guaranteeing .num each bea a period departm ng assembly sed to ancho shall be repl lds or anchor more than num m all not be rece e stored at lea ctor shall su nd load capac tanding the r o ring layout an top and botto allation details hod of attachm d capacity at s maximum ver maximum late maximum rota axis through t bearing id let ntractor shall te installation st the cont y a recognize s. tor shall sub or handling s tor shall subm g as a minimu aring is to per of five years sta ment of tr structu except for the or it to the su laceable with rages perman mm .
essed into pla ast num mm o bmit the de cities in acco equirements d orientation om plate detai s ment of bearin serviceability rtical permane eral load and ational capac the centre of t tter and numb have a stam .
tractor shall ed bearing ma mit to the en storing and in mit the manu um rform satisfac after the brid andard s ransport ures e top plate us ubstructure bu out damage nently attache ates that are p off the ground sign for the ordance with i in num ils including a ngs to the top limit states c ent and total l correspondin city about an the bearing bers .
mped copy of submit cert anufacturer h ngineer a cop stallation of th ufacturers sig ctorily in the o ge has been specifica tation an sed to attach ut including b to the struct ed to the stru permanently a in a weather bearings d tem num. the submiss anchorages p and bottom combination num load ng vertical loa y horizontal f these drawi tification that having experi py of the ma he bearings .
gned written g opinion of the opened to re ations nd infras it to the supe both contact s ture and witho ucture and wit attached to th rproof enclosu designed for ion shall inclu plates including ad and axis and abo ings at the s t the fabrica ence in the m anufacturers guarantee for e designerma gular vehicula tructur item num january num erstructure an surfaces of th out removal o thout lifting th he structure .
ure .
the specifie ude but not b out the vertic site before an ation is bein manufacture o recommende r the bearing anufacturer fo ar traffic .
re num num nd he of he ed be cal nd ng of ed s or depa bridg janua num .
num artment ge pot bea ary num num .num .num all .num sub .num approva .num the req .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num stan of trans arings if during the manufacture .num all costs other w incident .num all requ approve grouting proc bmittals are re al of supplier e engineer m quired to subm typical draw restraint dev load range maximum ro centre of the maximum tra lateral load capacity of l corrosion pr a tfe samp a typical sam a sample of of at least the design c final approv bearing and documents .
.num any dev typical s for appro ndard sp portatio e five year gu er of the bear s related to re work necessa al to this gua ired repairs s ed by the eng cedures shall equired in acc ay request for mit the followin wings showing vices if applica minimum and otational capa e bearing .
anslational ca d capacity of ro lateral restrain rotection .
ple of at least num mple of elasto the smallest p num mm the sh calculations sh val of the so d the shop d viation from th sample shall b oval .
pecificat on and inf structures uarantee peri ings shall rep epairs replac ary to comple rantee and sh shall be carri ineer .
be submitted cordance with r the supplier g data for eac g all materials able and met d maximum .
acity about an pacity .
otational bear nts of translatio num mm in dia meric disc .
production siz hop drawings hall be stamp ource of supp rawings with e materials a be cause for c tions frastruc s iod the beari place the bear cements jack ete the work hall be borne ied out in acc d for approval any cross refe to be approv ch class and ty s tolerances thods of instal ny horizontal rings .
onal elements ameter .
ze unidirection and the desig ed and signe ply shall be b the specified nd details ind cancellation o cture ings do not p rings .
ing of the brid k of replacing by the manuf cordance wit prior to comm erenced item ved in which c type of bearing details of co lation .
axis and the s. nal bearing wit gn calculations ed by a profes based on co d requirement dicated on the of approval an perform satisfa dge installati g the bearing facturer of the h this item a mencement o forming part o case the supp g nstruction inc vertical axis th a translatio s for the bear ssional engin ompliance of ts noted in th typical drawin nd necessitate item num page num actorily the ion and any gs shall be e bearings .
nd shall be of the work .
of this item .
plier may be cluding uplift through the nal capacity ing .
eer .
the sample he contract ngs and the e application br pag num num num num ridge pot b ge num num const num .num des num .num num .num bearings ruction sign requirem general .num the bear of the ma the servi documen .num bearings specified .num all steel conforma .num the aver conform t translation r .num provision mating t .num the tran specified .num translati the latera .num for com .num for b num o .num provision confined .num the rotat as specif .num uplift res .num at servic axial load .num num o .num rotationa specified departm ments rings shall be aximum and m iceability limit nts .
subject to up .
components ance with the r rage stress in to the requirem rotation n for translati tfe element .
nslational cap d or num mm onal element al loads as sp bearings wit bination num num bearings with of the vertical n for rotation elastomer for tional capacit fied or num w straint devices ceability limit d from the ce of the diamete al bearings s d in combinati sta ment of tr structu proportioned minimum facto t state and t plift shall limit s of the bea requirements the elastome ments of num. on shall be t pacity in the whichever is ts with lateral pecified or eith th a capacity num of the vert h a capacity o load in exces about any h r pot bearings .
ty about the v whichever is g s shall not res state combin ntre of bearin er of the confi shall be capab on with the a andard s ransport ures to function sa ored loads and the ultimate the separatio arings includi of cancsa er at serviceab num. through slidin e unrestraine greater .
restraints sh her of the follo y of num k tical load capa over num kn ss of num kn orizontal axis .
vertical axis th greater .
strict rotations nation num loads ng shall not ex ined elastome ble of resistin pplicable vert specifica tation an atisfactorily un d the factored limit states a n of the beari ing fasteners snum .
bility limit stat ng of a stainle ed direction hall be capabl owing kn or less a acity .
n at serviceab n. s shall be by hrough the ce s. s and maximu xceed the foll er for pot bea ng in any dir tical loads .
ations nd infras nder the critica translations a as shown on ing componen s shall be p te combinatio ess steel sur or directions le of resisting at serviceabi bility limit stat means of a entre of the be um rotation t owing values arings .
rection the la tructur item num january num al combination and rotations n the contra nts to the valu proportioned on num loads sha rface against s shall be a g the greater o lity limit stat te type ii plu single disc o earing shall b the shift in th s ateral loads a re num num ns at ct ue in all a as of te us of be he as depa bridg janua num .
num .
num .
num .
artment ge pot bea ary num num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num .num slid num .num num .num stan of trans arings the rotation that the ver combination brass sealin elastomer to a minimum positioned a surface of th the sealing the upper e the depth o remains bet rings with t rotation plus the pot and with silicone the bearin compressibl the pot and any joint in strength of t ding surfaces general .num sliding against .num for surf .num the mov the dus tfe elemen .num except w shall be spherica .num the dia the tfe thicknes ndard sp portatio n of confined e rtical strain a n num loads doe ng rings at l o prevent the of two layers around the ci he inside perim rings shall be edge of the ela of the pot wa tween the top the pot wall s num. d piston surfa e grease .
g shall be le ring agains piston contac the ring sha the ring .
s surfaces sha a mating tfe plane surface faces the me e metal surfa vement and e tfe element st and dirt to f nt when used a e virgin mate al reservoirs f meter of the e and the d ss of the tfe pecificat on and inf structures elastomeric b at the perime es not exceed least num mm elastomer fro s of flat sealin rcumference meter of the p e flat and smo astomer shall all shall be s p of the pot w upon rotating aces in conta sealed by a st entry of dir ct surfaces .
all be bonded all allow tran e element .
es the metal tal surface sh ace shall ove except for gui t so that the s all off .
s mating surf erial and sha for lubricant p reservoirs sh depth shall n . tions frastruc s bearings abou eter of the el d num of the e wide shall b om extruding ng rings shal of the elasto pot wall .
ooth on all su l be recessed such that a m wall and the c g the piston ct with the co a one piece rt dust and m d and the str slation or ro l surface shal hall be stainle erlap the tfe des for latera sliding movem faces for guid all be used a pressed into it hall not excee not be less t cture ut a horizonta lastomer at elastomer thic be provided between the ll be used wit omer and sha urfaces .
d to accommo minimum vert closest point o and amoun onfined elasto e continuous moisture betw rength shall b tation by slid ll be stainless ess steel or an e by at least al restraint sh ments will cau des for latera as unfilled sh ts surface .
ed num mm me than num mm al axis shall b serviceability ckness .
at the perim piston and th th the split e all fit snugly odate the sea ical distance of contact of nt equal to th omer shall be s performed ween the ela be at least e ding of a me s steel and fo nodized alum t num mm at e hall be positio use the accum l restraint the heets and sh asured at the nor more tha item num page num e limited so y limit state meter of the he pot wall .
nds equally against the ling rings .
of num mm the sealing he required e lubricated closedcell stomer and equal to the etal surface or spherical inum alloy .
extremes of oned above mulations of e tfe resin hall contain e surface of an half the br pag num num num num num ridge pot b ge num num num num num num bearings .num the occu .num mate num .num stainless .num the num direc .num lubricatio .num all t subje with .num thicknes .num the a rigi .num thick num maxim thick depth .num contact p .num the the t limit st service ultimat departm reservoirs sh py not less th erial used as num and num s steel thickness of t num for dimens ction of movem dimens sta on tfe surfaces ect to a conta silicone greas ss of tfe and tfe element id backing ma kness of the num .
thick mum plan dim kness mm h of recess pressure average cont tfe shall not ave tate eability com e sta ment of tr structu hall be evenly han num nor m mating surfa .num and sha the stainless sional differe ment .
thickne sional differen ainless steel a mm num num and num and s except thos act pressure se .
d depth of re t shall be fully aterial .
tfe element ness of tfe mension mm mm tact pressure t exceed the v erage contac bination num andard s ransport ures y distributed a more than num ace for guide all not be dim steel sheet s ences betwee table num ess of stainl nce between and tfe m num num se which act of less than ecess y bonded in th t and the dep table num elements an m for unfilled t values given i table num ct pressure f dead lo num num specifica tation an across the su num of the surf es for lateral pled or lubric shall not be le en stainless num ess steel minimu sta as mating s num mpa shall he manufactu pth of recess num nd depth of num num num fe elements in table num num for tfe elem oad mpa num num ations nd infras urface of the face .
l restraint sh cated .
ess than that steel and th um thickness ainless steel mm num num num surfaces for l be permane urers plant an s shall be as recess num num num num based on the num. ments total load num num tructur item num january num tfe and sha hall conform t given in tab he tfe in th s of guides or ar ently lubricate nd recessed given in tab num num num e gross area o mpa re num num all to le he re ed in le of depa bridg janua num .
num .
num .
num .
num .
artment ge pot bea ary num num num .num num .num gu .num .num .num .num .num num .num sho .num num .num fas .num stan of trans arings .num the ma element .num the ave filled tf not exce .num tfe .num lea coefficient o .num the coe exceed pressure con ide for later the guides both the hor unless the g not less than the translat steel and sh tfe conform lead filled t bonded to th glass fill or num. oe and base the shoe pl provided wit structure .
steners and a fasteners devices sha either of the ndard sp portatio aximum conta ts shall not ex erage contact fe elements u eed the follow e filled with up d filled tfe in of friction efficient of fric the values giv es within the r co ntact pressure num num and abov al restraint for lateral res rizontal and th guide bars a n num mm into th tional elemen hall provide l ming to num tfe shall be he substrate .
r virgin tfe s plates ate and base th the bearing anchorage used to atta all be capable following pecificat on and inf structures act pressures xceed num time t pressure at used to face m wing p to num by m n a bronze m ction between ven in table range given .
table num oefficient of f e mpa ve straint shall b he vertical ax re machined he plate to wh nts of guides lateral restrai .num and num at least num m shall be rece e plate which a gs and shall c ch the beari e of resisting tions frastruc s s at the extr es the values t serviceabilit mating surfac mass of glass atrix num mpa .
stainless ste num and sh num friction coefficient num num be arranged t is .
from the sol hich they are for lateral re int by sliding num. mm thick and essed and bo are permane conform to the ing to the to g the greater cture reme edges s given in tab ty limit state ces for guides fibres num mp .
eel and lubrica hall be interpo of friction num num to permit the id they shall attached .
estraint shall g against mat shall be me onded to the ntly attached e requiremen op and base r of the latera of flat and c ble num .
combination s for lateral re pa. ated virgin tf olated linearly required rota be bolted an be faced wit ting surfaces echanically fa substrate to to the structu ts of the bear plates and al loads as s item num page num curved tfe num loads for estraint shall fe shall not y for contact ations about nd recessed th stainless faced with stened and conform to ure shall be ring and the anchorage specified or br pag num num num num num num ridge pot b ge num num num .num num .num num .num num .num fab num .num bearings .num for com .num for b num k .num the ben anchors .
replaceabilit .num the ent superstr both con the struc attached .num bearings structure durability .num the bea against c .num bearings surfaces concrete bea .num at servic shall not .num at ultima num mpa .
.num the top permissib .num the effec elastome dispersal rication welding .num welding .num welding cancsa .num the weld departm bearings wit bination num num bearings with kn plus num o eficial effect ty ire bearing ucture and th ntact surfaces cture and wit to the struct s shall not b e. rings shall be corrosion so to s shall be de .
aring pressur ceability limit s exceed num m ate limit stat and base p ble bearing p ctive area for d er or tfe tran lines drawn a of structural q of stainless a wnum or a ding procedur sta ment of tr structu th a capacity num of the vert capacity ove of the vertical of friction sh assembly ex he base plate s of the slidin hout removal ure and witho be recessed e fabricated f o perform the esigned to pr re state combin mpa .
tes the ave plates of the ressures are distributing the nsferring the lo at num to the lin quality steels steel shall b aws anum .
re shall be ap andard s ransport ures y of num k tical load capa er num kn at load capacity hall be neglec xcept for th e used to anc ng interface s l of any conc out lifting the s into plates from materia eir intended fu revent moistu nation num loads erage concret bearing sha not exceeded e bearing load oad to the pla ne of applicati shall conform be done with proved by the specifica tation an kn or less a acity .
t serviceabilit y in excess of cted in propo e top plate chor it to the shall be repla crete welds o superstructur that are per ls which are unction .
ure and dirt s the average te bearing p all be propor d. d shall be take ate plus the a ion of the load m to num. h appropriate e canadian w ations nd infras at serviceabi ty limit state c f num kn .
ortioning the used to att substructure aceable witho or anchorage re more than rmanently at durable and from enterin e concrete be pressure sha rtioned to en en as the con area within the d from the con e electrodes welding burea tructur item num january num lity limit stat combination fasteners an tach it to th e but includin out damage t es permanent num mm .
ttached to th are protecte ng the intern aring pressur all not excee nsure that th tact area of th e uninterrupte ntact area .
conforming t au .
re num num te num nd he ng to tly he ed al re ed he he ed to depa bridg janua num .
num num num num .
num artment ge pot bea ary num num .num .num num .num fas .num num .num anc .num .num num .num ma .num .num .num .num num .num ro .num .num num .num atta .num .num .num stan of trans arings the stainles continuously moisture .
the weld sh area in cont steners the thread installation .
chors when the co the top and welding proc .num the anc indicated alternative m achining machining s metal to met the pots an plate or cast there shall elastomer o ughness of m the roughne bnum shall no the roughn cancsa b achment of t virgin or gla shall be bon the rigid ba lead filled t ndard sp portatio ss steel she y welded aro hall be clean act with tfe .
ed portion o ontract docum base plate an cess unless o chorage for st d on standard methods of an shall be carrie tal contact su d pistons for tings .
be no openin r tfe .
metal surface ess of metal s ot be greater t ess of metal bnum shall not fe ass filled tfe nded over the cking materia tfe shall be m pecificat on and inf structures eets which w ound the peri uniform and .
of the bolts ments specify nchorage to co otherwise indic teel structures d drawing num nchoring thes ed out after we urfaces shall b confined elas ngs or discon e surface in con than num m surfaces in be greater th e elements s entire area w al shall be grit mechanically tions frastruc s will be in con imeter to its without over shall be co that bearings oncrete may cated in the c s shall be pro num and in the se plates may elding wherev be machined stomer bearing ntinuities in th ntact with tf arithmetic ave contact with han num m ar shall be reces with an adhes t blasted prior fastened and cture ntact with t backing plat rlaps and sha oated with s s shall be supp be provided b contract docum ovided with b contract doc y be approved ver possible .
or fine groun gs shall be m he metal surf e measured erage for plan elastomers m rithmetic aver ssed in a rig sive .
r to applying t d bonded to t p fe shall be te to prevent all be located silicone greas plied from a lis by studs usin ments .
bolts and anch cuments .
d. d. machined from faces in conta to conform to ne surfaces .
measured to age .
gid backing m the adhesive .
the backing p item num page num one piece t ingress of outside the se prior to sted source g the fusion hor bolts as m solid metal act with the o cancsa conform to material and .
lates .
br pag num num num num ridge pot b ge num num .num num .num num .num num bearings corrosion pr .num all expos to steel s epoxy ma .num steel fas .num for corro superstr identification .num the bear and an in .num the latte followed .num the cha clearly le .num the char mm in wi tolerances .num general .num the with shall circu bear elem .num for c shall .num the of th diam mm .
.num the plan diam .num over .num over .num mach departm otection sed metal surf superstructur astic system c steners shall b osion protecti uctures shall rings shall be ndividual alph er shall consis by a sequent racters shall egible after ins racters shall n idth and num m deviation from tfe for plan not exceed lar tfe elem ing r is the ment .
confined elast be num mm inside diame he elastomer meters up to a plan dimensi dimensions meter or diago rall bearing pl rall bearing he hined surface sta ment of tr structu faces except s res shall be p conforming to be galvanized ion purposes be considere e supplied wit hanumeric ide st of the desig tial five digit n be stamped stallation .
not be less th mm in depth .
m flatness of e surfaces an num lh m ments where e radius of a tomer bearing m to num mm ter of the pot and shall b and including ions of the re of the tfe a nal .
lan dimension eight num mm .
es except whe andard s ransport ures stainless stee protected aga num and num d or protected bearing com ed part of the th each bearin entification .
gnated identi number .
or engraved han num mm h stainless ste nd from the th mm for recta e l is the gr a circular bea gs the tolera m. t cylinder sha be machined num mm and ecess for the and shall be m n num mm. . ere otherwise specifica tation an el and compo ainst corrosion num. d by other app mponents per structural ste ng marked w fication letter d into two ad igh with the i eel or aluminu heoretical su angular beari reater plan d aring and h nce of fit betw all be the sam to a toleran d num num m tfe shall be machined to specified num .
ations nd infras onents perman n by an inorg proved metho rmanently att eel .
with the date o r of the suppl djacent sides ndentations n um alloy surfa rface for sph ng nor num imension for is the free ween the pist me as the nom nce of num mm for diame e the same a a tolerance o .num mm .
tructur item num january num nently attache ganicaluminu ods .
tached to ste of manufactur ier and sourc s and shall b not less than aces in conta erical surface num rh mm fo a rectangula height of tf ton and the po minal diamete num mm fo eters over num as the nomin of num num o re num num ed m el re ce be num ct es or ar fe ot er or num al of depa bridg janua num num num artment ge pot bea ary num num .num .num installat num .num ge .num .num .num .num .num .num .num stan of trans arings elastomer .num diamete .num thickne .num brass ri .num diffe the .num diffe mou .num recesse .num guides element .num tfe pla .num tfe thic .num depth o tion neral the contrac documents .
the contrac shall conform expanded up all steel plate the bottom machined fro tabs for bolt pot .
.num welding structural st direction of num the contrac direct superv ndard sp portatio er num num ess num ngs erence betwe moulded elas erence betwe ulded elastom ed guide bar for lateral ts shall be num an dimension ckness num of recess for t ctor shall car ctor shall ensu m to the req pon by this ite es shall be pre portion of th om a solid pie ting the pot to g of the tabs fo teel compone num mm .
ctor shall ens vision of a qu pecificat on and inf structures num mm for num mm for num mm een internal d stomer shall b een sum of t mer shall be num rs american gap betwe num mm num num num num of th tfe num num rry out the w ure that all m uirements of em andor sub essed or mac he bearing t ece of steel .
the masonry or attachment ents of the b sure that all b alified technic tions frastruc s r diameters r diameters diameter of b be num num m thickness of num num mm standard cle een metal su num mm .
num of diamete hickness num mm work at the lo materials work num and num bmission unde chined flat prio the pot whi plate shall be of the tabs to bearings shall bearings shall cal represent cture num mm num mm brass ring an mm .
brass rings a m. earance loca urfaces rest er or diagona ocations as in kmanship con num except er num. or to manufact ich contains e machined fro the pot will no l have a min l be installed tative of the b p nd diameter o and recess d ational fit cla traints and m l ndicated in th nstruction and as further m ture of the bea the elastome om the same ot be permitte nimum dimens in the bridge bearing manuf item num page num of recess in depth in the ss lcnum .
mating tfe he contract d inspection modified and arings .
er shall be plate as the ed .
sion in any e under the facturer .
br pag num num num num ridge pot b ge num num num .num num measu .num the acco num basis o .num pay .num the acco bearings .num the bea recomme .num as a kept grouting of b .num prior to tolerance anchor b .num all co and the g .num the annu flowable instructio .num the spac dry pack .num follo .num grou perio .num n .num superstru obtained rement fo fabrication ordance with t of payment ment for wor owner will ordance with departm arings shall b endations .
minimum the out of direct s bearings the grouting e of num in num a bolts .
oncrete surfa all dirt rust o grout area prio ular space be consistency on .
ce between th k grout mixed owing dry pac ut shall be m od .
no grouting s ucture compo a minimum st or payment supply and this item shall t rk under this i make parti num .
sta ment of tr structu be shipped e bearings sh sunlight .
g the bearin and locked by aces to be gro oil grease a or to the com etween the an y mixed and he bearing ba d in accordan cking the grou maintained at hall be done w onents shall trength of num t installation o l be on a lump tem shall be ial payment andard s ransport ures and stored hall be stored g base plate y means of th outed are to b and other suc mencement o nchor bolts an d placed in ase plates an nce with the m ut shall be cov t a temperatu when the con not be place of the specif of all confine p sum basis .
at the lump s for confined specifica tation an in accordanc d at the site in es shall be he levelling an be roughened ch contaminan of grouting .
nd sleeves sh accordance nd top of conc manufacturers vered for num d ure of at lea ncrete or stee ed on the be fied numday st ed elastomer sum price .
d elastomer ations nd infras ce with the n weatherproo carefully lev nd top nuts p d to an amplit nts are to be hall be groute e with the m crete shall be s instructions days with wet ast numc dur el is below free earings until trength .
r pot bridg pot bridge tructur item num january num manufacture of shelters an velled within provided on th tude of num m removed fro ed with grout o manufacturer e filled with th .
burlap .
ring the curin ezing .
the grout ha ge bearings e bearings re num num rs nd a he m m of rs he ng as in in depa seale janua num num artment ed expans ary num descript .num this ite modula material .num all mate .num the ap docum .num castin the exp .num all stee finish a type num thick .
.num the su the bott concret .num all cent or mac .num the de numon canc .num the ro grade num .num all stee require strengt .num all g .num welded shall be .num cover minimu .num anchor equival screws stan of trans ion joint a tion em consists o ar assemblies s erials shall be pproved expa ents .
place type a pansion joint a el surfaces w and coated w num µm num pport boxes f tom plate tran te beneath th tre beams se hined shapes esign loading nt plus the dy sa snum .
ound bar a num w. el used for e ments of can h are required other steel co grade num w. d anchor stud e made from s plates are to um thickness o rs for cover ent a minim with allen so ndard sp portatio assemblies of the supply s. e supplied by ansion joint a anchors or ins assemblies .
with the exce with an appro num µm thick o for the sliding nsfers the loa e support box eparation bea s and shall no for sealed e ynamic load a nchorages a extrusions ed ncsa gnum d to satisfy th omponents sh s when requ steel meeting o be galvaniz of num µm an plates shall um of num mm ocket head or pecificat on and inf s structures and installatio the contracto assemblies to serts steel co eption of anch oved inorgan or zinc metali plates in mo ad to the side xes .
ams and edg ot be builtup w xpansion join allowance an and cover p dge beams a num grade num e stresses re hall conform t uired shall be g the requirem zed by hot di dor a minimu be richmond m long sized approved eq tions frastruc s on of sealed or .
o be supplied over plates a hor studs sh ic zinc coatin ized in accor odular expans plates assum ge beams sha welded memb nt assemblies nd all stresses plates shall and support numa or astm esulting from t to the minimu e the size indic ments of astm pping in acc um applicatio d insert type for num mm d quivalent .
cture expansion jo d shall be as nd cap screw hall be sandb ng conformin rdance with c sion joints sha ming no supp all be solid or bers .
s and for cen s shall be with conform to bars shall co m anum unles the loading sp um requireme cated in the c m anum .
cordance with on of num kgmnum .
e lfw close diameter x num oint assemblie s noted in th ws shall be su blasted to a w ng to cgsb cancsa gnum all be designe port from the t r voided stee ntre beams s hin the limits o cancsa onform to th ss grades of h pecified .
ents of canc contract docu h cancsa g ed ferrule o num mm long th item num page num es including he contract upplied with white metal numgpnumb num num µm ed such that thin layer of l extrusions hall be cl specified in gnum e minimum higher yield csa gnum uments and gnum to a or approved readed cap seale page num num num num ed expans num .num sealed to main submitta .num the co accorda .num the co comme .num all cer constru .num the co specific .num a repre when m .num all me .num the ins be cas concret .num all weld .num cover p .num the ste fabricat .num portion recoate .num spacing concret .num the ste indicate num .
de ion joint a expansion jo ntain the cross als ontractor sha ance with item ontractor shal encing the wo welders sha rtification leve ction ontractor sha cally directed b esentative from modular expan materials an eet the represe serts for attach t in the conc te has attained ding shall conf plates are to b eel portions o ting shop unle s of inorgani ed in the field .
g hardware s te .
eel portions ed in the co epartmen assemblies oint assemblie s slope and a all submit the m num. ll submit proo ork .
ll be certified el of qualified all carry out t by the engine m the expans nsion joints ar nchor bolt spa entatives app hing the steel crete and the d a minimum form to the re be anchored o of the expan ess otherwise ic zinc coatin shall be relea of the expan ontract docum stan nt of tran s structures es shall be st avoid permane e shop drawi of of certificat d by the cwb welder as is the work as er .
sion joint asse re installed .
acing and the proval before t cover plates e steel plates num hour set .
quirements of on the approa nsion joint as e specified .
ng damaged ased within num nsion joint as ments and a ndard sp nsportat s tored at least ent distortion ings for the tion for the w b to cancs ssued by the p indicated in emblys man e recesses fo the contracto at curbs si are to be fa f cancsa w ching traffic s semblies sha in the field num hours maxi ssemblies sh are subject to pecificati tion and i t num mm off .
sealed expa welders condu sa wnum sp province of n the contrac nufacturer or s ormed to rece or may place th dewalks and astened for f wnum .
side of the join all be fabrica shall be me imum of the hall be fabric o the toleran ions infrastr jan the ground in ansion joint a ucting the wo pecifications new brunswic ct documents supplier shall eive the assem he assemblies dor barrier wa inal installatio nt .
ated in one p echanically c placing of th cated to the nces indicate ructure item num nuary num n a manner assembly in ork prior to andor to a k. s andor as be present mblies shall s. alls are to on after the piece in the leaned and he adjacent dimensions ed in table depa seale janua num num num artment ed expans ary num .num the doc measure .num the sup this item basis of .num payme expans .num the ow with num stan of trans ion joint a dimensions crown e expansion j cuments and elevation this toleranc num joint opening ment for p pply and insta m shall be on payment nt for work ion joint assem wner shall m num .
ndard sp portatio assemblies exp joint assemb are subject to exp e shall not be g payment allation of the a lump sum b under this ite mbly as ident ake partial p pecificat on and inf s structures ta pansion joint face of face to lies shall be o the tolerance ta pansion joint e considered a complete sea basis .
em shall be tified under th payment for s tions frastruc s able num t fabrication curb to back face of curbs installed in t es indicated in able num t installation additive with th aled expansio at the lump e contract .
sealed expan cture tolerances of curb s the position in n table num tolerances num mm he tolerances num mm on joint assem p sum price nsion joint as num mm num mm num mm in ndicated in th num. s presented in mblies in acco for each typ semblies in a item num page num m m num m he contract table ordance with e of sealed accordance depa finge janua num num num artment er joint as ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num all stee finish a .num ca .num san .num the ro grade num .num welded shall be .num cover minimu .num anchor equival screws .num structu canc of num jo .num stainles .num steel fi maintai submitta .num the co item num .num the co comme .num all cer stan of trans ssemblies tion em consists o s erials shall be el surfaces w and coated wit rbo zinc num a ndblasting sh ound bar a num w. d anchor stud e made from s plates are to um thickness o rs for cover ent a minim with allen so ral steel sa gnumm oules when te ss steel shall inger joint as in the cross s als ontractor shall num. ontractor shal encing the wo welders sha rtification leve ndard sp portatio f the supply a e supplied by with the exce th an approve and dimecote hall not be use nchorages a s when requ steel meeting o be galvaniz of num µm an plates shall um of num mm ocket head .
in finger grade numw ested at minus conform to th ssemblies sha slope and avo l submit the s ll submit proo ork .
ll be certified el of qualified pecificat on and inf structures and installatio the contracto eption of anch ed inorganic z num are approv ed on stainles and cover p uired shall be g the requirem zed by hot di dor a minimu be richmond m long sized plate asse wt category num s numc .
he requireme all be stored oid permanent shop drawings of of certificat d by the cwb welder as is tions frastruc s on of steel fing or .
hor studs sh zinc coating .
ved coatings .
ss steel .
plates shall e the size indic ments of astm pping in acc um applicatio d insert type for num mm d emblies sha num or with a ce nts of astm at least num t distortion .
s for the finge tion for the w b to cancs ssued by the p cture ger joint asse hall be sandb conform to cated in the c m anum .
cordance with on of num kgmnum .
e lfw close diameter x num all meet ertified charpy anum aisi t num mm off the er joint assem welders condu sa wnum sp province of n mblies .
blasted to a w o cancsa contract docu h cancsa g ed ferrule o num mm long th the require y vnotch imp ype num. ground in a mblies in acco ucting the wo pecifications new brunswic item num page num white metal gnum uments and gnum to a or approved readed cap ements of pact energy manner to ordance with ork prior to andor to a k. finge page num num num er joint as num constru .num the co specific .num the ins be cas concret .num all weld .num cover p .num the ste .num steel fi otherwi .num all .num por and .num ino prio .num stu ca .num steel fi docum .num steel fin and are de ssemblies ction ontractor sha cally directed b serts for attach t in the conc te has attained ding shall conf plates are to b eel trough sha inger joint as se specified .
expansion joi rtions of inorg d recoated in t organic zinc sh or to installatio ud anchors o ancsa wnum .
inger joint as ents and are dimensions crown nger joint ass e subject to th elevation this toleranc num joint opening epartmen all carry out t by the engine hing the steel crete and the d a minimum form to the re be anchored o all be sealed to ssemblies sha nt assemblies ganic zinc coa the field .
hall have all c on of assembl on steel expa ssemblies sha subject to the finge semblies shall e tolerances i finger jo e shall not be g stan nt of tran structures the work as er .
cover plates e steel plates num hour set .
quirements of on the approa o the finger jo all be fabrica s field welded ating damage curing solution lies .
ansion joint a all be fabrica e tolerances in table er joint fabri face of face to be installed i indicated in ta table num oint installatio e considered a ndard sp nsportat s indicated in at curbs si are to be fa f cancsa w ching traffic s oint assembly ated in one p shall be grou ed by field we n and residue assemblies s ated to the d ndicated in ta num cation tolera curb to back face of curbs in the position able num .
num on tolerance additive with th pecificati tion and i the contrac dewalks and astened for f wnum .
side of the join to construct a piece in the und flush .
elding shall b e removed by hall conform dimensions in able num. ances of curb s n indicated in es num mm he tolerances num mm ions infrastr jan ct documents dor barrier wa inal installatio nt .
a durable wate fabricating sh be mechanica y water and b to the requ ndicated in th num mm num mm num mm in the contract s presented in ructure item num nuary num s andor as alls are to on after the ertight joint .
hop unless ally cleaned ristle brush irements of he contract m m num m documents table depa finge janua num num artment er joint as ary num measure .num the su item sh basis of .num payme .num the ow stan of trans ssemblies ment for p pply and inst hall be on a lum payment nt for work un wner shall mak ndard sp portatio payment allation of the mp sum basis nder this item ke partial pay pecificat on and inf structures e complete st s. shall be at th ment for stee tions frastruc s teel finger join he lump sum l finger joint a cture nt assemblies price .
assemblies in s in accordan accordance w item num page num ce with this with num .
depa steel janua num num num num artment l ballastw ary num descript .num this ite ballastw material .num all mate .num all stee finish a .num ca .num the ro grade num .num welded shall be .num structu gnum .num steel b the cros submitta .num the co item num .num the co comme .num all cer constru .num the co specific .num all weld stan of trans wall angl tion em consists o wall .
s erials shall be el surfaces w and coated wit rbo zinc num a ound bar a num w. d anchor stud e made from s ral steel in mnumw .
ballastwall ang ss slope and als ontractor shall num. ontractor shal encing the wo welders sha rtification leve ction ontractor sha cally directed b ding shall conf ndard sp portatio e of the supply e supplied by with the exce th an approve and dimecote nchorages a s when requ steel meeting n the ballas gle shall be s avoid perman l submit the s ll submit proo ork .
ll be certified el of qualified all carry out t by the engine form to the re pecificat on and inf structures and installatio the contracto eption of anch ed inorganic z num are approv and cover p uired shall be g the requirem stwall angle stored at leas nent distortion shop drawings of of certificat d by the cwb welder as is the work as er .
quirements of tions frastruc s on of the stee or .
hor studs sh zinc coating .
ved coatings .
plates shall e the size indic ments of astm shall mee st num mm off n. s for the stee tion for the w b to cancs ssued by the p indicated in f cancsa w cture el angle on th hall be sandb conform to cated in the c m anum .
et the requi f the ground el ballastwall a welders condu sa wnum sp province of n the contrac wnum .
he top of eac blasted to a w o cancsa contract docu irements of in a manner angle in acco ucting the wo pecifications new brunswic ct documents item num page num ch abutment white metal gnum uments and cancsa to maintain rdance with ork prior to andor to a k. s andor as ste pag num num num eel ballas ge num num .num stee othe .num .num .num .num balla in th num measu .num the this num basis o .num pay .num the num stwall ang el ballastwall erwise specifie portions of in and recoated inorganic zin prior to install stud anchors wnum .
astwall assem he contract do rement fo supply and in item shall be of payment ment for work owner will m .num .
departm gle assemblies ed .
norganic zinc d in the field .
c shall have a lation of asse s on steel ball mblies shall be ocuments and or payment nstallation of on a lump su t k under this it make partial p sta ment of tr structu shall be fabr coating dam all curing solu mblies .
lastwall assem e fabricated to d standard dr t the complete m basis .
tem shall be a payment for s andard s ransport ures ricated in on maged by field ution and resi mblies shall c o the dimensio rawing num. steel ballastw at the lump s steel ballastw specifica tation an e piece in th d welding sha due removed conform to the ons and insta wall angle ass um price .
wall angle ass ations nd infras he fabricating all be mecha d by water and e requirement alled in the po semblies in ac semblies in ac tructur item num january num g shop unles nically cleane d bristle brus ts of cancs sition indicate ccordance wit ccordance wit re num num ss ed h sa ed th th depa guide janua num num num num num num artment e rail syst ary num descript .num this ite structu material .num all mate submitta .num the co item num constru .num the co specific .num the co formwo .num the co .num all cont .num aluminu .num rail po specifie .num the a w measure .num the qu rail syst .num the me guide r structu basis of .num paymen guide ra stan of trans tem struc tion em consists o re .
ls erials shall be als ontractor shall num .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor sha ork and concre ontractor shall tacting alumin um posts sha sts bases bea ed by grouting e grout shall p waterproof sea ment for p uantity to be m tem on a high easured quan ail system m re .
payment nt for work u ail system on ndard sp portatio ctures of the supply a e supplied by t submit shop all carry out t by the engine ll be respons ete at the stag install all pos num and conc ll be separate aring unevenl g under the ba provide a smo al .
payment measured for p hway structure ntity shall be measured from under this item a highway st ecificati on and inf structures and installatio the contracto drawings for the work as er .
sible for the ge of the work sts and railing crete surfaces ed from steel b ly on concrete ase plate of th ooth bearing s payment shal e supplied and the direct stra m end cap to m shall include ructure as ide ions frastruc s on of an alum or .
the aluminium indicated in placing and k when this pl s and these shall be sepa bolts by nylon e surfaces sh e rail post wit surface under l be the numb d installed in a aight line mea end cap of e e a separate entified under cture minum guide ra m guide rail sy the contrac alignment of lacement mus shall be secu arated by a fa n or plastic bus hall be brough th an approve the full base ber of linear m accordance w asurement alo each section a unit price fo r the contract .
ail system on ystem in acco ct documents the anchor st occur .
ured firmly in p bric pad .
shings .
ht to bear in a ed epoxy grou plate area an metres of alum with this item .
ong the cente and on both s or each type o .
item num page num n a highway ordance with s andor as bolts in the place .
alignment as t. d shall form minum guide erline of the sides of the of aluminum depa serv janua num num num num num num num num num artment ice duct s ary num descript .num this ite material .num genera .num all .num fibregla .num fib epo .num polyvin .num all spe .num eac and .num .num .num .num steel s .num ste .num all .num fish ro .num the in e .num storage .num ma ind submitta .num the co the mat stan of trans structure tion em consists of s al materials sha ass duct breglass duct oxy fre and nyl chloride d pvc duct ecifications ch section of d at intervals manufacture inside diame type design supports eel in supports steelworks sh ope e fish rope sh each duct .
e aterials are to ividual pieces als ontractor shal terials meet o ndard sp portatio es f the supply an all be supplied couplings d shall confor duct t bends c semirigid p f pvc duct sh not exceeding ers name and eter in millime nation .
s and sleeves hall be galvan hall be polypro o be stored i s contained o l submit to th or exceed the pecificat on and inf structures nd installation d by the cont bends and e rm to cancs couplings a plastic duct hall have the g num m d trademark etres and s shall confor nized in accor opylene not le n an organiz r strapped .
he engineer specified gra tions frastruc s n of all service tractor .
end caps sha sa cnum .
and caps s ctnum a following inf rm to cancs rdance with c ess than num m zed fashion a upon request ade .
cture e ducts in stru all be made shall confor and shall be t formation prin sa gnum cancsa gnum m in diamete at least num t the manufa uctures .
of fibreglass rm to bell type ii thick nted on the d num .
num. er and shall be mm off the g acturers certif item num page num s reinforced canadas wall .
duct surface e one piece ground with fication that serv page num num num num num ice duct s num constru .num genera .num the spe .num the wo sur .num fre du .num the .num the num .num wh sha com .num a m eng .num exp and .num pvc d .num joi cou .num the num .num exp and .num eac sho .num a num lea .num .num de structure ction al e contractor ecifically direct e contractor ork is accept rrounding and uct e duct shall b e duct shall num m. here external all supply an mplete the wo minimum of num gineer to allow pansion sleev d shall be of t uct nts shall be f upling .
e duct shall num m. pansion sleev d shall be of t ch duct run sh own in the co num mm long ves the end o the galvani sidewalk an the expose outside .
epartmen es shall carry ou ted by the eng shall ensure ted in writing d encasing the e of the bell a be tied wit supporting st nd install this ork .
num days notic w inspection o ves shall be the type indica fitted with pus be tied wit ves shall be the type as ind hall be equipp ontract docum galvanized s of the abutme zed steel sle nd shall exten ed num mm o stan nt of tran structures ut the work a gineer .
that an insp g by the en e work .
and spigot typ th wire to th teelworks is d s structure a e prior to pla of the fre se provided at e ated in the co shfit type co th wire to th provided at e dicated on th ped with two ments or as di steel pipe slee ent wingwalls eeve shall be d num mm be of the galvan ndard sp nsportat s as indicated i pection of the ngineer prior pe with all join he reinforcin detailed in the at the stage acing concret ervice ducts .
each expansi ontract docum uplings and t he reinforcin each expansi e contract do num m num ben irected by the eve shall be or sidewalks embedded num eyond the con nized steel pi pecificati tion and i in the contra e work has b r to the plac nts fully seate ng steel at i e contract do of the cont te on the du on joint in th ments .
the duct shall ng steel at i on joint in th ocuments .
nds in each a e engineer .
provided on s. num mm in th ncrete surface ipe sleeve sh ions infrastr jan act documents been complet cement of an ed together .
ntervals not ocuments the tract most b ct shall be g e bridge sup l be fully sea ntervals not e bridge sup abutment and each pvc du he abutment es .
hall be threa ructure item num nuary num s andor as ted and the ny concrete exceeding e contractor eneficial to given to the perstructure ted into the exceeding perstructure shall be as uct where it wingwall or ded on the depa serv janua num num .
num num artment ice duct s ary num .num testing num .num ge .num .num .num afte term .num .num ca the measure .num the qu and ins .num the line the con basis of .num paymen identifie .num the ow stan of trans structure g neral after the in diameter of through the the contrac the mandrel er completion minate at eac a surplus of ps shall be af e galvanized s ment for p uantity to be m talled in acco ear measurem tinuous direct payment nt for work u ed under the c wner shall mak ndard sp portatio es stallation is c f the installed length of the ctor shall be test .
n of testing ch end in a sc f approximate ffixed to each steel pipe slee payment measured for rdance with th ment shall be t t run of the du under this item contract .
ke partial paym pecificat on and inf structures complete a d duct and a duct system responsible t the contract creweye ins ely num m of fish h end of the d eves at the en payment sha his item .
taken from en ct. m shall includ ment for duct tions frastruc s mandrel with a minimum l in the presen to clear ando tor shall thre serted in the r rope shall be duct with an a nds of abutme all be the num nd to end on e de a separate in accordance cture h a diameter ength of num nce of the eng or replace any ead each duc recess provid e provided at appropriate so ent wingwalls mber of linear each duct and e unit price f e with num of at least num num mm shall gineer .
y ducts that d ct with a fish ed in the duc each duct en olvent welding s or sidewalks r metres of du shall be mea for each size item num page num num of the be passed do not pass h rope and ct cap .
nd .
g cement to s. uct supplied asured along of duct as depa wate janua num num num num artment erproofing ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mat .num the con .num the con bal .num .num the doc .num materia submitta .num the co work t .num the the .num the on .num the acc .num the constru .num the co specific .num all conc .num any .num the co manufa stan of trans g tion m consists of s terials shall be e waterproofi nsisting of a pr e waterproofi nsisting of a p lastwalls of st protection b equivalent a e approved w cuments .
als shall be sto als ontractor shal the proposed e manufactur e waterproofin e manufactur the waterproo e contractor cordance with e waterproofin ction ontractor sha cally directed b crete surfaces y primed surfa ontractor shall acturers instal ndard sp portatio f the supply an e supplied by t ng system a rimer a memb ng system b primer a mem tructures and board shall be nd having a m waterproofing ored at least num ll submit to th type of water rers recomme ng system and rers specified ofing system .
shall select a the manufact ng and aspha all carry out t by the engine s shall be dry a aces left overn prepare the a llation specific pecificat on and inf structures nd installation the contracto a shall be a brane and a m b shall be a mbrane a mas on concrete b e vibraflex t maximum abso system shall num mm off the he engineer rproofing syst ended proced d its compone d minimum te a product app turers specific lt concrete sh the work as er .
and free of for night shall be area and insta cations and ins tions frastruc s of waterproof or .
a manufactur mastic and sha a manufactur stic and a prot box culverts .
type num or ik orption of num. be selected e ground in a w num days in ad tem including dures for inst ents .
emperature fo propriate for t cations .
hall perform as indicated in reign material reprimed prio all the waterp structions .
cture fing systems o red waterproo all be used on red waterproo tection board ko num prote .
from the list weatherproof dvance of the the following tallation and or asphalt con the applicatio s a waterproo the contrac s prior to prim or to membran proofing system on structures .
ofing membra n the decks of ofing membra and shall be ecto board o provided in th enclosure .
e commencem g instructions f ncrete during on and field c ofing system .
ct documents ming .
ne application m in accordan item num page num . ane system f structures .
ane system used on the or approved he contract ment of the for handling g placement conditions in s andor as n. nce with the wate page num num num num erproofing num .num for all w .num the spe .num any sun .num all .num for b drawing .num sol wat .num for bal downwa .num the num .num the .num for con .num the .num the .num the and num .num the of t sys .num the co waterpr measure .num the qu system .num sta me basis of .num paymen system .num the ow de g waterproofing e membrane ecified protect y protection bo nlight exposur exposed edge ridge decks g num or num lvent based m terproofing me last walls the ard angle of th e membrane num mm overlapp e details for in ncrete box cul e membrane s e membrane s e protection b d sides and num mm centres e protection b the sides is s stem .
ontractor sha roofing .
ment for p uantity to be m supplied and arter strips fla easured as a s payment nt for work un as identified wner shall mak epartmen applications t shall be pro ion board adh oard which is re in accordan e terminations the edge num. materials shall embrane .
membrane s he ballast wal shall cover ping onto the nstallation are lverts the follo shall be applie shall be install oard shall be d adhered between the boards shall b specified and ll pave a br payment measured for installed in ac ashing overla single layer of nder this item under the co ke partial paym stan nt of tran structures the following s otected when hered to the w to be left expo nce with the m s shall receive e details sh l be cured for shall be applie l angle .
the entire approach slab shown on sta owing conditio ed in strips pe led in accorda applied over t to the me two surfaces .
e butted tight d in all cases ridge deck w payment sha ccordance wit apped joints the waterproo shall include ontract .
ment for the w ndard sp nsportat s shall apply n so noted in waterproofed s osed for more manufacturers e a trowelled b hall be con r appropriate ed in vertical back face o b and wingwa andard drawin ons shall apply erpendicular to ance with stan the top of the embrane by tly and shall b s shall comple within num days ll be the num th this item .
double plied ofing system .
a separate un waterproofing pecificati tion and i n the contra surface .
e than num hour instructions .
bead of mastic nstructed as time period p strips starting of the ballast alls .
ng num. y o the long axis ndard drawing waterproofing placing go be orientated etely cover th of the insta mber of square areas patch nit price for ea system in acc ions infrastr jan act document rs shall be pro c. shown on prior to the pla g at the midd t wall with a s of the culver g num. g system on obs of the vertically whe he applied wa allation of the e metres of wa hes and seam ach type of wa cordance with ructure item num nuary num ts with the otected from n standard acing of the depth of the a minimum rt .
both the top mastic at en coverage aterproofing e deck slab aterproofing ms shall be aterproofing num .
depa shor janua num num num num artment ring ary num descript .num this ite shore e material .num all mate .num timber grade m mark lu .num timber .num steel sh .num steel m differing reduce .num when t the yiel submitta .num the co submit .num sho sec .num submitt constru .num the co specific work p .num the co .num the co workme time as .num the co contrac stan of trans tion em consists o excavations .
s erials shall be and lumber mark used by umber in cana piles used in heeting shall b members with g from those the design ca the grade of th d point of the als ontractor shall the design in oring shall ction num of the tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b rogresses .
ontractor shall ontractor sha en and the w the shoring is ontractor sha ctor and he sh ndard sp portatio of the design e supplied by t used in the the canadian ada andor lum shoring shall be free from k reduced cro shown in the apacity of the he steel mem steel is num m be responsib n accordance also be de e industrial sa red in accorda all carry out t by the engine design and c all be respon work area co s removed .
all remove th hall dispose o pecificat on and inf structures supply const the contracto construction n lumber man mber approve meet the req kinks and ben sssectional a e design sub members sha bers is not kn mpa .
ble for the des with item num esigned by afety code .
ance with any the work as eer andor as m construct all sh sible for the ntinuously fro e shoring an f them outside tions frastruc s truction and r or .
of shoring sh nufacturing a ed by the engi uirements of c nds .
areas due to bmission and all not be used nown andor c sign of the sho num. the contrac y crossreferen indicated in may be requir horing to withs adequacy o om the time o nd all materia e the work si cture removal of the hall be grade association an neer .
cancsa num holes cuts or in the co d. certified the e oring and ass ctor to mee nced item form the contrac red due to wo stand the anti of the shoring of placement als shall rem ite .
e materials n d and stamp nd agencies a num. and other dis ntract docum engineer will a ociated bracin t the requir ming part of th ct documents ork site condi icipated desig g and the sa of the shoring main the prop item num page num ecessary to ped with the uthorized to scontinuities ments which assume that ng and shall rements of his item .
s andor as itions as the gn loadings .
afety of the g until such perty of the sh pag num num oring ge num num measu .num the desi .num the the horiz num basis o .num pay rement fo quantity to igned constru area to be m excavation to zontally along of payment ment for work departm or payment be measured ucted and rem measured for p o a point ver g the edge of t t k under this it sta ment of tr structu t d for paymen moved in acco payment shall rtically upward the base of th tem shall be a andard s ransport ures nt shall be th ordance with th be the extent d num mm be e excavation .
at the unit pric specifica tation an he number of his item .
t of the shorin elow the surr .
ce .
ations nd infras f square met ng exposed fro rounding natu tructur item num january num tres of shorin om the base o ural grade an re num num ng of nd depa engin janua num num num num artment neered fill ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num enginee gravel uncons accorda rock ba .num enginee materia .num enginee materia .num the ma shall ha .num the ow past fie enginee submitta .num the co enginee .num where shall s enginee constru .num the co specific .num the ex from co to the s .num the in of num the max .num the en num mm modifie stan of trans l tion em consists o s erials shall be ered fill shall composed o solidated rock ance with ast ase or num mm ered fill shall als or condition ered fill shall al or its bypro aterial when ave a microd wner reserves eld performan er regardless als ontractor shal ered fill .
engineered ubmit for a ered fill .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b cavation for ommencemen specified elev situ material mm below the ximum dry de gineered fill s m and compa ed proctor m ndard sp portatio f the supply a e supplied by t consist of cle of clean un material orga tm cnum and m crushed gra l not contain ns that would l not present oducts when e tested by th deval loss not the right to re nce documen s of complianc ll advise the fill placemen pproval the all carry out t by the engine and the place nt of the work ation .
on which the e placement g ensity .
shall be place cted in accord maximum dry d pecificat on and inf structures and placemen the contracto ean hard soun coated partic anic materials dor cnum sha avel base per any friable make the agg t any environ exposed to th he microdev t greater than eject any sour nted by the r ce with gradat engineer a m t occurs betw proposed m the work as er .
ement of the k up to and u e engineered f grade in acco ed on a firm d dance with ite density .
tions frastruc s nt of engineer or .
nd durable cr cles free of s and other de all conform to num. soluble or re gregate prone nmental haza e natural elem val test metho n num. rce of supply o records and tion or physica minimum of num ween novem method of pr indicated in engineered f until the engin fill is to be fou ordance with i dry base and em num to a cture red fill .
rushed rock c mud muds eleterious mat the grading li eactive miner e to decompo ard from the ments after pla od in accorda of engineered experience o al requiremen num days prior t mber numst and rotection to p the contrac fill must be on neered fill pla unded shall b item num and shall be plac minimum of num crushed grave stone siltston terial and wh imits of num m rals or other sition or disint presence of acement in th ance with mt d fill solely on of the owner nts .
to start of pla may numst the prevent freez ct documents ne continuous acement is co be compacted to a minimum ced in lifts not num of the as item num page num el or pit run ne or other en tested in mm crushed deleterious tegration .
f the parent e work .
to lsnum the basis of r andor the acing of any contractor zing of the s andor as s operation ompleted up d to a depth m of num of t exceeding stm dnum engin page num num .
num num neered fill num num .num adj as .num neither placem .num the tole table num base top o measure .num the qu supplied .num the me docum basis of p .num paymen .num haulag de l jacent fill mat the engineere r the excava ment shall be erances in ele num .
t surfa e of engineere of engineered ment for p uantity to be m d and placed easurement s ents .
payment nt for work un e for enginee epartmen terial shall be ed fill .
ation below e permitted to f evation for the olerances fo ce ed fill d fill payment measured for in accordance shall be calcu nder this item ered fill shall b stan nt of tran structures e placed simu existing grad freeze until af e placement o table num or placement num of th specified num mm payment sha e with this item ulated based shall be at the be paid for in ndard sp nsportat s ultaneously a de nor the e fter the bearin of the enginee num t of engineer toleran he nominal th in the contra all be the num m. on the payme e unit price .
accordance w pecificati tion and i and maintaine engineered f ng concrete h ered fill shall m red fill ce in elevati hickness of th act document mber of cubic ent lines as i with item num ions infrastr jan ed at the sam fill as supplie has been cast meet the requ ion he engineered ts metres of en indicated in th .
ructure item num nuary num me elevation ed or after t. uirements of d fill ngineered fill he contract depa free janua num num num artment draining b ary num descript .num this ite material .num the co .num freedr .num freedr accorda .num co und submitta .num the co draining .num the co as a so stan of trans backfill tion em consists of s ontractor shall raining backfil raining backfi ance with as ncrete aggreg der this item .
als ontractor shal g backfill .
ontractor shal ource of suppl ndard sp portatio f supply and p supply all ma l shall be clea ll shall meet t tm cnum .
gates meetin free a siev num num num num num num num num l submit the s l submit a req ly for this item pecificat on and inf structures placement of f aterials .
an sound dura the grading re g the require table edraining ba astm ve size num mm num mm num mm num mm .num mm num mm num mm num mm source of mat quest in writin m. tions frastruc s freedraining b able crushed equirements s ements of item num ackfill grada perce num num num num num terial for appr ng for approv cture backfill .
rock crushed shown in tab m num may ation nt passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num roval in advan val of the use d gravel or pit ble num whe y be approved nce of obtaini e of concrete item num page num run gravel .
en tested in d for supply ng the free aggregates fr pag num num num eedrainin ge num num const .num the spec .num whe free stan .num free mate .num the and num measu .num the back .num the doc num basis o .num pay g backfill ruction contractor s cifically directe en the water draining bac ndard drawing edraining bac erial .
freedraining or on the sta rement fo quantity to b kfill supplied a measuremen cuments .
of payment ment for work departm l shall carry o ed by the eng table is below ckfill shall be g num. ckfill shall be backfill shall ndard drawin or payment be measured and placed in a nt shall be ca t k under this ite sta ment of tr structu ut the work gineer .
w the bottom provided as placed simu be placed to t g num .
t for payment accordance w alculated base em shall be at andard s ransport ures as indicated m of the freed indicated in ultaneously w the dimension shall be the with this item .
ed on the pa t the unit pric specifica tation an d in the cont draining back the contract with the placin ns as indicated number of c ayment lines a ce .
ations nd infras tract docume kfill positive d t documents ng of adjacen d in the contr cubic metres o as indicated i tructur item num january num ents andor a drainage of th andor on th nt embankme ract documen of freedrainin in the contra re num num as he he nt ts ng act depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of asp ary num descript .num this ite waterpr material .num none i submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num all rem outside .num the co the con abutting .num the rep .num all asph may be orthotro .num the co milling .
.num the ap the asp measure .num the rem on a lum basis of .num payme stan of trans phalt conc tion em consists o roofing system s dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b moved materia e of the work ontractor must ncrete bridge g components e contractor placement of s halt concrete e in place to opic bridge de ontractor shall proach aspha phalt at the inte ment for p moval and dis mp sum basis payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio crete str of the remova m from a brid all carry out t by the engine als shall beco site .
t take care wh deck steel o s of the structu r shall be re such damage shall be comp o expose an eck .
l not be allow alt shall be re erface of new payment sposal of the a s. nder this item pecificat on and inf ructures structures al and dispos dge deck .
the work as er .
ome the prop hen removing orthotropic brid ure .
esponsible a e resulting from pletely remov nd leave bare wed to remove moved in a st and old asph asphalt concre m shall be at t tions frastruc s sal of the exi indicated in perty of the g the existing a dge deck ro at hisher ow m the work .
ved including e the portlan e the existing tepped fashio alt .
ete carried ou the lump sum cture isting asphalt the contrac contractor an asphalt concr oadway drains wn expense any deck wat nd cement co asphalt from on to avoid a ut in accordan m price .
t concrete in ct documents nd shall be d rete so as not s joints curb for the rep terproofing sy oncrete surfa the bridge d vertical face f nce with this it item num page num ncluding the s andor as disposed of t to damage bs and other pair andor ystem which ace or steel eck by cold full depth of tem shall be depa remo janua num num num num artment oval of co ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num the co days p constru .num genera .num the spe .num the und .num all and .num unl con occ .num the sup .num the and dire res .num .num the .num the abu .num the adj stan of trans ncrete tion em consists o s dentified .
als ontractor sha rior to the com ction al e contractor ecifically direct e removal of der item num. removed mat d shall be disp less otherwis nstruction ope curs during the e contractor pports during t e contractor s d any damage ect or indirect ponsibility of t the contrac arising from e contractor s e contractor s utments and fr e contractor acent and abu ndard sp portatio f the removal ll submit the mmencement shall carry ou ted by the eng the asphalt c terials genera posed of outsid se specified t erations and e work .
shall take al the work .
shall pay parti e incurred to result of the the contractor ctor shall ind damages or in shall be respo shall be requir rom the work shall be resp utting features pecificat on and inf structures and disposa proposed me t of the work .
ut the work a gineer .
concrete to ba ated as a resu de the work s the railing an the contracto ll care not to icular attention vehicles or th contractors r. emnify and s njuries .
nsible to ensu red to remove k site before th ponsible at h s. tions frastruc s l of concrete ethod and se .
as indicated i are exposed lt of the work site .
nd rail posts or shall ensu o damage an n to the flow o heir cargo or action proced save harmles ure the securit e all concrete he contract is hisher own e cture from a struct equencing of in the contra concrete surf k shall be the p s are to rem ure that no d ny portion of of traffic throu injury sustain dures or negl ss the owner ty of the fall ar rubble and ot s completed .
expense for ture .
the removal act documents face shall be property of the ain in place damage to th the superstr ugh the constr ned to their oc ligence shall r with regard rea below the ther waste fro any damage item num page num at least num s andor as carried out e contractor during the ese articles ructure and ruction zone ccupants as be the sole s to claims structure .
m piers and e or loss of re pag num num num num num moval of c ge num num .num equ .num num .num num .num num .num num .num type .num .num .num concrete ipment all equipme approval of th chipping ham .num chipping .num chipping jackhammers .num jackham .num concrete .num withi .num withi place .num withi rigmounted .num utilizing a areas .num for b the g .num for b to be .num withi .num loca and t docu num .
withi studs e a partial d this section c the actual lo engineer .
partial depth .num sidewalk .num the top s .num barrier w departm nt used to r he engineer .
mmers hammers sha hammers sha s mmers shall we e removal utiliz innum mm of c innum mm of t e and in num mm of re breakers a rigmounted barrier walls p girders are to b barrier walls a e removed in deck joint a ated within a d the lap length uments and in num mm fro s to remain in depth remova consists of the ocations area removal shall ks and curbs surface of dec walls endposts sta ment of tr structu remove conc all weigh less all be permitte eigh less than zing a jackham concrete that i the edges and einforcing stee d breaker for c parapet walls be removed and parapet w assembly istance from c of steel reinfo om the edge place .
al e partial depth a and extent apply to but i cks and s and ballastw andard s ransport ures rete from the than less than ed in all areas num kg .
mmer shall no is to remain in d faces of stru el that is to rem concrete remo and deck sla walls supported concrete to re orcement to re and faces of h removal and t of removal s not limited to walls .
specifica tation an e repair area n num kg .
of concrete re ot be permitted n place ctural steel m main in place .
oval shall not abs supported d by steel bea emain in place emain in place structural ste disposal of lo shall be dete to ations nd infras as shall be emoval .
d in the followi members that a . be permitted d by concrete ams unless t e equal to the e as specified eel members i oose and unso ermined on t tructur item num january num subject to th ing areas are to remain in the followin girders unles he deck slab sum of numm in the contra including shea ound concrete the site by th re num num he in ng ss is m act ar e. he depa remo janua num .
num artment oval of co ary num num .num co oth .num re com .num ha deb .num co num .num the det num .num .num .num all san con .num the rein .num in a reti .num type b .num thi .num the eng .num ful con less .num all san and .num ca .num exp stan of trans ncrete ncrete shall b er componen inforcing ste mponents to r mmers shall bonding of ba ncrete remov hours and to e unsound a termined by t mm orientate concrete sh of reinforcin .num any add removed removal of by the engin of the exp ndblasting or ncrete .
e maximum nforcing steel areas where ed at each in full depth s section con e actual loca gineer .
l depth remo ncrete surface s. of the exp ndblasting or d concrete .
re shall be ta posed reinfor ndard sp portatio be removed i nts and utilitie el prestress remain in plac not come in ars in adjacen val shall not b a minimum c nd delaminat the engineer ed perpendicu hall be remove g steel .
ditional unso d from these concrete bey neer .
osed reinforc r engineer ap size of the shall be num the top mat tersection po removal nsists of the fu tions area a oval areas sh e to a depth osed reinforc r engineer ap ken not to da cing steel sha pecificat on and inf structures n such a ma s that are to r sing tendons ce shall not b n contact with nt concrete are be permitted w ompressive s ted areas of shall be saw ular to the orig ed to a minim und concrete areas .
yond the spec cing steel w pproved altern air hammer n. of reinforcin oint .
ull depth remo and extent of hall be saw c of num mm or cing steel w pproved altern mage cut or all be retied a tions frastruc s anner as to pr remain in plac shear con e damaged o h reinforcing eas not being within num m of strength of num the concrete w cut along a ginal concrete mum of num mm e beyond th cified limit sh within these nate method r to be used g steel is co oval and disp f removal sha cut along all r to the top la within these nate method loosen the re at each interse cture revent damag ce .
nnectors stru or loosened .
bars in a m g repaired .
newly placed mpa .
e deck slab all edges to a e surface .
m below the b he minimum hall only be ca repair areas such that it d when rem ompletely exp posal of concr all be determ edges perpe ayer of reinfor repair areas such that the einforcing stee ection point .
ge to adjacen uctural steel manner which d concrete for curbs and en a depth of ap bottom bar of specified sh arried out wh s shall be c is free of sca moving concr posed the ba rete .
mined on the endicular to t rcing steel w s shall be c ey are free of el .
item num page num nt concrete and other h will cause r a period of ndposts as proximately the top mat hall also be hen directed cleaned by ale rust and ete around ars shall be site by the the existing whichever is cleaned by f scale rust re pag num num num num moval of c ge num num .num .num num .num typ .num .num .num .num .num num measu .num the rem num basis o .num pay iden concrete the contract not to dama way .
the contrac superstructu e c comple this section girdersfloor s the use of ex the contract the contrac supporting m operations in where suppo the contract those embed rement fo quantity to b oved and disp of payment ment for wor ntified under th departm tor must take ge the existi ctor shall em re from falling ete removal n consists of stringers of a xplosives sha tor shall not d tor shall clea members in n order to prev orting membe or shall emp dded elements or payment be measured f posed of in ac t k under this it he contract .
sta ment of tr structu care during ng reinforcing mploy method g concrete de f the comple structure .
all not be perm drop any mate arly mark on advance to vent cutting n ers have shea ploy concrete s nor the sup t for payment s ccordance with tem shall inclu andard s ransport ures the removal o g steel gran ds approved ebris .
ete removal mitted .
erials from the the surface o performing nicking or spa ar connection removal me porting memb shall be the nu h this item .
ude a separat specifica tation an of deck concr nite curbing r by the eng and disposa e bridge deck of the bridge saw cutting alling of the su s or stirrups e ethods that w bers .
umber of squ te unit price f ations nd infras rete in the cu railposts and gineer to pro al of concre k area .
e deck the lo g andor jac upporting me embedded in will not result are metres of for each type tructur item num january num rb areas so a d railing in an otect the ste ete above th ocations of th ck hammerin mbers .
the deck sla in damage t f deck concret of removal a re num num as ny el he he ng b to te as depa remo janua num num num num artment oval of str ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num the co .num the co comme structu govern .num the from into ma constru .num the co specific .num for stru item num .num the wat .num the equ .num the co .num explosi .num all wor demolit .num the .num the fol .num fou .num bac dep stan of trans ructures tion em consists o s dentified .
als ontractor shal ontractor sha encement of re for appro nment .
e submittal sh m the structu o the wetted p aterial which in ction ontractor sha cally directed b uctures in or o num and the follo e structure sh tercourse .
e removal of uipment in the ontractor shal ves will not be rk shall be ca tion of structu e structure sh lowing condit undation exca ckfilling of th pending on th ndard sp portatio f the removal l submit draw all submit to the work th oval by the hall include th ure the prop portion of the nadvertently f all carry out t by the engine over watercou owing hall be remov material whic e wetted porti l protect publ e permitted fo rried out in ac ures .
hall be remove ions shall app avation for the he work are he backfill mat pecificat on and inf structures of structure wings and des the enginee he proposed engineer an he proposed osed retentio watercourse falls into the w the work as er .
urses the con ved without re ch falls into t ion of the wat ic traffic from r demolition .
ccordance wit ed in such a m ply for buried e work shall b ea shall be c terial to be pl tions frastruc s s including t sign calculatio er upon req method and nd the depa method for th on system for and techniqu watercourse .
indicated in ntractor shall eleasing harm the river shal tercourse or d the dust and th cancsa manner to elim portions of th be carried ou carried out i aced .
cture the disposal o ons in accorda uest at leas d sequencing artment of e he capture an r preventing ues to be use the contrac carry out the mful materials ll be accomp disturbing the debris result snum code minate contac he structures ut in accordan n accordanc of all debris .
ance with item st num days p g of the rem environment nd removal o the material ed for the rem ct documents work in acco or contamina lished withou e riverbed .
ting from the w e of practice f ct with the rive nce with num ce with num item num page num m num. prior to the oval of the and local f the debris from falling moval of any s andor as ordance with ants into the ut stationing work .
for safety in erbed .
num .
num or num remo page num num num num oval of str num .num all was dispose disposa .num wa .num any da repaire measure .num the rem basis of .num paymen de ructures ste and dem ed of outside al site .
aste and demo mage to the d by the cont ment for p moval of a stru payment nt for work un epartmen molition debris e the work olition debris riverbed or to tractor at his payment uctures in ac nder this item nt of tran structures s shall becom site at an shall be recy o portions of t her own expe ccordance wit shall be at the specific nsportat s me the prope approved co ycled where p the structure ense .
th this item sh e lump sum cations tion and i erty of the c onstruction a ossible .
which are to hall be on a lu price .
infrastr jan contractor an and demolitio remain in pla ump sum basis ructure item num nuary num nd shall be on material ace shall be s. standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num roadway drain for structures num drain num num num num num num num view x num o.d .
x num mm pipe typical numm bar thru pipe num reqd length num num num num num num num o.d .
x num mm pipe typical num num b b num a a num drain num num num numxnum bars num num typical numm bar thru pipe num reqd length num plan welding reinforcing csa gnum grade num materials steel cancsa gnumgnum mnum type numw csa wnum num and csa wnum mnum all steel plates are to be nummm thick unless otherwise noted .
notes all welders shall be certified by the cwb to cancsa wnum specifications andor to a certification level of qualified welder as issued by the province of new brunswick .
numm reinforcing bars shall be supplied with drains .
numm bar thru pipe num reqd length num down spout section details on standard drawing num view x typ .
file num deck drain assemblies to be galvanized by hot dipping in accordance with cancsa gnum to a minimum thickness of num um andor a minimum application rate of num kgm .
standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num roadway drain details num num num typ .
num num num num o.d .
x num mm pipe typical num numxnum bar numm bar thru pipe num reqd length num num num num typ .
num num num num o.d .
x num mm pipe typical num numxnum bar numm bar thru pipe num reqd length num num num num num num typ .
num typ .
num typ .
drain num o.d .
x num mm pipe typical num num num num num num num numxnum bars num num num numm bar thru pipe num reqd length num opening num opening down spout detail section bb section aa typ .
num plan view x on standard drawing num file num hss num x num x num down spout galvanized standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num concrete limits for foundation overexcavation file num limits of working slab concrete original ground structure as defined in the contract documents num num num num slab volume will be paid for as working slab nummm overexcavation original ground structure as defined in the contract documents num num num num nummm overexcavation slab volume will be paid for as footing concrete common bedrock bedrock common limits of footing concrete num num num num num num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num steel h piles pile cap details numxnumxnum pile cap num num num num num num num num pile cap hp numxnum num num num num num num hp numxnum num num battered pile vertical pile num num num num num num num num num num hp numxnum pile cap vertical pile battered pile num num num num num num num num numxnumxnum pile cap pile cap plate size based on nominal pile dimensions hp numxnum num num num num num num pile cap hp numxnum vertical pile battered pile num num num num num num numxnumxnum pile cap file num num num pile cap details for hp numxnum pile cap details for hp numxnum pile cap details for hp numxnum standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num steel h piles pile point details num num file num if pile point is not bevelled pile must be bevelled num pile point pile butt weld detail for flanges titus pile point no .
hhps web pile point numd full penetration num num web pile standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num steel h piles splice details num num num num num num num num num num web runoff block numxnumxnum see detail a coping hole in web h pile flange of h pile num num num num num typ .
typ .
num may be reduced to num when splices are checked by nondestructive test method .
vertical alignment for h pile splicing detail a num num tolerance num max .
typ .
num num numd numd num nummm plate remove after splice is finished and grind flush .
file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num steel h piles sequences for welds for horizontal position file num a b coping hole coping hole detail web a approx .
nummm larger than edge of groove b large enought to allow the weld to start beyond the web with a max .
tip of num of the electrode backchip num and num to sound metal before deposition of passes num and num num and num num and num num num num num num num num num num num corner filled first on alternate sides weld passes num and num are at the center line of the flanges and weld psses num and num are on the inside of the flanges backchip note sequence of welding flanges sequence of welding web standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num steel h piles sequences for welds for flat position file num gouge or backchip root before welding second side supported edge supported edge a a a a b b b b c c c c d d d d e e e e f f f f supported edge corned filled first corned filled first gouge or backchip root before welding weld to be complete as shown by the numbered sequence note position no .
num position no .
num position no .
num position no .
num num num num num num num num num num num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num steel pipe piles pile point details file num dnum dnum d num num num num num num num num num num num s num numd num pipe pile nummm x nummm backing bar nummm x nummm backing bar nummm nummm base nummm base nummm stiffener c.p .
typ .
pipe pile a a b b pipe pile num x num num x num num typ .
pipe pile nummm base nummm x nummm backing bar pipe pile num typ .
nummm stiffener pipe pile pipe pile section aa section bb pile point detail standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num steel pipe piles splice details file num num s pipe pile splice center of num s minimum see detail a or b for applicable position see detail a or b for applicable position pipe pile max .
wall thickness nummm num num num backing plate made from section of pipe pile or formed from nummm thick plate section of pile center of splice detail a flat vertical or overhead position num root opening root opening num detail b horizontal position backing pipe pile backing pipe pile pipe pile num num num num num num num num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num prestressed beam lifting device details vertical only num num num num num nummm thick gnumm grade numw steel end of beam num num num num num num num aashto type ii beam end of beam num num num num num num num num aashto type iii beam num num num num num num num nummm holes typical nummm thick gnumm grade numw steel nummm holes typical end of beam num num num num num num num nummm thick gnumm grade numw steel nummm holes typical num num num aashto type iv beam nbdot type i beam num num end of beam nummm holes typical num num num num num num num num num num num nummm thick gnumm grade numw steel num top of beam top of beam top of beam top of beam file num num num num bulbtee beam standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num bridge pot bearing nomenclature bottom flange top plate piston pintle base plate nonshrink grout bearing block base pot elastomeric disc nut bolt seal rings seal num fixed bearing symmetrical girder base plate bearing block nonshrink grout seal rings base pot elastomeric disc piston num nut bolt constrained sliding bearing bottom flange top plate dust seal stainless steel symmetrical girder lubricated dimpled p.t.f.e .
bonded and recessed recessed p.t.f.e .
bonded and a bronze matrix or lead filled tfe in shoe plate anchor bolt pipe sleeve shoe plate anchor bolt pipe sleeve file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num ballastwall protection details file num detail a nummm x nummm long studs staggered at nummm on center .
studs to conform to astm grade num and aashto specifications .
num num num num num plumb nummm bleeder hole at nummm on center nummm x nummm x nummm angle set flush with top of concrete finished grade ballastwall section pavement structure plumb compacted fill see detail a standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num deck at barrier wallcurb waterproofing details file num membrane overlap nummm minimum nummm asphalt concrete barrier wall curb waterproofing membrane deck concrete overlap membrane in principle direction of water flow and in direction of asphalt concrete placement .
for normal crown install starter strip first .
for superelevation install starter strip on high side last .
notes membrane to turn up vertical face nummm .
section through deck at barrier wall curb showing waterproofing system nummm x nummm fillet material compatible with selected waterproofing .
when specified in the contract documents nummm x nummm densoband top to be approximately nummm above surface of asphalt concrete standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num ballast wall waterproofing system details file num min .
num waterproof membrane mastic protection board front face back face ballast wall approach slab min .
num mastic section through ballast wall showing waterproofing system all protection board to be applied on top of the waterproofing system and adhered to the membrane with the specified mastic placed as gobs on nummm centers between the two surfaces .
all protection board to be butted tightly .
all terminations to be sealed by an edge bead of mastic .
all membrane shall be placed vertically and overlapped a minimum of nummm with adjacent sheets .. notes num x num expanded polystyrene minimum density of num kgm nummm asphalt impregnated fibreboard standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num waterproofing requirements on box culvert or rigid frame january num structures standard drawing num surface waterproofing joint waterproofing to be conwrap and primer or equivalent exterior top full depth on sides finished grade note rubrnek required for culverts with tongue and groove joints only num num num num numm to nummm numm to numm nummm to numm over numm top and full depth on sides top and full depth on sides top and down nummm on sides no waterproofing b b a case minimum cover required waterproofing type surface waterproofing chart standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num deck at barrier wallcurb torch applied waterproofing detail january num structures standard drawing num numm m to numm m overlap membrane nummm min .
numm m concrete asphalt nummm above surface of asphalt concrete nummm x nummm densoband top to be approximately when specified in the contract documents face of barrier w all max .
num torch applied waterproofing membrane nummm num deck concrete file num of asphalt concrete placement .
overlap membrane in principle direction of water flow and in direction note showing torch applied waterproofing system section through deck at barrier wall curb curb flush with top of waterproofing nummm grey pvc drain pipe to be with selected waterproofing fillet material compatible standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num january num structures standard drawing num free draining backfill placement details file num a a b b num num num num num num grade to drain where required free draining backfill to be placed under wingwall as shown wingwall grade to drain where required wingwall wingwall free draining backfill free draining backfill free draining backfill to follow slope of wingwall back face of breastwall approach slab seat bottom of wingwall approach slab seat back face of breastwall wingwall wingwall back face of breastwall section bb section aa plan of abutment at approach slab seat elevation of inside face of wingwall num num num num depa table janua it num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num artment e of conte ary num tem d num s num p num s num f num a num r num p num p num c num c num a num r num r num r num s stan of trans ents descriptio storm sewer precast catch sluice box frame with g adjustment of relocation of paving catch pipe zone ma curb and gutt concrete side asphalt sidew removal of cu removal of si removal of un standard draw num num t num num p num num t num num t num num t num num t num num t num num t num num p num num c num num c num num c num num c num num j num num j num num a ndard sp portatio n pipe h basin grate or cover f catch basins catch basin basin apron aterial ter ewalk walk urb and gutte idewalk nderground s wings typical trenc precast catch typical catch typical sluice typical sluice typical sluice typical frame typical frame paving catch curb and gut curb and gut curb and gut concrete side joint layout joint and isol asphalt sidew pecificat on and inf municipal r s and manho er services ch cross sect h basin detai h basin excav e box and pip e box installat e box installat e with grate e with cover basin apron tter details tter details tter details ewalk details ation details walk details tions frastruc les tions ls vation pe detail tion behind th tion into the c square round s cture numbe page num num num num num num num num num num num num num num he curb and g curb and gut di r of es gutter tter vision num page num depa stor janua num num num num num num num artment m sewer p ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num concre .num all .num all .num metal p .num all .num all .num plastic .num all .num pv .num .num .num pe .num .num .num spe .num .num pipe zo .num pip ma .num backfill .num bac eng .num if a wo item stan of trans ipe tion em consists o ls erials shall be ete pipe pipe shall con pipe wrap for pipe pipe shall be pipe wrap for pipe plastic pipe s c pipe smooth wal fnum .
profileribbe pipe pe pipe sha profile pe p ecialized ben specialized requirement one materials pe zone mate anufacturers i ckfill materia gineer .
additional mat ork area from m num .
ndard sp portatio f the supply a e supplied by nform to can r the pipe join corrugated s r the pipe join shall conform l pvc pipe sh ed pvc pipe s all conform to ipe and fitting nds bends as i ts of the adjoi s erials shall co nstallation ins al shall be s terials are req m a source an ecificati on and inf municipal and installatio the contracto ncsaanum ts shall be a g steel pipe as ts shall be a g to cancsa hall conform t shall conform astm fnum gs shall confo indicated in ning pipe .
onform to the structions .
elected mate quired for bac nd of a type a ions frastruc on of storm se or .
num class numd geotextile con specified by c geotextile con bnum .
to cancsa to cancsa andor fnum .
orm to canc the contrac e limits estab erial from th ckfilling the c approved by t cture ewer pipe .
d. nforming to num cancsagnum nforming to num bnum ast abnum and csabnum .
ct documents blished in num he excavation contractor sha the engineer num type n num .
num type n tm dnum an astm fnum .
s shall confo num or as det n as approv all import mate r and in accor item num page num num .
num. ndor astm orm to the ailed in the ved by the erials to the rdance with sto pag num num num num orm sewer ge num num submit .num the certi doc .num the and prop .num sub num const num .num gen .num .num .num .num .num num .num exca .num .num .num .num d r pipe ttals contractor s ification that th cuments .
contractor sh pipe zone m posed .
mittals are req ruction neral the contract specifically di the engineer selected loca the contract grades for the the contracto the contract work is antici avation trench excav the contract d the contract bracing and u the contract to the proper .num any dam contracto .num paved dr are show identified the contract disturb the su departme shall submit i he materials s hall notify the materials at le quired in acco tor shall carry rected by the r shall provide tions or as ma tor shall be re e work as sho or shall sched or shall notify ipated .
vation for pipe documents an tor shall be re underpinning n tor shall inso rty rightsofw mage resulting or at herhis o riveways culv wn on the plan as part of this tor shall neatl urface beyond sta ent of tra municip n advance of supplied meet engineer in w east num days ordance with a y out the wo engineer .
e control point ay be required esponsible for own on the pla dule all work t the engineer e laying shall b nd standard d esponsible for necessary to c ofar as is prac way or easem g from the w own expense verts hedges ns and the c s item .
ly cut pavem the limits of t andard s ansporta pal f the commen t the specified writing for app s in advance any crossrefe rk as indicate s in the field to d. the layout an ans .
to minimize int at least num ho be carried out drawing num r the design a complete the w ctical confine ments provided work on adja with reasona lawns etc .
w contractor sha ent in a straig he excavation specifica ation and ncement of th d requirement proval of the s of obtaining erenced item f ed in the con to provide vert nd maintenanc terruptions to ours before in t in accordanc num. and constructi work .
e the operatio d by the own acent property able promptne which are likel all make the r ght line so th n. ations d infrast he work the ts as detailed sources of su material from forming part o ntract docum tical and horiz ce of control f existing servi nspection of an ce with the lim ion of all temp ons and stora er for the wo y shall be re ss .
y to be affecte repairs to the hat the excav tructure item num january num manufacturer in the contra upply of backf m the source f this item .
ents andor a zontal control for all lines an ces .
ny phase of th mits indicated porary shorin age of produc ork .
epaired by th ed by the wo affected area vation does n e num num rs act fill s as at nd he in g ts he rk as ot depa stor janua num num artment m sewer p ary num num .num .num .num all sto eng .num the in a .num the of t .num .num .num .num .num the with .num the ope .num if ove acc .num ro item .num pipe zo .num pip with .num pip .num all mm stan of trans ipe the contrac damage to excavation a the paveme other materia ckpiled mater gineer .
e contractor s a manner not d e contractor m the new pipe a the contrac basins and approved for any pipe de owner and t undamaged .
.num if the pi enginee all pipe rem maintenance all unsalvag and shall be e contractor s hout the prior e contractor s eration withou overexcavatio erexcavation cordance with ck encounter m num. one material pe zone mater h the pipe ma pe zone mater pipe zone ma m in thickness ndard sp portatio ctor shall be the paveme and for the rep ent shall be ex als shall be e rial shall be re shall dispose o detrimental to may be requir alignment .
ctor shall not shall verify th r removal .
etermined to b the contractor .
pe is damage er the contrac moved and sa e depot .
geable pipe an disposed of o shall not exca approval of th shall not leav ut prior approv on occurs and shall fill t item num and red within the rial shall be pla nufacturers in rial shall not be aterial shall be and compact ecificati on and inf municipal responsible a ent and othe pair or otherwi xcavated sepa excavated by eused to back of water result o public and pr red to excavat ify the engin hat the existi be salvageabl r shall take al ed as a result ctor shall be re alvaged from ndor catch b outside the wo avate more th he engineer .
ve open more val of the eng the contract the overexca d compacted t limits of the aced as indica nstructions .
e placed in tre e placed in ac ted to a minim ions frastruc at hisher ow er surfaces b ise restoration arately .
material type kfill the excav ting from the w rivate property te existing pip eer prior to b ng pipe and le by the eng l precaution to t of the contr esponsible to the work sha basins shall b ork site .
han num metres e than num met ineer .
tor shall at avation with an to num of the excavation s ated on stand enches having ccordance with mum of num of cture wn expense f beyond the d n of the areas e and stockpi vation to subg work in accor y. pe andor catc breaking into catch basins gineer shall re o preserve the ractors action replace the p all be transpo ecome the pr s in advance tres of trench t herhis ow n approved b maximum dry hall be excav dard drawing g soft and uns h item num in f its maximum for all remova designated lim affected .
iled separatel grade as dire rdance with ite ch basins in existing pipe s are out of s emain the pro e pipe section ns as determ ipe .
orted to the n roperty of the of installation h at the end o wn expense backfill materia y density .
vated in acco num and in stable bottom lifts of not mo m dry density .
item num page num al of andor mits of the ly .
selected ected by the em num and the location e and catch service and operty of the ns intact and mined by the nearest dti e contractor operations of any days repair the al placed in rdance with accordance conditions .
ore than num sto pag num num num num num orm sewer ge num num .num .num .num num .num pipe .num num .num join .num .num .num num .num bac .num .num .num .num num .num deto .num d r pipe compaction e or cause mov the contrac continuous u all placement on both sides e laying all pipe shall accordance w .num in all cas concrete .num connecti secure fit .num preca nts joints for con .num joints fo minimum of num mm gaskets shal joints shall b kfilling backfill mate subgrade as documents .
all backfill m num mm in th excavated m the contracto stockpiled m backfill as d shall be dispo ours detours requ departme equipment for vement of the ctor shall sha uniform bearin t of pipe zone s at the same t be installed o with num. ses the install and pvc pipe ons between t. ast inserts sha ncrete and me r concrete an m of num mm o m at the crow l be used in jo be maintained erial shall be s indicated on material shall hickness and material suitab or as directed material not determined by osed of outsid ired for the w sta ent of tra municip r pipe bedding pipes due to i ape the pipe g surface for t e material sha time .
on a prepared ation shall pro e. catch basins all be accepta tal pipe storm nd metal pipe on each side wn of the pipe .
oints for plastic d free of mud e placed from n the standar be placed in compacted to ble for and su d by the engin reused per y the enginee de the work s work shall be c andard s ansporta pal g shall be size impact andor bed true to the barrel of th all be carried o d bed as indic oceed upgrad s and pipe s able for pvc c m sewers shall e shall be w of the joint an c pipe .
silt gravel an m the top of rd drawing num n accordance o a minimum urplus to back neer .
num an er shall beco site .
arried out in a specifica ation and ed so as not t r vibration .
o grade and he pipe .
out such that cated on stan de with the b shall be morta connections .
be gasketfre wrapped with nd the geotex nd other forei the pipe zo num andor a with item num of num of its kfilling shall b nd excavated ome the prop accordance wi ations d infrast to cause dam the grade s the pipe is ba ndard drawin bell ends plac ared to provid ee .
type nnum g xtile shall over ign materials .
ne material t as indicated i num in lifts of maximum dry be placed or d material no perty of the c ith item num .
tructure item num january num age to the pip shall provide ackfilled equal g num and ed upgrade fo de a tight an geotextile for rlap a minimu .
to the define in the contra not more tha y density .
disposed of b ot suitable fo contractor an e num num pe a lly in or nd a m ed ct an by or nd depa stor janua num num artment m sewer p ary num measure .num the qu supplied .num the me starting interme basis of .num paymen type of .num the ow work s .num par stan of trans ipe ment for p uantity to be m d and installed easurement s and ending ediate precast payment nt for work u pipe as ident wner shall mak site .
rtial payment s ndard sp portatio payment measured for p d in accordan hall be taken at the centre concrete stru nder this item tified under the ke partial paym shall be made ecificati on and inf municipal payment shall ce with this ite continuously of a precast uctures and fit m shall include e contract .
ment in accor e for specialize ions frastruc be the numbe em .
from end to t structure if ttings .
e a separate rdance with num ed storm sewe cture er of linear me end along th any and inc unit price for num for storm er pipe stored etres of storm he centreline cluding in the r each specifie m sewer pipe s d at the supplie item num page num m sewer pipe of the pipe e length any ed size and stored at the ers yard .
depa preca janua num num num num artment ast catch ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num all mate .num pipe zo .num backfill .num if a wo item submitta .num the co manufa in the c .num the co basins .num sta .num ge .num len .num join .num loc .num con .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the co bracing .num the co .num the he in the w .num the co num st of trans basin tion em consists of ls erials shall be erials shall co one materials material sha additional mat ork area from m num .
als ontractor shall acturers certif contract docu ontractor shall containing bu ation of catch b neral layout s ngth and weig nt details cation of reinfo ncrete design tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shal and underpin ontractor shal eight of the pr work for each ontractor shal and all units s tandard portatio f the supply an e supplied by onform to csa shall conform all be selected terials are req m a source an l submit upon ication that th ments .
l submit in ac ut not limited to basin dti co howing catch ght mass of in orcing steel in strength age red in accorda all carry out t by the engine ll be respons nning necessa l schedule all recast catch b h catch basin l be responsi shall be cons d specific on and inf municipal nd installation the contracto a anum as m to the limits d material from quired for bac nd of a type a n request in e materials su ccordance wit o the followin ontract numbe basin and ap ndividual sect ncluding addit e of test and s ance with any the work as er .
sible for the d ary to complet work so as t basins the fin shall be as in ible to constr tructed plumb cations frastruc n of precast ca or .
stm cnum an s established m the excava ckfilling the c approved by t advance of t upplied meet th item num s ng information er and descript ppurtenances tions tional reinforce hipping streng crossreferen indicated in design and c te the work .
to minimize in nal grade of t ndicated in th ruct all units i b and true to cture atch basins .
dor astm c in num. tion as appro contractor sha the engineer the commenc the specified shop drawing tion ement around gth .
nced item form the contrac construction o nterruptions to the frame and he contract d n accordance alignment an cnumm .
oved by the e all import mate r and in accor cement of the requirements gs for each pr d large openin ming part of th ct documents of all tempora o existing ser d grate and t ocuments .
e with standa d grade .
item num page num engineer .
erials to the rdance with e work the s as detailed recast catch ngs and is item .
s andor as ary shoring rvices .
the location ard drawing pr pag num num num ecast cat ge num num .num all j cem .num the prog .num hole eng .num .num .num heig and .num .num exc requ draw num measu .num the basi .num num basis o .num pay prec .num the ch basin joints are to ment or cemen contractor gresses .
es shall be cu ineer .
holes shall n connecting p holes may b shall be the r to make the p ght adjustmen or metal or c precast rise num mm .
avation pipe uired shall b wing num .
rement fo quantity to b in exclusive o the height o concrete bas of payment ment for wor cast catch bas owner shall m departm be made wa nt mortar .
shall mainta ut in the preca not be more t ipe .
be made at th responsibility proper conne nts to meet th concrete grad r sections s zone materia be carried ou or payment be measured of frames and of individual c se to the unde t rk under this i sin as identifie make partial p sta ment of tr municip atertight usin ain the interi ast sections b than num mm he time of the of the contra ctions .
he required ele e rings as pe shall be use al backfilling ut in accorda t for payment d grates supp catch basins s erside of the f item shall inc ed under the c payment for pr andard s ransport pal ng rubber ring or of the un by means of d greater in dia e manufactur actor to make evation shall r standard dr d if the adj around the c ance with num shall be the n plied and insta shall be meas frame or grate clude a separa contract .
recast catch b specifica tation an gs bituminou nit in a clea drilling or othe ameter than t ring of the pr e any adjustm only be made rawing num justment to catch basin i num and as number of lin alled in accor sured from th e seat .
ate unit price basins in acco ations nd infras us compound an condition er methods ap the outside d recast section ments in the f e with precas .
be made is nstallation an indicated on ear metres of rdance with th he underside e for each siz ordance with num tructur item num january num d epoxy res as the wo pproved by th diameter of th ns however field necessa st riser section s greater tha nd any detou the standar f precast catc his item .
of the preca e diameter num .
re num num in rk he he it ry ns an rs rd ch st of depa sluic janua num num num num artment ce box ary num descript .num this ite the stor material .num all mate .num the slu standa precut .num the dra up to num .num pipe zo .num backfill .num if a wo item submitta .num the co manufa in the c .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the slu .num the dra .num the dra placed to prov .num excava in acco .num for ins at num m stan of trans tion em consists o rm sewer pipe ls erials shall be uice box shall ard drawing num opening for t ain pipe shall .num m in length one materials material sha additional mat ork area from m num .
als ontractor shal acturers certif contract docu tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ice box and d ain pipe shall ain pipe from flush with the ide a tight and ation pipe zon ordance with num tallations beh mm below the ndard sp portatio of the supply e andor catc e supplied by be precast c num comple the drain pipe be num mm d h. shall conform all be selected terials are req m a source an l submit upo ication that th ments .
red in accorda all carry out t by the engine drain pipe shal be laid on a p m the sluice b e inside surfa d secure fit .
ne material b num. hind curb and surrounding ecificati on and inf municipal and installati ch basin .
the contracto concrete fabric ete with drain e. diameter pvc m to the limits d material from quired for bac nd of a type a on request in e materials su ance with any the work as er .
ll be construct prepared bed box shall be c ce of the stru backfilling aro d gutter the s ground level ions frastruc ion of a storm or .
cated and su n pipe steel f c pipe meetin s established m the excava ckfilling the c approved by t advance of upplied meet crossreferen indicated in ted as indicate d. connected to ucture and se ound the sluic sluice box sha as per stand cture m sewer sluic pplied to the frame a squa ng the require in num. tion as appro contractor sha the engineer the commenc the specified nced item form the contrac ed on standar the drainage ecured with m ce box installa all be installe ard drawing num ce box and d dimensions in are cast iron g ments of drnum oved by the e all import mate r and in accor cement of the requirements ming part of th ct documents rd drawing num e structure w mortar or a rub ation shall be ed with the to num .
item num page num rain pipe to ndicated on grate and a num typically engineer .
erials to the rdance with e work the s as detailed is item .
s andor as num. with the end bber gasket carried out p grade set slu pag num num num uice box ge num num .num .num for belo .num num measu .num the insta num basis o .num pay the area def be sloped do installations ow the lowest the area def the sluice bo at a constant rement fo quantity to b alled in accord of payment ment for wor departm fined by exte own from the s in the gutter point of the g fined by exten x shall be slo t slope .
or payment be measured dance with thi t rk under this i sta ment of tr municip nding a dista surrounding g the sluice bo gutter as per s nding a dista oped down fro t for payment s item .
tem shall be andard s ransport pal ance of num m grade to the s ox shall be in standard dra nce of num m om the surrou shall be the at the unit pr specifica tation an mm from all s sluice box top nstalled with t awing num. mm from all si unding grade number of sl rice .
ations nd infras sides of the s p grade at a co the top grade ides excludin e to the sluice uice box units tructur item num january num sluice box sha onstant slope e set at num m ng curbside o e box top grad s supplied an re num num all e. m of de nd depa fram janua num num num num num num artment me with gra ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num frame drawing submitta .num the co manufa on the c constru .num the co specific .num frames .num frames .num grates elevatio measure .num the qu or cove basis of .num paymen grate or stan of trans ate or cove tion em consists of ls erials shall be with grat gs num and als ontractor shal acturers certif contract docu ction ontractor sha cally directed b s shall be rigid s shall be plac or covers sh on .
ment for p uantity to be m ers supplied a payment nt for work u r cover as ide ndard sp portatio er f the supply an e supplied by t e or cove num respec l submit upo ication that th uments .
all carry out t by the engine dly fitted onto ced as shown hall be set to payment measured for and installed i nder this item entified under ecificati on and inf municipal nd installation the contracto er shall b ctively .
on request in e materials su the work as er .
the drainage on standard o a tolerance payment sha n accordance m shall include the contract .
ions frastruc n of a catch ba or .
e supplied advance of upplied meet indicated in structure .
drawing num e of num mm all be the num e with this item e a separate cture asin frame wit in accord the commenc the specified the contrac num. to num mm o mber of catch m. unit price for th grate or cov dance with cement of the requirements ct documents of the adjace basin frames r each type of item num page num ver .
standard e work the s as detailed s andor as ent finished with grates f frame with depa adjus janua num num num num num num artment stment of ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num all adj polyeth submitta .num the co manufa on the c constru .num the co specific .num existing grade r .num existing .num the he .num the gra elevatio measure .num the qu adjuste basis of .num payme stan of trans catch bas tion em covers the ls erials shall be usting rings ylene conform als ontractor shal acturers certif contract docu ction ontractor sha cally directed b g catch basins ings andor pr g cast iron fram ight of adjustm ates or cover on .
ment for p uantity to be m d in accordan payment nt for work un ndard sp portatio sins and ma adjustment o e supplied by t supplied sh ming to astm l submit upo ication that th uments .
all carry out t by the engine s and manhol recast riser se mes shall be ments require rs shall be se payment measured for nce with this it nder this item ecificati on and inf anholes municipal of catch basins the contracto hall be conc m dnum or me on request in e materials su the work as er .
es shall be ad ections .
removed and d shall be set et to a toleran payment sha tem .
shall be at th ions frastruc s and manhol or .
crete conform etal .
advance of upplied meet indicated in djusted to suit cleaned and t out in the co nce of num mm all be the num he unit price .
cture les to the fina ming to ast the commenc the specified the contrac t the final grad d prepared for ontract docum m to num mm mber of catch l specified gra tm cnum h cement of the requirements ct documents de and cross r reuse in the ments .
of the adjace basins ando item num page num ade .
igh density e work the s as detailed s andor as slope using e work .
ent finished or manholes depa relo janua num num num num artment cation of ary num descript .num this ite material .num existing .num all mate .num pipe zo manufa .num backfill .num if a wo item submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the co .num the .num if th eng .num excava shall be .num all othe .num drain p connec .num drain p secured .num reloca .num wall he addition stan of trans catch bas tion em consists o ls g catch basin erials shall be one materials acturers insta material sha additional mat ork area from m num .
als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shal e contractor s he catch bas gineer the co ation and bac e carried out i er work shall pipe from the cting the catch pipe shall be d with cemen ted catch bas eights shall b n of new or re ndard sp portatio sin f the relocatio shall be reus e supplied by s shall confo allation instruc all be selected terials are req m a source an red in accorda all carry out t by the engine l relocate the shall take all p in is damage ontractor shall ckfilling of a t in accordance be carried ou e existing ca h basin and th e reconnected t mortar .
sins shall be a e adjusted so eplacement g ecificati on and inf municipal on of catch ba sed .
the contracto orm to the li ctions .
d material fro quired for bac nd of a type a ance with any the work as er .
existing struc precaution to p ed as a result be responsib trench from t e with num. ut in accordan atch basin sh he storm sew d to the relo adjusted to su olely by the re rade rings an ions frastruc asin .
or .
imits establis m the excava ckfilling the c approved by t crossreferen indicated in cture such tha preserve the c t of the contr ble to replace t the catch bas nce with num hall be reloca wer system .
ocated catch uit the specifie removal of ex ndor precast r cture shed in num ation as appr contractor sha the engineer nced item form the contrac at it may be re catch basin int ractors action the catch bas sin location to num. ated by addi basin and t ed final grade xisting spacer riser sections num or as deta roved by the e all import mate r and in accor ming part of th ct documents eused in the w tact and unda ns as determ in .
o the relocati tion or remo the connectio e. r materials an s. item num page num ailed in the engineer .
erials to the rdance with is item .
s andor as work .
maged .
mined by the ion position oval of pipe on shall be ndor by the re pag num num location o ge num num measu .num the acco num basis o .num pay of catch b rement fo quantity to ordance with of payment ment for wor departm basins or payment be measured this item .
t rk under this i sta ment of tr municip t d for paymen tem shall be andard s ransport pal nt shall be th at the unit pr specifica tation an he number of rice .
ations nd infras f catch basin tructur item num january num ns relocated re num num in depa pavin janua num num num num num num artment ng catch b ary num descript .num this ite constru material .num all mate .num aggreg .num asphalt submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num aggreg .num the co basin i .num the ap measure .num the q constru basis of .num payme stan of trans basin apro tion em consists o ction of an ap ls erials shall be ate base sha t concrete c a als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b gate base sha ontractor sha n accordance ron shall be s ment for p uantity to be ucted in accor payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio n of the supply a pron around a supplied by t ll meet the req and d shall m red in accorda all carry out t by the engine all be placed a all place asph e with num o shaped as sho payment e measured rdance with th nder this item ecificati on and inf municipal and placemen catch basin g he contractor quirements of eet the requir ance with any the work as er .
and compacte halt concrete or num. own on stand for paymen his item .
m shall be at t ions frastruc nt of aggrega grate .
r. f num. rements of num crossreferen indicated in ed in accorda e over the p dard drawing nt shall be t the unit price cture ate base and num and num nced item form the contrac ance with num prepared area num. the number e. asphalt conc num. ming part of th ct documents num. a surrounding of catch ba item num page num crete for the is item .
s andor as g the catch asin aprons depa pipe z janua num num num num artment zone mate ary num descript .num this ite material .num pipe zo of shale the g astm c submitta .num the co the ma materia constru .num the co specific stan of trans rial tion em consists o ls one material s e clay friable rading limits cnum and as ast sieve num num num num num num num num num num notes num num als ontractor shal terial to the w al .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ndard sp portatio f the supply o shall be clean e materials o s indicated stm cnum .
grad tm e size mm mm mm mm mm mm num mm mm µm µm use type a m for all other p use type b f other pipe num l submit to the work site the all carry out t by the engine ecificati on and inf municipal of pipe zone m n hard soun organic matter in table ta dation limits coarse ma percen see num num num num num num num num num material for p pipe larger tha for pvc pipe num mm or sma e engineer fo e proposed s the work as er .
ions frastruc material for al nd durable cr r and other d num wh able num s for pipe zo aterial type nt passing e note num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num pvc pipe larg an num mm in num mm or s aller in diame or approval a source of sup indicated in cture l underground rushed or pit eleterious su hen tested ne materials a fine pe er than num m n diameter .
smaller in diam eter .
t least num day pply and certif the contrac d services .
run gravel or bstances and in accord s material typ ercent passin see note num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num mm in diamete meter and for ys prior to the fication of the ct documents item num page num r stone free d shall meet ance with pe b g er and r all e delivery of e pipe zone s andor as pip pag num num pe zone ma ge num num measu .num the supp num basis o .num pay mate aterial rement fo quantity to b plied in accor of payment ment for wor erial as identi departm or payment be measured rdance with th t rk under this i ified under the sta ment of tr municip t for payment his item .
item shall inc e contract .
andard s ransport pal shall be the clude a separa specifica tation an number of to ate unit price ations nd infras onnes of pipe e for each typ tructur item num january num e zone materi pe of pipe zon re num num al ne depa curb janua num num num num artment b and gutte ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num concre .num joint fill cut to fit .num alte .num pigmen .num aggreg submitta .num submitt part of t constru .num the co specific .num the en location .num the co in the c .num excava shown .num the not .num materia determi to the p .num excava along th .num exc by stan of trans er tion m consists of ls erials shall be te shall be su ler shall consi t the required ernate materia nted membran ate base sha als tals are requir this item .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ngineer shall p ns or as may b ontractor shall contract docu ation for the fo in the contrac e contractor s t disturb the su al disturbed in ined by a test placement of th ated material m he limits of the cavated mate the engineer ndard spe portatio f the construct supplied by t pplied in acco ist of an appro cross section als shall be su ne curing com ll meet the req red in accorda all carry out t by the engine provide contro be required .
be responsib ments .
undation prep ct documents shall neatly cu urface beyond the bottom o t strip or other he backfill .
may be used e work subjec erial suitable .
ecificati on and inf municipal tion of portlan he contractor ordance with num oved num mm t ns of the joints ubmitted to the pounds shall quirements of ance with num the work as er .
ol points in the ble for the layo paration for th andor on sta ut the existing d the limits of e of the excavat r standard ind as backfill be ct to the appro for and surp ons frastruc d cement con r. num and cs thick asphalt i s formed .
e engineer for conform to as f num .
.num and with an indicated in e field for vert out for all lines e curb and gu andard drawin g pavement in excavation .
tion shall be c dustry method ehind and un oval of the eng lus to backfil cture ncrete curb an sa anum expo mpregnated f r approval .
stm cnum .
ny other cross the contrac tical and horiz s and grades utter shall be t ng num. n a straight lin compacted to ds and approv der the new gineer .
ling shall be nd gutter .
osure class c fibreboard of g sreferenced it ct documents zontal control for the work a to the depth a ne so that the the maximum ved by the en concrete curb disposed of item num page num num. good quality tem forming s andor as at selected as indicated and width as e work does m density as ngineer prior b and gutter as directed cu pag num rb and gu ge num num .num .num agg acco .num .num curb doc .num .num con .num .num .num curb and .num .num .num .num .num d tter excavated m the property regate base ordance with num water shall placement so b and gutter cuments ando joint layout a drawings num .num control jo to control .num isolation movemen .num construc the place .num dummy j ncrete shall be the contract concrete .
concrete plac so that a mini b and gutter s or where loca curb and gut curvatures i intersections constructed a where the cu prefabricated an isolation jo .num spacing other box curb and gu spaced as in joints shall b and num hours departme material not s of the contra shall be plac num. be uniformly o as to thorou shall be cons or standard dr and joint deta num and num oints are partia l the location o joints are fu nt .
ction joints are ement of concr oints are toole e placed in acc or shall notify ced in the wo imum of voids shall be cast in al conditions d tter shall be fo in the alignm and transitio as indicated in urb and gutte d joint filler sh oint as indica of the contro xouts .
utter shall hav dicated on st be cut before s after placem sta ent of tra municip uitable for ba ctor and shal ced as indica applied to t ughly wet the structed in ac rawings num ails shall be la num. al depth and a of drying shrin ull depth and e full depth an rete is interrup ed partial dept cordance with the engineer ork shall be co s remain in the n place in sec dictate otherwi ormed and pl ment of the ons for drivew n the contrac er are formed hall be placed ted in the sta ol joints shou ve a control jo tandard draw e uncontrolled ment and the andard s ansporta pal ackfill as dete l be disposed ated on stand he aggregate aggregate ba ccordance wit num and num. aid out and c are used to cr nkage cracks .
d are used nd are used at pted by more t th joints and a num. at least num ho onsolidated to e placed conc ctions of num m in ise .
aced monolith curb and g ways crossw ct documents against a bu between the andard drawin uld vary to c oint formed by wing num. d shrinkage ta timing shall b specifica ation and ermined by t d of outside th dard drawing e base imme ase surface w th the dimens constructed in reate a plane to prevent c t the end of a than num minut are positioned ours prior to th o ensure unifo crete .
n length exce hically withou gutter for pa walks and oth s andor direct uilding or othe e curb and the ng num. oincide with y cutting a slo akes place w be the respon ations d infrast the engineer he work site .
gs num and ediately ahea without the po sions shown i n accordance of weakness cracking due a days constr tes .
for aesthetics he planned pla rmity of the co ept in slipform ut kinks .
rking areas er transition ted by the en er fixed struc e adjacent str the centre o ot to a depth which can oc nsibility of the tructure item num january num shall becom num and ad of concret ooling of wate in the contra with standar in the concret to differenti ruction or whe s. acement of an oncrete densi ming operation and at stree areas shall b ngineer .
cture a num m ructure to for of manholes o of num mm an ccur between contractor .
e num num me in te er .
act rd te al en ny ty s et be m m or nd num depa curb janua num num num num artment b and gutte ary num .num metal f .num the be do .num for per .num for of a .num top wo .num slipform .num slip dra .num .num finishin .num fin me .num pig app .num .num voi con .num edg pla .num the com .num repair .num cu rep .num if t ma adj stan of trans er forms e contractor securely po cuments .
rmwork shall rmit the ready rms shall rem any disturban p surfaces of oden or magn ming pform machin awings num after slipform ng curing an ished surface ethod subject gmented mem proval of the e pigmented m after the fina .num one ap applicati ids or surfac ncrete load an ges of concre stic and shall e contractor mpletion and and replace rb and gutte placed as dire the repair an aterials adjace ustments at h ndard spe portatio shall erect al ositioned to t be thorough y release of th main in place f nce to the plac the curb and nesium float f nes must be num and num ming joints sh d protection es of the cur t to the approv mbrane curing engineer .
membrane cu al finishing .
pplication sha ion .
ce irregulariti nd a float sha ete shall be ro leave a true shall be re acceptance o ment r which does ected by the e nd replaceme ent to the cu hisher own ex ecificati on and inf municipal ll forms to the the required ly coated wit he forms and for a minimum ced and partia d gutter shall for finish .
e capable of num. hall be saw c rb and gutter val of the eng g compounds ring compoun all be placed ies shall be all be used on ounded with a smooth surfa sponsible for of the work .
s not conform engineer .
ent results in urb and gutte xpense and to ons frastruc e full depth o lines and g th a commerc will not disco m of num hours ally set concr be struck w placing the cut insert bars r shall be rou gineer .
s may be use nds shall be a d in a direc repaired us the repaired an approved ace .
r the mainte m to the spe n the need er the contra o the satisfac cture of the curb an grade as ind cial quality fo olour the conc after concret rete exists .
with a straight concrete as s shall not be ughened by b ed upon requ applied in two ction perpend sing concrete area prior to edging tool w enance of the ecifications s for repairs a actor shall ca ction of the en nd gutter and dicated in th orm coating crete .
te is placed if edge and flo indicated o e permitted .
brooming ligh uest subject applications i dicular to th e grout from texturing .
while the con e curb and shall be repa and adjustme arry out the r ngineer .
item num page num these shall he contract which shall f the danger oated with a n standard htly or other to the prior immediately he previous the same crete is still gutter until aired andor ents to the repairs and cu pag num num num rb and gu ge num num .num num measu .num the gutt num basis o .num pay gutt d tter materials rem outside the w rement fo quantity to er constructe of payment ment for wor er as identifie departme moved shall b work site .
or payment be measured d in accordan t rk under this ed under the sta ent of tra municip become the t d for paymen nce with this i item shall inc contract .
andard s ansporta pal property of th nt shall be th tem .
clude a separ specifica ation and he contracto he number of rate unit pric ations d infrast or and shall b f linear metre ce for each ty tructure item num january num be disposed o es of curb an pe of curb an e num num of nd nd depa conc janua num num num num artment crete sidew ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num concre .num the join quality c .num alte .num pigmen .num aggreg submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the en location .num the co in the c .num excava shown .num materia determi enginee .num excava limits of .num exc co .num exc the stan of trans walk tion m consists of ls erials shall be te shall be su nt filler shall c cut to fit the re ernate materia nted membran ate base sha als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ngineer shall p ns or as may b ontractor shall contract docu ation for the f in the contrac al disturbed in ined by a tes er prior to the ated material m f the work sub cavated mate ntractor as di cavated mate e property of t ndard sp portatio f the construct supplied by t pplied in acco consist of an equired cross als shall be su ne curing com ll meet the req red in accorda all carry out t by the engine provide contro be required .
be responsib ments .
foundation pre ct documents the bottom o st strip or oth placement of may be used a bject to the ap erial suitable rected by the erial not suita he contracto ecificati on and inf municipal tion of portlan he contractor ordance with num approved num sections of th ubmitted to the pounds shall quirements of ance with any the work as er .
ol points in the ble for the layo eparation for andor on sta of the excavat her standard f the backfill .
as backfill beh pproval of the e for and sur e engineer .
able for backf r and shall be ions frastruc d cement con r. num and cs num mm thick as he joints forme e engineer for conform to as f num. crossreferen indicated in e field for vert out for all lines the sidewalk andard drawin tion shall be c industry met hind and unde engineer .
rplus to back fill as determ e disposed of cture ncrete sidewa sa anum expo sphalt impregn ed .
r approval .
stm cnum .
nced item form the contrac rtical and horiz s and grades k shall be to ng num. compacted to thods and sh er the new con kfilling shall mined by the f outside the w alk .
osure class c nated fibreboa ming part of th ct documents zontal control for the work a the depth an the maximum hall be appro ncrete sidewa be disposed engineer sh work site .
item num page num num. ard of good is item .
s andor as at selected as indicated nd width as m density as oved by the alk along the d of by the hall become co pag num oncrete sid ge num num .num agg num .num .num a cr be to con .num con doc .num .num con .num .num .num con and .num .num .num .num d dewalk regate base s .num .
water shall placement so ross slope of owards the cu ntractor is to ad ncrete sidewa cuments ando joint layout a and num .
.num control jo to control .num isolation movemen .num construc the place .num dummy j ncrete shall be the contract any concrete concrete pla density so th ncrete sidewa or where loca sidewalk sha curvatures i intersections constructed a where the co mm prefabric form an isola .num spacing other box concrete sid and spaced a departme shall be place be uniformly o as to thorou num mm per m urb however l dvise the eng lk shall be co or standard dr and joint detail oints are partia l the location o joints are fu nt .
ction joints are ement of concr oints are toole e placed in acc tor shall notify e. aced in the w at a minimum lk shall be cas al conditions d all be formed n the alignm and depress as indicated in oncrete sidew cated joint fille ation joint as in of the contro xouts .
dewalk shall h as indicated o sta ent of tra municip ed as indicate applied to t ughly wet the metre shall be ocal condition ineer if this sl onstructed in a rawing num. ls shall be con al depth and a of drying shrin ull depth and e full depth an rete is interrup ed partial dept cordance with y the enginee work shall be m of voids sha stinplace in num dictate otherwi and placed in ment of the c sions for drive n the contrac walk is forme er shall be pla ndicated in th ol joints shou have a contro on standard d andard s ansporta pal ed on standar he aggregate aggregate ba formed and th ns may result lope condition accordance w nstructed in a are used to cr nkage cracks .
d are used nd are used at pted by more t th joints and a num. er at least num e consolidate all remain in th num m sections i ise .
n a single ope concrete sid eways crossw ct documents d adjacent to aced between he standard d uld vary to c ol joint forme drawings num specifica ation and rd drawing num e base imme ase surface w he direction o in the necess n must be alte with the dimen accordance wi reate a plane to prevent c t the end of a than num minut are positioned hours prior t ed to ensure he placed con in length exce eration .
ewalk for pa walks and oth s andor as dir o a building o n the curb an drawing num oincide with ed by cutting num and num ations d infrast num and in ac ediately ahea without the po of the slope sh sity to vary this red .
nsions shown th standard d of weakness cracking due a days constr tes .
for aesthetics to the planned uniformity o ncrete .
ept in slipform arking areas her transition rected by the r other fixed nd the adjace num. the centre o a slot to a de num .
tructure item num january num ccordance wit ad of concret ooling of wate hall in genera s slope and th in the contra drawings num in the concret to differenti ruction or whe s. d placement o of the concret ming operation and at stree areas shall b engineer .
structure a num nt structure t of manholes o epth of num m e num num th te er .
al he act num te al en of te s et be num to or m depa conc janua num .
num num num artment crete sidew ary num num .num du cut .num eve .num joi and .num metal f .num the be .num for per .num for of a .num slipform .num slip dra .num .num finishin .num the wo .num fin me .num pig app .num .num voi con .num a m eac too .num the com stan of trans walk mmy joints sh tting a slot in t ery fourth join nts shall be c d num hours aft forms e contractor s securely posit rmwork shall rmit the ready rms shall rem any disturban ming pform machin awing num .
after slipform ng curing an e top surface oden or magn ished surface ethod subject gmented mem proval of the e pigmented m after the fina .num one ap applicati ids or surfac ncrete load an margin of num ch slab and t ol .
e contractor mpletion and ndard sp portatio hall be formed the slab num m nt shall be to t cut before un ter placement shall erect all tioned to the r be thorough y release of th main in place f nce to the plac nes must be ming the join d protection e of the sidew nesium float f es of the conc t to the approv mbrane curing engineer .
membrane cu al finishing .
pplication sha ion .
ce irregulariti nd a float sha mm in width the edges sh shall be res acceptance o ecificati on and inf municipal d in concrete mm deep with the full depth ncontrolled sh t and the tim forms to the required lines ly coated wit he forms and for a minimum ced and partia capable of p ts shall be sa walk shall be for finish .
crete sidewa val of the eng g compounds ring compoun all be placed ies shall be all be used on h shall be def hall be rounde sponsible for of the work .
ions frastruc e at intervals e a tbar .
of the concre hrinkage take ming shall be t full depth of t and grade .
th a commerc will not disco m of num hours ally set concr lacing the co aw cut insert e struck wit alk shall be ro gineer .
s may be use nds shall be a d in a direc repaired us the repaired fined and fini ed to a radiu the mainten cture equal to the w ete .
es place whic the responsib the concrete s cial quality fo olour the conc after concret rete exists .
oncrete as ind bars shall no h a straight e oughened by ed upon requ applied in two ction perpend sing concrete area prior to ished smooth us of num mm w ance of the width of the s ch can occur ility of the co sidewalk and orm coating crete .
te is placed if dicated on th ot be permitted edge and flo brooming ligh uest subject applications i dicular to th e grout from texturing .
h along the p with an appro concrete sid item num page num sidewalk by r between num ontractor .
these shall which shall f the danger he standard d. ated with a htly or other to the prior mmediately he previous the same perimeter of oved edging dewalk until co pag num num num oncrete sid ge num num .num rep .num .num num measu .num the cons .num mea num pole num basis o .num pay d dewalk pair and repla concrete sid replaced as d if the repair materials ad adjustments .num materials outside t rement fo quantity to structed in ac asurements s num and no ded es or other sim of payment ment for wor departme acement dewalk which directed by th r and replace djacent to th at hisher ow s removed sh he work site or payment be measured ccordance wit hall be taken ductions shal milar objects .
t rk under this i sta ent of tra municip does not co he engineer .
ement results he sidewalk n expense an all become th .
t d for paymen th this item .
as the dimen ll be made fo tem shall be andard s ansporta pal onform to the s in the nee the contra nd to the satis he property of t shall be the nsion of the w r areas occup at the unit pr specifica ation and e specification ed for repair actor shall c sfaction of the f the contract e number of work as indic pied by light s rice .
ations d infrast ns shall be re rs and adjus carry out the e engineer .
tor and shall b square metre cated on sta standards ma tructure item num january num epaired ando stments to th e repairs an be disposed o es of sidewa ndard drawin anhole cover e num num or he nd of alk ng rs depa aspha janua num num num num artment alt sidewa ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num aggreg .num asphalt submitta .num the co approva .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num asphalt .num materia density by the e .num surplus the prop .num aggreg with num .num a cross genera slope a .num the co .num asphalt relative .num the co sidewa stan of trans alk tion m consists of ls erials shall be ate base sha t concrete d s als ontractor shal al by the engi tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b t sidewalk sha al disturbed in as determine engineer prior s excavated m perty of the co gate base sha num. s slope of num l be towards and the contr ontractor shal t concrete sh e density as d ontractor shal alk is protecte ndard sp portatio f the construct supplied by t ll meet to the shall conform ll submit the neer .
red in accorda all carry out t by the engine all be constru n the bottom ed by a test s r to the placem material not re ontractor and all be placed to num mm pe s the curb ho ractor is to ad l place the sid all be compac determined in l maintain ba ed from traffic ecificati on and inf municipal tion of asphalt he contractor requirements to the require asphalt conc ance with any the work as er .
ucted as show of the excava strip per num ment of the ba equired for bac shall be dispo as indicated er metre shall owever local c vise the engi dewalk using cted to a den accordance arricades or o until the heat ions frastruc t concrete sid r. of num. ements of num crete mix des crossreferen indicated in wn on standa ation shall be or other stan ackfill .
ckfill as deter osed of outsid d on standard l be placed a conditions ma ineer if this sl an asphalt sp nsity not less t with astm d ther suitable t of the aspha cture ewalk .
.num or num. sign as set o nced item form the contrac rd drawing num e compacted ndard industry rmined by the de the work s d drawing num nd the directi ay result in th lope condition preader in acc than num of t dnum .
measures to alt concrete m out in num o ming part of th ct documents num. to num of the y methods an e engineer sh site .
num and in a ion of the slo he necessity n must be alte cordance with the theoretica ensure that t mixture has di item num page num or num for is item .
s andor as e maximum nd approved hall become accordance ope shall in to vary this ered .
h num. al maximum the finished ssipated .
as pag num num phalt side ge num num measu .num the side .num mea num pole num basis o .num pay ewalk rement fo quantity to ewalk constru asurements s num and no ded es or other sim of payment ment for wor departm or payment be measured ucted in accor hall be taken ductions shal milar objects .
t rk under this i sta ment of tr municip t d for paymen rdance with th as the dimen ll be made fo tem shall be andard s ransport pal nt shall be th his item .
nsion of the w r areas occup at the unit pr specifica tation an he number of work as indic pied by light s rice .
ations nd infras f square met cated on sta standards ma tructur item num january num tres of aspha ndard drawin anhole cover re num num alt ng rs depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of cur ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num excava dispose measure .num the qu remove basis of .num payme stan of trans rb and gut tion em consists o ls dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ated curb and ed of outside ment for p uantity measu ed in accordan payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio tter f the removal all carry out t by the engine d gutter mate the work site payment ured for paym nce with this it nder this item ecificati on and inf municipal of curb and g the work as er .
rials shall be e. ment shall be tem .
m shall be at t ions frastruc gutter .
indicated in come the pro e the number the unit price cture the contrac operty of the r of linear me e. ct documents contractor a etres of curb item num page num s andor as and shall be b and gutter depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of sid ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num excava dispose measure .num the qu in acco basis of .num payme stan of trans dewalk tion em consists o ls dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ated sidewalk ed of outside ment for p uantity measu ordance with t payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio f the removal all carry out t by the engine k materials s the work site payment ured for paym his item .
nder this item ecificati on and inf municipal of sidewalk .
the work as er .
shall become e. ment shall be t m shall be at t ions frastruc indicated in e the proper the number of the unit price cture the contrac rty of the c f square metr e. ct documents contractor an res of sidewa item num page num s andor as nd shall be alk removed depa remo janua num num num num artment oval of und ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num backfill .num if a site app submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the co and sha .num the co bracing .num the co connec .num the co way or .num the the .num any con .num excava .num materia the ow .num materia the con stan of trans dergroun tion em consists o ls erials shall be material sha additional mat e from a sou propriate item als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall all verify that t ontractor shal and underpin ontractor shal ction flows into ontractor shall easements pr e contractor s owner to the y other dama ntractor at her ation shall be c als from the w ner .
als that are de ntractor and sh ndard sp portatio d services f the removal e supplied by all be selected terials are req rce and of a m. red in accorda all carry out t by the engine l notify the en hey are out of ll be respons nning found ne l ensure to t o the excavatio confine hishe rovided by the shall repair an e satisfaction o age to adjace rhis own expe carried out in a work unless ot etermined by hall be dispos ecificati on and inf s municipal of undergrou the contracto d material from quired for bac a type approv ance with any the work as er .
ngineer prior f service and a sible for the d ecessary to co the extent pra on during the er operations e owner for th nd restore the of the enginee ent property ense .
accordance w therwise deter the engineer sed of outside ions frastruc und services .
or .
m the excava ckfilling the c ved by the e crossreferen indicated in to breaking in approved for r design and c omplete the w acticable tha work .
and storage he work .
properties rig er .
resulting from with num and rmined by the r to be unsalv the work site cture tion as appro contractor sha engineer and nced item form the contrac nto the existin removal .
construction o work .
at no contents of products to ghtsofway o m the work s standard dra e engineer sh vageable shal e. oved by the en all import mate in accordan ming part of th ct documents ng undergrou of all tempora s of any sewe o the propertie r easements shall be repa awings num hall remain the l become the item num page num ngineer .
erials to the ce with the is item .
s andor as und services ary shoring er or sewer es rightsof provided by aired by the and num. e property of property of re pag num num num moval of u ge num num .num the und mate .num bac and num measu .num the serv .num if m com num basis o .num pay und undergro contractor erground ser erial and sha kfill shall be p compacted to rement fo quantity to b vices removed ore than one mbination of se of payment ment for wo erground serv departm und servic shall comp rvices with all finish the ba placed in acco o a minimum o or payment be measured d in accordanc service exists ervices shall b t ork under th vice removed sta ment of tr ces municip letely backfi an approved ackfilled area ordance with i of num of its m t for payment ce with this ite s in a given tr e treated as o his item shal d as identified andard s ransport pal ll the excav d material of a to match the tem num in lift maximum dry shall be the em .
rench the leng one unit .
ll include a d under the c specifica tation an vation result f the quality e surrounding fts of not more density .
number of lin gth shall only separate un contract .
ations nd infras ting from th matching th g grade .
e than num m near metres o y be measured nit price for tructur item num january num e removal o he surroundin m in thicknes of undergroun d once and th each type o re num num of ng ss nd he of standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num typical trench cross sections january num municipal standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num precast catch basin details january num municipal standard drawing num section aa top view frame with grate eccentric precast cover mortar around pipe both sides of c.b .
wall additional riser sections as required pipe num min a a finished grade all joints to be made watertight grade rings file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num typical catch basin excavation january num municipal standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num typical sluice box and pipe detail january num municipal standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num typical sluice box installation behind the curb and gutter january num municipal standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num typical sluice box installation into the curb and gutter january num municipal standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num typical frame with grate square january num municipal standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num typical frame with cover round january num municipal standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num paving catch basin apron january num municipal standard drawing num slope slope slope slope nummm of nummm aggregate base catch basin nummm of asphalt frame with grate num num num num a a section aa num concrete c or d file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num curb and gutter details january num municipal standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num curb and gutter details january num municipal standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num curb and gutter details january num municipal standard drawing num asphalt concrete section aa frame with grate gutter curb catch basin slope slope slope num num num num a a file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num concrete sidewalk details january num municipal standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num joint layout january num municipal standard drawing num median curbgutter wheelchair ramp typ .
median num d max .
num max .
curb or curbgutter cover num d max .
num max .
pole separate sidewalk and curbgutter sidewalk with curbgutter a b b section bb section aa isolation joint control joint dummy joint legend d sidewalk depth see dwgnum see dwg num file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num joint and isolation details january num municipal standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num asphalt sidewalk details january num municipal standard drawing num depa table janua ite num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num artment e of conte ary num m num guid num rem num guid num rem num ene num rem num cas num con num und num und num und num pow num rem num scre num rem num sign num rem num ligh num rem num med num rem num sign num rem num roa num rem num ove sta of trans ents de posts moval of guide de rail moval of guide rgyabsorbing moval of energ tinplace co ncreteencase der roadbed d derground duc derground jun wer point moval of powe ew base moval of screw n or light bas moval of sign ht standard moval of light dian flashing moval of medi n post moval of sign adside sign moval of road erhead sign s andard s portatio traff descrip e posts e rail g guide rail gyabsorbing oncrete barrie ed duct bank duct ct nction box er point w base se or light base t standard light an flashing l post dside sign structure foun pecificat on and inf fic control d ption terminal g guide rail t er system e light ndation tions frastruc devices terminal cture numbe page num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num di r of es vision num page num ta pag i ble of con ge num item num o num r num o num r num p num c num s ntents overhead sig removal of o overhead sig removal of o pavement ma construction t standard draw num num g num num g num num b num num g num num g num num c num num c num num u num num u num num u num num p num num p num num s num num t num num t num num t num num s num num a num num l num num l num num l num num l num num m num num r num num r num num r num num r num num r num num r num num r num num o num num o departm tr desc n structure .. verhead sign n verhead sign arkings traffic contro wings guide post de guide post an beam guide r guide rail st guide rail st castinplace concrete enca under roadbe underground d underground j power point d power point d screw base d ype e sign ype f sign ype g sign sign or light b angulation of s ight standard ight standard ight standard ight standard median flashin roadside sign roadside sign roadside sign roadside sign roadside sign roadside sign roadside sign overhead sign overhead sign sta ment of tr raffic contro cription n structure n ol etails d guide rail rail details tructure detai tructure detai concrete bar ased duct ba ed duct detai duct details junction box detail multiple detail single l etail or light base or light base or light base base detail b sign foundat d detail sing d wiring deta d wiring deta d anchor deta ng light deta n post anchor n details n strap seque n strap seque n strap seque n strap seque n strap seque n structure fo n structure fo andard s ransport ol devices details ils ils rrier details nk system ls detail e lights light e details so e details soi e details soil bedrock foun tions gle and doubl ils num volt ils num volt ails ails r details ence ence ence ence ence oundation a oundation b specifica tation an num pa il foundation il foundation foundation ndation le davit anchorage de base plate and ations nd infras ber of ages num num num num num num etails d template d tructur section num january num details re num num depa guide janua num num num artment e posts ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num guide p .num the po structu nlga .num prepara america .num prior to point of .num the pre for field .num preserv .num guide p .num backfill the eng .num if a wo with .num offset b on stan .num sal sho and submitta .num the co product cuts .
.num the co manufa on the c stan of trans tion em consists of ls erial shall be s posts shall be osts shall be ral posts and standard gr ation handlin an wood pres o pressure trea f num to num at eservative sha cut surfaces vation and wo posts shall be materials use gineer .
additional mat ork site from a h num clas blocks shall c ndard drawing lvaged rail m own in the s d below the ra als ontractor shal t name and m ontractor shall acturers certif contract docu ndard sp portatio traff f the supply an supplied by th of the maple sound and r d timbers gra rading rules f g and treatme servers asso ating posts s t num mm depth all be as follow wolman end ood products s sized as indic ed shall be s terials are req a source and ss a. onform with num g num. may require th tandard draw ail .
ll submit upo manufacturers submit upon ication that th uments .
ecificati on and inf fic control d nd installation he contractor .
birch or beec rotfree and s aded in accor for canadian ent of posts s ociation awpa hall be incised h. ws for pressu d cut preserv supplied shall cated on stan elected mater quired for bac of a type app num and sha he length of wing num in on request p s specification n request and e materials su ions frastruc devices n of preservati .
ch species of shall meet or rdance with th lumber .
shall be in ac a standards .
d on all four s ure treating ch vative green be in accorda ndard drawing rial from the e ckfilling the c proved by the all be sized in the offset blo n order to ac rior to incorp ns for the pres in advance o upplied meet cture ive treated ha f hardwood .
r exceed the he national l ccordance with .
sides and drie hromated cop or equivalen ance with can g num. excavation s contractor sha engineer and n accordance ock to be gr chieve the m porating the m servative to be of the commen the specified ardwood guide requirement umber gradin h cancsanum ed to their fibre pper arsenate t applied in tw ncsa num. subject to the all import mate d supplied in with the deta reater than th inimum num material in the e applied to th ncement of th requirements item num page num e posts .
ts for no .
num ng authority num and the e saturation cca and wo coats .
approval of erials to the accordance ils indicated he num mm mm above e work the he post field he work the s as detailed gu pag num num num uide posts ge num num const .num the spec .num guid and .num .num align .num insta surr .num .num area and .num cut the m .num was wor num measu .num the acco num basis o .num pay as id ruction contractor s cifically directe de posts sha num .
if energyab documents t shall be repla nment of guid allation shall rounding road the contrac resulting from as around gui shall be finish surfaces of a manufacturer ste materials s rk site .
rement fo quantity mea ordance with t of payment ment for wor dentified unde departm tr shall carry o ed by the eng all be installe sorbing guid the flared bur aced with eag de posts shall be carried dway .
tor shall be r m the work .
de posts shal hed to match all wood prod s application shall become or payment asured for pa this item .
t rk under this i er the contrac sta ment of tr raffic contro ut the work gineer .
ed in accord de rail termi ried end treat grt systems be establishe out in a ma responsible a ll be backfilled the surroundi ucts shall be instructions .
the property t ayment shall b item shall inc t. andard s ransport ol devices as indicated ance with s inal eagrt tments shown installed in ac ed by the engi anner so as at hisher ow d with approve ng grade .
treated with of the contra be the numbe lude a separa specifica tation an d in the cont standard draw systems ar n in standard ccordance wit ineer .
to avoid dam wn expense t ed material c an approved actor and shal er of guide po ate unit price ations nd infras tract docume wings num re specified in drawings num th item num. mage to the to repair any compacted du preservative ll be disposed osts supplied a for each size tructur item num january num ents andor a num num n the contra num and num adjacent an such damag uring placeme as detailed d of outside th and installed e of guide pos re num num as num ct num nd ge nt in he in st depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of gu ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num the re surroun .num the res .num all mat directed .num sal und .num sal ma .num all sha .num the co remova area to .num the co accumu matchin measure .num the qu with thi basis of .num payme stan of trans ide posts tion em consists o ls dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b moval shall nding roadwa e contractor sulting from th terials shall d for disposal lvageable gu der num un lvageable gui aintenance de unsalvageab all be dispose ontractor shal al with an ap match the su ontractor shal ulated over t ng the adjace ment for p uantity measu s item .
payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio traff f the removal all carry out t by the engine be carried ou ay .
shall be resp he work .
remain the p l. ide posts as less otherwis ide posts not epot .
ble guide post ed of outside t l be responsi proved mater urrounding gra l shape and g time and sha ent surface .
payment ured for paym nder this item ecificati on and inf fic control d of guide pos the work as er .
ut in a mann ponsible at h property of th s determined e specified in t used for offs ts and waste the work site ble to comple rial compacte ade .
grade the sho all leave the ment shall be t m shall be at t ions frastruc devices sts .
indicated in ner so as to hisher own e he owner u by the engi n the contract set blocks sh e shall becom e. etely backfill t ed during plac oulder by rem e work site the number o the unit price cture the contrac avoid dama expense to r until such tim neer shall b t documents .
hall be transpo me the proper the hole resu cement and s moving the ex in a uniform of guide posts e. ct documents age to the ad repair any su me as the ma e used as of .
orted to the n rty of the con lting from the shall finish th cess materia m and consis s removed in a item num page num s andor as djacent and ch damage aterials are ffset blocks nearest dti ntractor and e guide post e backfilled ls that have stent grade accordance depa guide janua num num num num artment e rail ary num descript .num this ite material .num delinea .num if spec owner .num the .num the co .num guide r .num eac submitta .num the co product .num the co manufa requirem constru .num the co specific .num guide num a .num if e doc sha .num guide r grade o .num salvage installat .num the stan of trans tion em consists of ls ators shall be ified for use under item num e contractor s ontractor shall rail shall be c ch section of g name or bra identification number and aashto sp class and ty als ontractor shal t name and m ontractor shal acturers certifi ments as deta ction ontractor sha cally directed b rail shall be and num .
energyabsor cuments the all be replaced rail sections s of the finished ed guide rail tion .
e contractor s ndard sp portatio traff f the supply an available from on the contr num from dti f shall be respo supply all oth lass a type i guide rail in a and of manufa n symbols or c d coating lot pec and ype .
ll submit upo manufacturers l submit upo ication for all ailed on the co all carry out t by the engine e installed in bing guide r flared buried d with eagrt shall be instal highway surf l shall not b shall allow for ecificati on and inf fic control d nd installation m the owner f ract salvaged fredericton n onsible to tran her materials .
ii wsection s accordance w acturer code for heat on request p s specification on request in galvanized m ontract docum the work as er .
n accordance rail terminal d end treatme t systems inst led to produc face .
e intermixed a two week tu ions frastruc devices n of steel beam from stock at d dstraightened nb .
sport the salv steel beams c with aashto rior to incorp s for the guide advance of metals that the ments .
indicated in e with stand eagrt sy ents shown in talled in acco ce a smooth c or alternate urn around fo cture m guide rail .
dti frederict d rail shall be vaged rail to th conforming to mnum require porating the m e rail .
the commenc e materials su the contrac ard drawing ystems are s standard dr rdance with it continuous rai ed with new or straightened ton nb .
e made availa he work site .
aashto mnum es markings a material in the cement of the upplied meet th ct documents s num num specified in th rawings num tem num. il paralleling t guide rail in d rail .
item num page num able by the num. as follows e work the e work the he specified s andor as num num he contract num and num the line and n the same gu pag num num num uide rail ge num num .num guid .num .num .num cut the m .num offs stan .num num measu .num the supp .num num basis o .num pay d de rail section each section before disma additional num aashto mnum surfaces of a manufacturer set blocks and ndard drawing the colour of marking .
rement fo quantity to plied and insta the quantity by num m. of payment ment for wor departme tr ns shall be lap n of salvaged ntling is overl num mm x num m num. all wood prod s application d delineators g num. f the delineato or payment be measured alled in accord shall be calcu t rk under this i sta ent of tra raffic contro pped in directio rail shall be apped upon r mm slots requ ucts shall be instructions .
shall be inst or shall be co t d for paymen dance with this ulated by mult tem shall be andard s ansporta ol devices on of the traffi installed such reinstallation .
uired in the g treated with talled on the onsistent with nt shall be th s item .
tiplying the tot at the unit pr specifica ation and ic .
h that the end guide rail sha an approved guide rail as the colour of e number of tal number of rice .
ations d infrast d that had be ll meet the re preservative specified an the adjacent f linear metre guide rail piec tructure item num january num een overlappe equirements o as detailed nd indicated o pavement lin es of guide ra ces in the wo e num num ed of in on ne ail rk depa remo janua num num num num artment oval of gu ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num when s straight delivere constru .num the co specific .num guide compon .num the dis surroun .num the res .num disman shall be .num any co .num uns bec .num disman the wo .num any con .num uns con stan of trans ide rail tion em consists o ls dentified .
als salvaged guid tening the co ed and the co ction ontractor sha cally directed b rail offset nents .
smantling sha nding roadwa e contractor sulting from th ntled guide ra e transported y loss or da ntractors resp salvageable g come the prop ntled offset bl ork and shall b y loss or dam ntractors resp salvageable o ntractor and s ndard sp portatio traff f the removal de rail is deli ontractor sha ontract numbe all carry out t by the engine blocks hard all be carried ay .
shall be resp he work .
ail hardware to dti frede amage to ma ponsibility and guide rail ha perty of the co ocks shall be be the respon mage to mate ponsibility and offset blocks a shall be dispos ecificati on and inf fic control d of steel beam ivered to dti ll submit a do er of the proje the work as er .
dware and out in a ma ponsible at h and delinea ericton nb .
aterials during d heshe shall ardware and d ontractor and e stored at a l nsibility of the erials during d he shall repla as determined sed of outside ions frastruc devices m guide rail .
i fredericton ocument iden ect under whi indicated in delineators nner so as to hisher own e ators shall rem g removal t l replace any delineators a shall be dispo ocation selec contractor .
removal tran ace any mate d by the engi e the work site cture n nb in acco ntifying the qu ich it was salv the contrac shall be di o avoid dama expense to r main the pro transporting a materials dam as determined osed of outsid cted by the c nsporting and erials damaged neer shall be e. ordance with uantity of guid vaged .
ct documents ismantled to age to the ad repair any su perty of the andor storag maged or lost .
d by the eng e the work si ontractor unt dor storage s d or lost .
ecome the pro item num page num num for de rail being s andor as o individual djacent and ch damage owner and ge shall be .
gineer shall ite .
til reused in shall be the operty of the re pag num num moval of g ge num num measu .num the rem .num the num num basis o .num pay guide rail rement fo quantity to oved in accor quantity sha m. of payment ment for wor departm tr or payment be measured rdance with th ll be calculate t rk under this i sta ment of tr raffic contro t d for paymen his item .
ed by multiplyi tem shall be andard s ransport ol devices t shall be the ing the total n at the unit pr specifica tation an e number of number of guid rice .
ations nd infras linear metres de rail pieces tructur item num january num s of guide ra in the work b re num num ail by depa ener janua num num num num artment gyabsorb ary num descript .num this ite eagr material .num all mate .num eagrt nchr .num eagrt .num only pr .num ene .num ro .num trin .num a yellow reflectiv .num backfill eagrt submitta .num the co system drawin .num prior to certifica num te as desi .num submit constru .num the co specific .num work s .num the c supplie ensure stan of trans bing guide tion em consists o rt .
ls erial shall be ts shall mee rp report num ts shall be the roprietary eag ergy absorpti ad system in nity industries w and black h ve sheeting o material sha t or the mate als ontractor sha proposed for gs clearly sho o delivery of ation that the st level num ha gned .
tals shall be m ction ontractor sha cally directed hall be carrie contractor sh ermanufacture that correct p ndard sp portatio rail termi traff of the supply supplied by t et the require num test level e straight type grts will be on systems i c. big spring s inc. dallas hazard marke or equivalent all be the ma erial otherwise all submit at r the work th owing in deta the eagrt e eagrt has ave been fabr made as requ all carry out t by the engine d out as indic hall be prep er of the eag procedures ar ecificati on and inf inal fic control d y and installat he contracto ements of na num. e. acceptable i inc. chicago g texas .
texas .
er minimum num shall be supp aterial excava e specified by least num da he name of th il the compon systems to th s been desig ricated of mat uired for any c the work as eer .
cated in the s pared to ar grt to be on re established ions frastruc devices tion of an en or .
ational coop ncluding thos illinois .
num mm x num plied with eac ated from the y the manufac ys in advanc he manufactu nents and inst he work site ned to meet terials consis crossreferen indicated in shop drawing rrange for n site for the d. cture nergyabsorb erative highw se made by th num mm and ma ch eagrt .
e roadbed fo cturer .
ce of the wo rer and at lea tallation of the e the contra the requirem stent with the ced item form the contrac s. a technical e initial install ing guide ra way researc he following ade from numm or the installa ork the type ast three cop e eagrt .
ctor shall sub ments of nch design and w ming part of th ct documents representati ation on the item num page num ail terminal ch program hiintensity ation of the of eagrt pies of shop bmit written hrp report will function his item .
s andor as ive of the contract to en pag num num num ergyabso ge num num .num the man .num haz .num bac acco .num insta insta num measu .num the acco num basis o .num pay d orbing guid impact hea nufacturer of t zard markers s kfilling of po ordance with allation of any allation to wh rement fo quantity to ordance with of payment ment for wor departm de rail ter tr ad of each e the reflective shall be secu osts and oth num. y eagrt sha ich it will be a or payment o be measur this item .
t rk under this i sta ent of tr rminal raffic contro eagrt shal sheeting haz red squarely her undergro all be perform attached .
t red for paym tem shall be andard s ransport ol devices l be cleaned ard marker .
to the impact ound units o med concurre ment will be at the unit pr specifica tation an d thoroughly t head .
of the eagr ntly with the the numbe rice .
ations d infrast as recomm rt shall be completion o er of eagrt tructure item num january num ended by th completed of the guide ra ts installed e num num he in ail in depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of ene ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num guide r hardwa .num disman surroun .num the res .num disman frederi .num any co .num uns the measure .num the q accorda basis of .num payme stan of trans ergyabso tion em consists o ls dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed rail offset blo are shall be sa ntling shall b nding roadwa e contractor sulting from th ntled compon cton nb .
y loss or dam ntractors res salvageable c e contractor a ment for p uantity to be ance with this payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio orbing guid traff f the removal all carry out t by the engine ocks steel gu alvaged and d e carried ou ay .
shall be resp he work .
ents shall rem mage to com ponsibility an components and shall be d payment e measured s item .
nder this item ecificati on and inf de rail ter fic control d of an energy the work in a eer .
ide posts be dismantled in t in a mann ponsible at h main the prop mponents duri d shehe sha as determine isposed of ou for paymen m shall be at t ions frastruc rminal devices yabsorbing g accordance w earing plates to individual c er so as to hisher own e perty of the ow ing removal all replace any ed by the en utside the wo nt will be the the unit price cture guide rail te with the con anchors imp components .
avoid damag expense to r wner and sha transporting y components ngineer shall ork site .
e number o e. erminal eagr tract docume pact head and ge to the ad repair any su all be transpo andor storag s damaged or become the f eagrts r item num page num rt .
ents andor d all related djacent and ch damage orted to dti ge shall be r lost .
property of removed in depa cast janua num num num num artment inplace c ary num descript .num this ite method material .num delinea .num all othe .num steel re .num dow .num concre .num membra loss of w submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num concre .num concre .num when accorda .num wa pla .num when s line esta .num dow num .num the co concret .num the co aggreg .num co sat stan of trans concrete b tion em consists d. ls ators shall be a er materials sh estraining dow wels shall be te shall be su ane curing co water to not m als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b te barrier sha te shall be pla slipforming c ance with item ater shall be cement so as slipforming co ablished by th wels shall be num. ontractor shal te with a minim ontractor shall ate base by t ncrete spilled tisfaction of th ndard sp portatio barrier traff of the constr available from hall be supplie wels shall mee of the size an pplied in acco ompounds sh more than num red in accorda all carry out t by the engine ll be construct aced in accord concrete barr m num. uniformly ap s to thoroughl ncrete barrier he engineer .
e embedded t ll schedule th mum of interru l take all prec the slipform p d on the hig he engineer .
ecificati on and inf fic control d ruction of ca m the owner fr ed by the cont et the requirem d length as p ordance with c all meet the num kgm² .
ance with any the work as er .
ted in accorda dance with num rier on aggre pplied to the y wet the agg r on pavemen o the depth a he work sequ uption .
caution to avo paver truck mi ghway shall ions frastruc devices astinplace co rom stock at d tractor .
ments of num per standard d csa anum cl requirements crossreferen indicated in ance with stan num. egate base aggregate b gregate base nt surfaces th and at the sp uence so as oid damage to ixers or other be removed cture oncrete barrie dti fredericto num .
drawing num ass of exposu of astm cnum nced item form the contrac ndard drawing the base s base immedia e surface with he steel dowel acing indicate to ensure u o the roadwa equipment .
d and the h er using the on nb .
num. ure cxl .
num and shall ming part of th ct documents g num. hall be fine ately ahead o out the poolin ls shall be ins ed on standa niform placem ay surface p highway clea item num page num slipforming restrict the is item .
s andor as graded in of concrete ng of water .
stalled to the ard drawing ment of the pavement or ned to the ca pag num num num astinplac ge num num .num han or w .num .num .num surf num m .num curi finis .num con saw .num .num wor con .num .num .num vert .num the meth .num .num .num deli curv num measu .num the conc .num mea num basis o .num pay e concret nd finishing wil wood float .
textured bro air holes num m faces of the straight edge ing shall cons hing with the s ntraction joints wing without ex contraction num mm and a rk which exp ntractor shall n for those pa of concrete o the contract tical construct contractor s hods can not b formwork sh form and sty neators shall ves .
rement fo quantity to b crete barrier c asurement of t of payment ment for work departm te barrier tr ll be permitted om or brush f mm in diamet median barr .
ist of two spra second applic s shall be saw xcessive ravel joints shall at a uniform s periences unc notify the engi arts deemed n of not less tha tor may subm tion joints sha shall undertak be employed .
hall be in acco yle of the form be installed o or payment be measured constructed in the barrier sha t k under this ite sta ment of tr raffic contro d only on a m finish shall be ter or larger s rier shall not ay application cation applied w cut as soo ling and befor be cut nea pacing not ex controlled sh neer of the loc not acceptabl an num m surrou mit for conside all include a v ke formwork ordance with num med barrier sh on the media t for payment accordance w all be along th em shall be at andard s ransport ol devices inimal basis a e applied to th shall be repair vary by mo s of the mem in a direction on as the con re shrinkage c atly in a ve xceeding num m hrinkage crac cation and ext e the contra nding the cra eration altern vertical key in and hand pla num. hall match the n barrier eve shall be the with this item .
he bottom of th t the unit pric specifica tation an and shall be c he approved s red .
ore than num m brane curing c perpendicula ncrete has ha cracking takes ertical plane .
cking shall b tent of crackin actor shall rem ack .
nate repair me the joint surf acement of t e slipformed a ry num m on ta number of lin he barrier bet ce .
ations nd infras conducted with surface .
mm when me compound im ar to the first .
rdened suffic s place .
to a minim e clearly ma ng for hisher r move and rep ethods .
face .
the work whe abutting sectio angents and e near metres o tween the end tructur item num january num h a magnesiu easured with mmediately afte iently to perm mum depth o arked and th review .
place a sectio ere slipformin on .
every num m o of castinplac d section limits re num num m a er mit of he on ng on ce s. depa conc janua num num num num artment creteenca ary num descript .num this ite duct un material .num all mate .num electric num .num duct a standa .num backfill engine .num if a wo .num beddin .num all conc docum .num each s metres .num concre .num rebar s .num the co submitta .num the co certifica requirem .num when r installa .num submitt constru .num the co specific stan of trans ased duct tion em consists o nder the road ls erials shall be cal equipmen under the ele nd undergrou ard drawing num material sha er .
additional mat ork area from g material sh creteencased ents .
section of pv the manufac ete shall meet shall be numm ontractor shal als ontractor shall ation andor m ments as deta requested th tion and instr tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ndard sp portatio bank syst traff of the supply dbed .
e supplied by nt shall be ectrical instal und service num andor a all be selected terials are req a source and all be sand ha d pvc duct b vc duct shal cturers name t the requirem bar meeting t l supply all ot l submit in a mill certificate ailed on the co e contractor ructions for ha red in accorda all carry out t by the engine pecificat on and inf em fic control d and installati the contracto certified in lation and ins warning tape as indicated in d materials fr quired for bac d of a type ap aving a dust bends coupli l have printe e and tradema ments of num the requireme her appurtena dvance of the es for the du ontract docum shall submit andling of the ance with any the work as er .
tions frastruc devices ion of concre or unless oth accordance spection act .
e shall be of the contract rom the exca ckfilling the c pproved by the content not m ings and caps ed on its surf ark inside dia num exposure c ents of num ances as req e commencem uct that the m ments .
the manufac duct .
crossreferen indicated in cture eteencased p erwise indica e with new f the type an documents .
vation subje contractor sha e engineer .
more than num s shall be as rface at inter ameter mm class cnum. . uired and as ment of the w materials sup cturers recom nced item form the contrac polyvinyl chlo ated on the pl brunswick nd size as in ct to the app all import mate .
specified in th rvals not exc and type des indicated on work the ma pplied meet th mmended pro ming part of th ct documents item num page num oride pvc ans .
regulation ndicated on roval of the erials to the he contract ceeding num signation .
the plans .
anufacturers he specified cedures for is item .
s andor as co pag num oncreteen ge num num .num con draw .num .num bott soft .num .num the reco .num .num the the c .num form exp spec .num duc .num tren .num .num .num .num .num bac stru .num und draw .num afte mm duct ncased duc nstruction of th wing num an for excavatio schedule of th tom of the ex spots or distu if overexcava of overexcav accordance w contractor s ommended pro joints shall be engineer sha concreteenca mwork and co osed concret cified by the e ct installation s nches shall be backfill shall b backfill for th conduit shall dimension .
backfill from surrounding m bedding and surrounding m to a minimum kfill and mate cture .
derground serv wing num. r the backfillin less than the t bank system departm ct bank sy tr he trench and ndor as indica on depths gre he work .
xcavated tren urbed ground ation is carried vation and s with item num shall install the ocedures suc e watertight .
all be notified a ased duct ban oncrete placem e shall be m engineer .
shall be inspec e completely b be placed in s he area imme be nonorgan num mm above material .
d backfill sha material or as m of num of the erials above s vice warning ng is complete e duct id shall m in the presen sta ment of tr ystem raffic contro d the installat ated in the co eater than num. ches shall be prior to place d out the co shall fill this and compact e duct in the h that the duc at least num day nk system can ment shall co moistcured .
fo cted and appr backfilled to su such a manne ediately surrou nic and free o e the duct to s all be compa s a minimum e maximum d subgrade elev tape shall be e a flexible st be passed th nce of the eng andard s ransport ol devices tion of the du ontract docum .num m the co e uniformly g ement of the ntractor shall area with a ted to a minim formwork an ct is free of sha ys in advance n be carried ou onform to the orms shall be roved by the e ubgrade eleva er so as to min unding the du of lumps and s subgrade sha acted to the in lieu of othe ry density .
vation shall m installed to c teel mandrel a hrough the len gineer and a re specifica tation an uct shall be in ments .
ontractor shall graded and sh bedding mate at hisher ow an approved mum of num of nd in accordan arp bends kin of the concre ut .
requirements e left in place engineer prior ation .
nimize damage uct and to a stones larger all be materia degree of c er direction in match the sur conform to the at least num m ngth of each d epresentative ations nd infras n accordance l notify the e hall be free o erial .
wn expense backfill mate f the maximum nce with the nks and break te work so th s of num num e for at least to backfilling .
e to the instal height of num than num mm al of the qualit compaction o n accordance rrounding exis e details show mm long and o duct in the con e of each utility tructur item num january num with standar engineer of th of sharp rock repair the are erial placed m dry density .
manufacturer ks .
at inspection num and num t num days or a led duct .
mm above th in the greate ty matching th of the existin e with item num sting paveme wn on standar of a diameter ncreteencase y company .
re num num rd he s ea in rs of num. as he est he ng num nt rd num ed depa conc janua num .
num num artment creteenca ary num num .num eac eac pro .num the ma .num immedi open en .num the co duct ba measure .num the qu encase basis of .num payme stan of trans ased duct ch duct shall b ch end in a s ovided at each e contractor andrel test .
iately after th nds of the duc ontractor shall ank system .
ment for p uantity to be d duct bank s payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio bank syst traff be threaded w screweye ins h end .
shall be resp e mandrel in ct with a water install a visibl payment measured fo system supplie nder this item pecificat on and inf em fic control d with a polyprop sert in the end ponsible to cle spection and rtight plug .
e marker at e or payment s ed and installe m shall be at t tions frastruc devices pylene fish ro d cap or plug .
ear andor rep approval th each end term shall be the n ed in accordan the unit price cture pe minimum a surplus of place any du e contractor mination point number of lin nce with this it e. num mm and te num m of fish ro cts that do n shall securel of the concre near metres o tem .
item num page num erminated at ope shall be ot pass the ly block the eteencased of concrete depa unde janua num num num num artment r roadbed ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num electric num .num duct a standa .num backfill engine .num if a wo submitta .num the co certifica requirem .num when r installa .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num constru drawing .num for sch .num bottom disturbe .num if o of acc stan of trans d duct tion em consists o ls erials shall be cal equipmen under the ele nd undergrou ard drawing num material sha er .
additional mat ork area from als ontractor shall ation andor m ments as deta requested th tion and instr tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b uction of the t g num ando r excavation hedule of the w of the excav ed ground .
overexcavatio overexcavati cordance with ndard sp portatio traff f the supply a e supplied by nt shall be ectrical instal und service num. all be selected terials are req a source and l submit in a mill certificate ailed on the co e contractor ructions for ha red in accorda all carry out t by the engine trench and th or as indicated depths greate work .
vated trenche n is carried o on and shal item num and pecificat on and inf fic control d and installatio the contracto certified in lation and ins warning tape d materials fr quired for bac d of a type ap dvance of the es for the du ontract docum shall submit andling of the ance with any the work as er .
he installation d in the contra er than num m s shall be un ut the contra ll fill this are d compacted t tions frastruc devices on of duct und or .
accordance spection act .
e shall be of rom the exca ckfilling the c pproved by the e commencem uct that the m ments .
the manufac duct .
crossreferen indicated in of the duct s ract documen m the contra niformly grade actor shall at ea with an a to a minimum cture der the roadb e with new f the type an vation subje contractor sha e engineer .
ment of the w materials sup cturers recom nced item form the contrac shall be in ac ts .
actor shall no ed and shall b hisher own approved ba m of num of the bed .
brunswick nd size as in ct to the app all import mate work the ma pplied meet th mmended pro ming part of th ct documents ccordance wit otify the engi be free of sha expense rep ckfill materia e maximum d item num page num regulation ndicated on roval of the erials to the anufacturers he specified cedures for is item .
s andor as th standard neer of the arp rocks or pair the area l placed in ry density .
un pag num num num der roadb ge num num .num the bend .num .num duc .num tren .num .num .num .num .num bac stru .num und draw .num afte insta eng .num .num imm open .num the duct num measu .num the and num basis o .num pay bed duct contractor s ds kinks and joints shall be ct installation s nches shall be backfill shall b backfill for th conduit shall dimension .
backfill from surrounding m backfill shall b as a minimum the maximum kfill and mate cture .
derground serv wing num. r the backfillin alled duct sh ineer .
the contract mandrel test .
mediately after n ends of the contractor sh t crossing .
rement fo quantity to b installed in ac of payment ment for wor departm tr shall install th breaks .
e watertight .
shall be inspec e completely b be placed in s he area imme be nonorgan num mm above material .
be compacted m in lieu of ot m dry density .
erials above s vice warning ng is complete all be passed tor shall be re r the mandre duct with a wa hall install a v or payment be measured ccordance wit t rk under this i sta ment of tr raffic contro e duct in the cted and appr backfilled to su such a manne ediately surrou nic and free o e the duct to s d to the degre ther direction subgrade elev tape shall be e a mandrel d through the esponsible to l inspection a atertight plug .
visible marker t for payment h this item .
tem shall be andard s ransport ol devices e prepared tre roved by the e ubgrade eleva er so as to min unding the du of lumps and s subgrade sha e of compacti in accordanc vation shall m installed to c with a diamet e length of t o clear andor and approval at each end shall be the n at the unit pr specifica tation an ench such tha engineer prior ation .
nimize damage uct and to a stones larger all be materia ion of the exis ce with item num match the sur conform to the ter of at least the duct syst r replace any the contrac termination p number of lin rice .
ations nd infras at the duct is to backfilling .
e to the instal height of num than num mm al of the qualit sting surround num to a minim rrounding exis e details show t num of the d tem in the pr ducts that do ctor shall secu point of the u near metres o tructur item num january num s free of shar led duct .
mm above th in the greate ty matching th ding material o mum of num sting paveme wn on standar diameter of th resence of th o not pass th urely block th under roadbe of duct supplie re num num rp he est he or of nt rd he he he he ed ed depa unde janua num num num num artment rground d ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num electric num .num duct s connec .num backfill engine .num if a wo submitta .num the co certifica docum .num prior to engine .num when r installa .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num electric .num an new .num on new placem stan of trans duct tion em consists o ls erials shall be cal equipmen under the ele secondary wi ctions shall be materials sh er .
additional mat ork area from als ontractor shall ation that the m ents .
o commencin er .
requested th tion and instr tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b cal work shall electrical con w brunswick s w construction ent .
ndard sp portatio traff f the supply a e supplied by nt shall be ectrical instal ires ground e of the type a hall be selecte terials are req a source and l submit in a materials supp g the work e contractor ructions for ha red in accorda all carry out t by the engine be in accorda ntractor holdin shall perform n the work u pecificat on and inf fic control d and installatio the contracto certified in lation and ins wires groun and size as in ed material fr quired for bac d of a type ap dvance of the plied meet the the contracto shall submit andling of the ance with any the work as er .
ance with the c ng a valid elec all electrical w under this ite tions frastruc devices on of duct and or .
accordance spection act .
nd rods und dicated on st rom the exca ckfilling the c pproved by the e commencem e specified req or shall subm the manufac duct .
crossreferen indicated in canadian ele ctrical contrac work .
m shall be c cture d wires .
e with new derground se tandard drawi vation subje contractor sha e engineer .
ment of the w quirements as mit a copy of cturers recom nced item form the contrac ectrical code .
ctors licence is completed bef brunswick rvice warning ing num. ct to the app all import mate work the ma s detailed on t the wiring pe mmended pro ming part of th ct documents ssued by the fore aggrega item num page num regulation g tape and roval of the erials to the anufacturers the contract ermit to the cedures for is item .
s andor as province of te subbase un pag num dergroun ge num num .num con stan .num .num .num duc .num the bend .num duc .num bac .num tren .num .num .num und draw .num afte insta eng .num nd duct nstruction of th ndard drawing bottom of the grade free of if overexcava overexcavati with item num ct placed unde contractor s ds kinks and ct shall be insp kfill shall be p nches shall be for trenches .num backfill in conduit a and stone for trenches .num backfill fo conduit s dimensio .num backfill fr the surro .num backfill s material o item num .num backfill a structure derground serv wing num. r the backfillin alled duct sh ineer .
the contract mandrel test .
departm tr he trench and g num. e excavated f sharp rocks .
ation is carrie on and shall f num and compac er a roadbed shall install th breaks .
pected and ap laced in such e completely b outside the r n the area imm and also in th es larger than within the roa or the area im shall be inorga on .
rom num mm a unding materi shall be com or as a minim to a minimum and materials e. vice warning ng is complete all be passed tor shall be re stan ment of tr raffic contro the installatio trenches sha ed out the co fill this area w cted to a minim shall be encas e duct in the pproved by the a manner so backfilled and roadbed back mediately surr he top num m num mm in the adbed backfi mmediately sur anic and free bove the duct ial .
pacted to the mum unless o m of num of th above subg tape shall be e a mandrel d through the esponsible to dard spe ransport ol devices n of the duct a ll be undistur ontractor shal with an approv mum of num o sed in under e prepared tre e engineer prio as to minimiz finished level kfill shall be ta rounding the d m of the tren e greatest dim lling shall be c rrounding the of lumps and t to subgrade e degree of otherwise dire he maximum d grade shall m installed to c with a diamet e length of t o clear andor ecificatio tation an and the wiring rbed insitu so l at his own ved backfill m of the maximu roadbed duc ench such tha or to backfillin ze damage to with the surro mped during p duct and to a ch shall be i mension .
carried out as duct and to a d stones larger e shall be mat compaction ected by the e dry density .
match the surr conform to the ter of at least the duct syst r replace any ons nd infras g shall be in a oil and shall h expense rep aterial placed um dry density ct. at the duct is ng .
the installed d ounding adjac placement .
a height of num norganic and follows a height of num r than num mm terial of the q of the existin engineer in a rounding exis e details show t num of the d tem in the pr y ducts that d tructur item num january num ccordance wit have a unifor pair the area d in accordanc y. s free of shar duct .
cent surface .
mm above th d free of lump mm above th in the greate uality matchin ng surroundin ccordance wit sting paveme wn on standar diameter of th resence of th o not pass th re num num th m of ce rp he ps he est ng ng th nt rd he he he depa unde janua num num num artment rground d ary num .num immedi open en .num second .num the occ .num a minim boxes a .num splicing .num electric tests sh .num the co portion measure .num the qu supplied .num linear m direct ru .num du basis of .num paymen as iden stan of trans duct iately after th nds of the duc dary wires sha e contractor cur to the wire mum of num m o and power poi g of wire will o cal work shall hall be submitt ontractor shall of the electric ment for p uantity to be m d and installed measurement un of the duct ct encased in payment nt for work u tified under th ndard sp portatio traff e mandrel in ct with a water all be of a size shall pull the as a result of of secondary ints in order to only be permitt l be tested fo ted to the eng perform meg cal system .
payment measured for d in accordan t shall be take .
n under road nder this item he contract .
pecificat on and inf fic control d spection and rtight plug .
and number wires throug f installation .
and ground o accommoda ted in junction r satisfactory gineer .
ger tests on a payment sha ce with this ite en from end to bed duct sha m shall include tions frastruc devices approval th indicated on t gh the duct in wire shall be ate the making n boxes .
operation by all feeders and all be the num em .
o end on the all be measur e a separate u cture e contractor the plans .
n such a man e left coiled at g of connectio y the contract d branch circu mber of linear duct and sha red as one un unit price for shall securel nner that no d t all pole bas ons .
tor and the re uits before ene metres of duc ll be measure nit of length .
each type of item num page num ly block the damage will ses junction esults of the ergizing any ct and wires ed along the f installation depa unde janua num num num num artment rground j ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num the un drawin .num all ele num .num freedr .num backfill engine .num if a wo num submitta .num the co certifica docum .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num all elec .num an new .num the jun .num all spl .num the w surroun .num the res stan of trans junction b tion em consists o ls erials shall be derground el g num. ctrical equipm under the ele raining backfi material sha er .
additional mat ork site from num .
als ontractor shall ation that the m ents .
tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b trical work sh electrical con w brunswick s nction box sha wire splices ice kit .
work shall be nding roadwa e contractor sulting from th ndard sp portatio box traff f the supply a e supplied by ectrical juncti ment shall b ectrical installa ll shall be sup all be selected terials are req a source and l submit in a materials supp red in accorda all carry out t by the engine hall be in acco ntractor holdin shall perform all be installed inside the ju e carried out ay .
shall be resp he work .
pecificat on and inf fic control d and installatio the contracto ion box shall be certified ation and insp pplied in acco d materials fro quired for bac d of a type a dvance of the plied meet the ance with any the work as er .
rdance with th ng a valid elec all electrical w d in accordan unction box s in a manne ponsible at h tions frastruc devices on of an under or .
be of the typ in accordanc pection act .
ordance with num om the excava ckfilling the c approved by t e commencem e specified req crossreferen indicated in he canadian e ctrical contrac work .
nce with stand hall be made er so as to hisher own e cture rground elect pe and size a ce with new num. ation subject contractor sha the engineer ment of the w quirements as nced item form the contrac electrical cod ctors licence is dard drawing e with a csa avoid damag expense to r trical junction as indicated o w brunswick t to the appro all import mate and in accor work the ma s detailed on t ming part of th ct documents de .
ssued by the g num .
aapproved d ge to the ad repair any su item num page num box .
on standard regulation oval of the erials to the rdance with anufacturers the contract is item .
s andor as province of irect buried djacent and ch damage un pag num num num dergroun ge num num .num the free .num .num the adju .num all b num measu .num the supp num basis o .num pay nd junction junction box draining bac the foundatio the area of t that water ca top of the ju usted to accom backfill shall b rement fo quantity to plied and insta of payment ment for wor departm n box tr shall be insta kfill .
on layer shall he junction b annot pond or unction box sh mmodate num be placed in a or payment be measured alled in accord t rk under this i sta ment of tr raffic contro alled above t l be construct box installatio saturate the hall be place num. accordance w t d for payment dance with this tem shall be andard s ransport ol devices he water tabl ted such that n shall be pr foundation zo d flush with t ith num. t shall be the s item .
at the unit pr specifica tation an le on a num m the area is m rovided with p one .
the surroundi e number of u rice .
ations nd infras mm thick foun maintained fre positive drain ng grade eit underground tructur item num january num ndation layer o eedraining an nage to ensur ther existing o junction boxe re num num of nd re or es depa powe janua num num num num artment er point ary num descript .num this ite material .num the con .num all othe .num all ele num submitta .num prior to engine constru .num the co specific .num all elec .num an new .num the po .num the co from dt .num the co receipt .num all elec .num all the .num the ene .num the co be deliv stan of trans tion m consists of ls ntrol box and s er materials sh ctrical equipm under the ele als o commencin er .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b trical work sh electrical con w brunswick s wer point sha ontractor shall ti fredericton ontractor shall of the materia ctrical wiring s portions of th e tests shall be e contractor ergizing any p ntrol box and vered to the e ndard sp portatio traff f the installatio service box sh hall be supplie ment shall b ectrical installa g the work all carry out t by the engine hall be in acco ntractor holdin shall perform all be installed l be responsib n nb to the w be responsib als until such t shall be conne he electrical w e submitted to shall perfor portion of the service box engineer .
ecificati on and inf fic control d on of a power hall be supplie ed by the cont be certified ation and insp the contracto the work as er .
rdance with th ng a valid elec all electrical w d in accordan ble for transp work areas .
ble for all mat time that the m ected as show work shall be o the enginee rm megger t electrical sys shall be locke ions frastruc devices point .
ed by the own tractor .
in accordanc pection act .
or shall subm indicated in he canadian e ctrical contrac work .
ce with stand porting unload .
terials and for materials have wn on the pla tested for sa er .
tests on all stem .
ed immediate cture ner from stock ce with new mit a copy of the contrac electrical cod ctors licence is dard drawing ding storing a r any damage e been accept ans .
atisfactory ope feeders and ely after instal k at dti frede w brunswick the wiring pe ct documents de .
ssued by the num. and distributin e or loss from ted in the wor eration and th branch circ llation and the item num page num ericton nb .
regulation ermit to the s andor as province of ng materials m the time of rk .
he results of cuits before e keys shall po pag num num ower point ge num num measu .num the acco num basis o .num pay rement fo quantity to ordance with t of payment ment for wor departm tr or payment be measured this item .
t rk under this i sta ment of tr raffic contro t d for paymen tem shall be andard s ransport ol devices nt shall be th at the unit pr specifica tation an he number o rice .
ations nd infras of power poin tructur item num january num nts installed re num num in depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of pow ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num prior to engine constru .num the co specific .num all elec .num an pro .num all num .num a pow drawing .num the co control .num the .num power p dti fre .num any co measure .num the qu accorda basis of .num payme stan of trans wer point tion m consists of ls dentified .
als o commencin er .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ctrical work sh electrical c ovince of new electrical equ num of the electr wer point sha g num. ontractor shall unit from the e utility pole s point and all c edericton nb y loss or da ntractors resp ment for p uantity to be ance with this payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio traff f the removal o g the work all carry out t by the engine hall be in acc contractor ho w brunswick s uipment shall rical installatio all consist o l remove the utility pole an shall only be re components s . amage to ma ponsibility and payment measured fo item .
nder this item pecificat on and inf fic control d of a power po the contracto the work as er .
ordance with olding a valid shall perform a be removed on and inspe of all compo above ground d the wire from emoved if the hall remain th aterials during d he shall repl or payment s m shall be at t tions frastruc devices int .
or shall subm indicated in the canadian d electrical all electrical w in accordanc ction act for t onents as id d conduit wir m the utility p electrical sup he property of g removal t lace any mate shall be the the unit price cture mit a copy of the contrac n electrical c contractors work .
e with new b the province dentified and re control box ole to the nex pply feeds only the owner an transporting a erials damage number of p e. the wiring pe ct documents code .
licence issu brunswick reg of new bruns d detailed on x service box xt junction poin y the dti cont nd shall be tra andor storag ed or lost .
power points item num page num ermit to the s andor as ued by the gulation num swick .
n standard x and photo nts .
trol box .
ansported to ge shall be removed in depa screw janua num num num num num num artment w base ary num descript .num this ite material .num screw frederi .num all othe submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num screw .num screw shown .num the top .num num .num num measure .num the qu accorda basis of .num payme stand of trans tion em consists o ls bases bolts cton nb .
er materials s als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed bases shall b bases shall b on standard p surface of th num mm of a leve num mm of the e ment for p uantity to be ance with this payment nt for work un dard spec portatio traff f the installati s and washe hall be suppli all carry out t by the engine be installed at be aligned to drawing num he screw base el line when m elevation prov payment measured fo s item .
nder this item cificatio on and inf fic control d ion of a screw ers shall be ed by the co the work as eer .
the locations be within num num. es shall be w measured acr vided by the e or payment s m shall be at th ons frastruc devices w base .
available fr ontractor .
indicated in s indicated on num mm in hor within the follow ross the top s engineer .
shall be the he unit price .
cture rom the own the contrac n the plans .
rizontal offset wing toleranc urface of the number of s . ner from sto ct documents t from the cen ces base .
screw bases item num page num ock at dti s andor as ntrelines as installed in depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of scr ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num the ba the eng .num if a wo submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num the wo its com .num screw to dti .num any co .num all bas .num the co the scre the sur measure .num the qu accorda basis of .num payme stand of trans rew base tion em consists o ls erials shall be ckfill material gineer .
additional mat ork area from als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed ork shall be c ponents .
base bolts a fredericton y loss or dam ntractors res material that se .
ontractor shal ew base with rounding grad ment for p uantity to be ance with this payment nt for work un dard spec portatio traff f the removal e supplied by ls shall be se terials are re a source and all carry out t by the engine carried out in nd washers s nb .
mage to mate ponsibility an t is not a com l be responsi an approved de .
payment measured fo s item .
nder this item cificatio on and inf fic control d of a screw b the contracto elected mater quired for ba d of a type ap the work as eer .
such a mann shall remain th erials during d he shall rep mponent of th ble to comple d material co or payment s m shall be at th ons frastruc devices ase .
or .
rials from the ackfill the co pproved by the indicated in ner so as to a he property o removal tran place any ma he screw bas etely backfill t ompacted dur shall be the he unit price .
cture work site s ontractor shal e engineer .
the contrac avoid damage of the owner nsporting and aterials lost or se shall be r the hole resu ring placemen number of s . ubject to the l import mate ct documents e to the screw and shall be dor storage s r damaged .
removed from lting from the nt and finishe crew bases item num page num approval of erials to the s andor as w base and transported shall be the m the screw e removal of ed to match removed in depa sign o janua num num num num artment or light ba ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num electric num .num concre num .
.num co .num reinfor .num other m .num backfill enginee .num if a wo with submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num all elec .num an new .num constru standa .num bases s .num the an centreli .num concre and num stan of trans ase tion em consists of ls erials shall be cal equipmen under the ele ete shall be de ncrete shall m rcing steel sha materials are d material sha er .
additional mat ork area from h num .
als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b trical work sh electrical con w brunswick s uction of all s rd drawings num shall not have nchor bolt ass nes as shown ete and rein num respective ndard sp portatio traff f the construct e supplied by t nt shall be ectrical installa esigned prod meet the requi all meet the re detailed on st all be selected terials are req a source and red in accorda all carry out t by the engine hall be in acco ntractor holdin shall perform sign and ligh num num e a diameter v sembly shall n on standard nforcing stee ely .
ecificati on and inf fic control d tion of a cast the contracto certified in ation and insp uced supplie rements of cs equirements o tandard draw d materials fr quired for bac d of a type app ance with any the work as er .
rdance with th ng a valid elec all electrical w ht bases shal num and num variation great be aligned to d drawing num el shall be ions frastruc devices inplace reinfo or .
accordance pection act .
ed and placed sa anum exp of num. ings num num rom the excav ckfilling the c proved by the crossreferen indicated in he canadian e ctrical contrac work .
ll be in acco num. ter than num mm o be within num num. placed to cture forced concret e with new d in accordanc posure class c num num a vation subjec contractor sha e engineer and nced item form the contrac electrical cod ctors license i ordance with m in the cross num mm in h meet the te sign or ligh brunswick ce with num cnum .
nd num. ct to the app all import mate d supplied in ming part of th ct documents de ssued by the the details in s sectional dim horizontal offs requirements item num page num t base .
regulation num num and roval of the erials to the accordance is item .
s andor as province of ndicated on mensions .
set from the of num sig pag num num num gn or light ge num num .num bac .num bas .num .num .num the tops num measu .num the with num basis o .num pay iden t base kfilling shall b es shall have num mm of a l .num areas in the minim .num it wil base .num if the tolera the repla num mm of th contractor s soiling andor rement fo quantity to b this item .
of payment ment for wor ntified under th departm tr e carried out the top surfac evel line whe excess of th mum cover re ll not be acc e concrete tha e concrete su ance is not t engineer en ace with new he elevation p shall restore t r hydroseeding or payment be measured f t rk under this he contract .
sta ment of tr raffic contro in accordance ce finished lev n measured a e num mm toler equirements s ceptable to ac at has harden urface upon to the engine ntirely remove concrete .
provided by th the work are g to the satisfa t for payment sh item shall inc andard s ransport ol devices e with num. vel smooth a across the ba rance may be specified in the chieve this re ed .
removal are eers satisfact e designated e engineer .
ea to its origin action of the e hall be the nu clude a separ specifica tation an and within the ase e removed by e contract do epair by plac eas in excess tion the cont d portions or nal condition .
engineer .
umber of base rate unit pric ations nd infras following tole y abrasive me ocuments are cing grout or s of the num m tractor shall r all of the this may in es constructed e for each ty tructur item num january num rances eans provide e met .
concrete ove mm permissib as directed b concrete an clude shapin d in accordanc ype of base a re num num ed er le by nd g ce as depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of sig ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num backfill enginee .num if a wo submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num the wo and its .num any dis .num uns out .num the co the bas surroun measure .num the qu with this basis of .num paymen identifie stan of trans gn or light tion em consists of ls erials shall be materials sh er .
additional mat ork area from als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ork shall be c components .
y salvageable strict maintena salvageable b tside the wor ontractor shal se with an ap nding grade .
ment for p uantity to be m s item .
payment nt for work u ed under the c ndard sp portatio t base traff f the removal e supplied by t all be selecte terials are re a source and all carry out t by the engine carried out in .
e bases not r ance depot .
bases shall b k site .
l be responsi pproved mate payment measured for under this item contract .
ecificati on and inf fic control d of a concrete the contracto ed materials f quired for ba of a type app the work as er .
such a mann reused on the become the p ble to comple erial compac payment sha m shall includ ions frastruc devices sign or light b or .
from the exca ackfill the co proved by the indicated in ner so as to av e contract sh roperty of the etely backfill t cted during p all be the num de a separate cture base .
avation subje ontractor shal engineer .
the contrac void damage hall be transp e contractor a the hole resu placement an mber of bases e unit price fo ect to the app l import mate ct documents to the sign o orted to the n and shall be d lting from the nd finished to s removed in or each type item num page num proval of the erials to the s andor as or light base nearest dti disposed of e removal of o match the accordance of base as depa light janua num num num num artment t standard ary num descript .num this ite material .num light st kits and frederic .num all othe .num all ele num submitta .num prior to engine constru .num the co specific .num all elec .num an new .num the co from dt .num the co receipt .num the wir undergr .num wir .num the co portion .num lumina operatio .num the lum enginee .num all port submitt stan of trans d tion m consists of ls tandard pole d pole hardw cton nb .
er materials re ctrical equipm under the ele als o commencin er .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b trical installati electrical con w brunswick s ontractor shall ti fredericton ontractor shall of any materia ring shall be round wiring re splices will ontractor shall of the electric aires with lam onal .
minaires once er .
ions of the ele ted to the eng ndard sp portatio traff f the installatio and davit fr ware and fran quired shall b ment shall b ectrical installa g the work all carry out t by the engine ons shall be in ntractor holdin shall perform l be responsib n nb to the w be responsib als until such installed and in accordance not be permitt perform meg cal system .
mps shall be e operable s ectrical work ineer .
ecificati on and inf fic control d on andor reins rangible base ngible bases e supplied by be certified ation and insp the contracto the work as er .
n accordance ng a valid elec all electrical w ble for transp work areas ble for all mat time that the m the complete e with standar ted between t ger tests on a attached to hall be adjus shall be teste ions frastruc devices stallation of a es luminaires will be avail y the contracto in accordanc pection act .
or shall subm indicated in e with the can ctrical contrac work .
porting unload .
terials and for materials have e structure ere rd drawings num the handhole c all feeders and the light sta sted by the c ed for satisfac cture light standard s lamps com able from the or .
ce with new mit a copy of the contrac adian electric ctors licence i ding storing a r any damage e been accep ected plumbe num num num connections a d branch circu andard and contractor un ctory operation d and luminair mplete panel b e owners sto w brunswick the wiring pe ct documents cal code .
ssued by the and distributin e or loss from pted in the wo ed and conne num and num and the lumina uits before ene the unit sha nder the direc n and the resu item num page num es .
boards fuse ock at dti regulation ermit to the s andor as province of ng materials m the time of ork .
ected to the num. aire .
ergizing any ll be made ction of the ults shall be lig pag num num ght standa ge num num measu .num the reins num basis o .num pay ard rement fo quantity me stalled in acco of payment ment for work departm tr or payment easured for p ordance with t t k under this ite sta ment of tr raffic contro t payment shal this item .
em shall be at andard s ransport ol devices ll be the num t the unit pric specifica tation an mber of light ce .
ations nd infras t standards in tructur item num january num nstalled ando re num num or depa remo janua num num num num artment oval of lig ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num prior to engine constru .num the co specific .num electric .num ele num .num an of n .num work s compon .num the res .num light st .num light st luminai .num wire sh .num light s transpo .num any co stan of trans ght standa tion em consists of ls dentified .
als o commencin er .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b cal work shal ectrical equipm num electrical in electrical con new brunswic hall be carrie nents .
e contractor s sulting from th andards and c tandards shal res .
hall be rolled a standards lum orted to dti f y loss or da ntractors resp ndard sp portatio ard traff f disconnectin g the work all carry out t by the engine l be in accord ment shall be nstallation an ntractor holdin ck shall perfo ed out in such shall be respo his work .
components s l be removed and labelled by minaires and fredericton n amage to ma ponsibility and ecificati on and inf fic control d ng and remov the contracto the work as er .
dance with the e removed in d inspection a ng a valid ele orm all electric h a manner so onsible at his shall be handl d from the con y length .
d wire shall r nb .
aterials during d he shall repl ions frastruc devices ving light stan or shall subm indicated in e canadian e n accordance act .
ectrical contra cal work .
o as to avoid sher own exp ed with a non ncrete base a remain the p g removal t lace any mate cture ndards and l mit a copy of the contrac electrical code with new br actors licence d damage to t pense for an nmetallic sling and disassem property of th transporting a erials damage uminaires .
the wiring pe ct documents e. runswick reg e issued by th the light stand y repair of su g. mbled into dav he owner an andor storag ed or lost .
item num page num ermit to the s andor as gulation num he province dard and its uch damage vit pole and nd shall be ge shall be remo page num num num oval of lig num measure .num the qu accorda basis of .num paymen de ght standa ment for p uantity to be ance with this payment nt for work un epartmen ard traff payment measured fo item .
nder this item nt of tran fic control d or payment sh shall be at the specific nsportat devices hall be the n e unit price .
cations tion and i number of ligh infrastr jan ht standards ructure item num nuary num removed in num depa media janua num num num num artment an flashin ary num descript .num this ite material .num the me owner .num all othe .num all ele num submitta .num prior to engine constru .num the co specific .num all elec .num an pro .num the me foundat .num the co from dt .num the co receipt .num all wirin .num wir .num all port the res .num the co any por stan of trans g light tion m consists of ls edian flashing from stock at er materials sh ctrical equipm under the ele als o commencin er .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ctrical installat electrical c ovince of new edian flashing tion as shown ontractor shall ti fredericton ontractor shall of the materia ng connections re splices will ions of the ele ults shall be s ontractor shal rtion of the ele ndard sp portatio traff f the installatio light post fra dti frederic hall be supplie ment shall b ectrical installa g the work all carry out t by the engine tions shall be contractor ho w brunswick s g light and po on standard l be responsib n nb to the w be responsib als until such t s shall be carr not be permi ectrical work submitted to t l perform me ectrical syste ecificati on and inf fic control d on of a median angible base ton nb .
ed by the cont be certified ation and insp the contracto the work as er .
in accordanc olding a valid shall perform a ost shall be i drawing num ble for transp work areas .
ble for all mat time that the m ried out by th itted .
k shall be teste the engineer .
egger tests on m. ions frastruc devices n flashing light and mounting tractor .
in accordanc pection act .
or shall subm indicated in ce with the ca d electrical all electrical w installed on t num. porting unload .
terials and for materials have he contractor ed for satisfa n all feeders a cture t with post .
g hardware sh ce with new mit a copy of the contrac anadian elect contractors work .
the concrete ding storing a r any damage e been accept to make the l ctory operatio and branch c hall be availab w brunswick the wiring pe ct documents trical code .
licence issu median barrie and distributin e or loss from ted in the wor ight operation on by the con circuits before item num page num ble from the regulation ermit to the s andor as ued by the er or screw ng materials m the time of rk .
nal .
ntractor and e energizing me pag num num edian flash ge num num measu .num the insta num basis o .num pay as id hing light rement fo quantity to b alled in accord of payment ment for wor dentified unde departm tr or payment be measured f dance with this t rk under this i er the contrac sta ment of tr raffic contro t for payment s s item .
tem shall incl t. andard s ransport ol devices shall be the nu ude a separa specifica tation an umber of med ate unit price ations nd infras dian flashing li for each type tructur item num january num ghts with pos e of installatio re num num sts n depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of me ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num prior to engine constru .num the co specific .num electric .num ele ele .num an pro .num median screw fo .num median .num wire sh power p .num wir .num materia nb .
.num los res measure .num the qu accorda basis of .num payme stan of trans dian flash tion m consists of ls dentified .
als o commencin er .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b cal work shall ectrical equipm ectrical installa electrical c ovince of new n flashing ligh oundation in n flashing light hall be disconn point .
re shall be roll als shall rema ss or damage sponsibility and ment for p uantity measu ance with this payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio hing light traff f the removal o g the work all carry out t by the engine be in accorda ment shall be ation and insp contractor ho w brunswick s t post and h such a manne and post sha nected and re led and labelle ain the prope to materials d d he shall rep payment ured for paym item .
nder this item pecificat on and inf fic control d of a median fla the contracto the work as er .
ance with the c removed in a pection act .
olding a valid shall perform a ardware shal er so as to min all be handled emoved from t ed to indicate erty of the ow during remova place any mate ment shall be m shall be at t tions frastruc devices ashing light w or shall subm indicated in canadian ele accordance w d electrical all electrical w l be removed nimize damag with a nonme the undergrou the length .
wner and sha al transportin erials damage the number the unit price cture with post and w mit a copy of the contrac ectrical code .
with new brun contractors work .
d from the co ge to the unit .
etallic sling .
und duct betw all be transpo ng andor stora ed or lost .
of median fla e. wire .
the wiring pe ct documents nswick regula licence issu oncrete media ween the medi orted to dti age shall be c ashing lights item num page num ermit to the s andor as ation num ued by the an barrier or an light and fredericton contractors removed in depa sign janua num num num num num num artment post ary num descript .num this ite material .num the sig frederic submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num the co from dt .num the co receipt .num the sig .num the sig minimu .num after ins .num the ins under it measure .num the qu with this basis of .num paymen stan of trans tion m consists of ls gn post frang cton nb .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall ti fredericton ontractor shall of the materia n post shall b n post shall b m torque of num stallation the stallation of sig tem num .
ment for p uantity to be m s item .
payment nt for work un ndard sp portatio traff f the installatio ible base and all carry out t by the engine l be responsib n nb to the w be responsib als until such t e handled by e plumbed an num nm and in sign posts sh gn posts shal payment measured for p nder this item ecificati on and inf fic control d on of a sign po d hardware sh the work as er .
ble for transp work areas .
ble for all mat time that the m a nonmetallic nd fastened to n accordance all be clean .
l be immedia payment shall shall be at the ions frastruc devices ost .
hall be availab indicated in porting unload terials and for materials have c sling .
o the sign base with standard tely followed be the numbe e unit price .
cture ble from the o the contrac ding storing a r any damage e been accept e with the anc d drawing num by the installa er of sign post owner from s ct documents and distributin e or loss from ted in the wor chor bolts prov num. ation of the si ts installed in item num page num tock at dti s andor as ng materials m the time of rk .
vided with a ign installed accordance depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of sig ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num the wo .num the po .num all mate nb .
.num any co .num the per measure .num the qu accorda basis of .num paymen stan of trans gn post tion em consists o ls dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ork shall be c st shall be ha erials shall re y loss or da ntractors resp e contractor rmanent black ment for p uantity to be ance with this payment nt for work un ndard sp portatio traff f the removal all carry out t by the engine arried out in s andled with a emain the pro amage to ma ponsibility and shall identify k marker .
payment e measured f s item .
nder this item ecificati on and inf fic control d of a sign pos the work as er .
such a manne nonmetallic perty of the o aterials during d heshe shall all sign post for payment shall be at the ions frastruc devices st. indicated in er so as to av sling .
owner and sh g removal t l replace any ts by marking shall be the e unit price .
cture the contrac void damage t hall be transpo transporting a materials dam g the sign nu e number of ct documents to the post .
orted to dti andor storag maged or lost .
umber on the sign posts r item num page num s andor as fredericton ge shall be .
cap with a removed in depa road janua num num num num num num artment dside sign ary num descript .num this ite aluminu material .num roads submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num the wo and the .num the pos .num the his .num sign pa no more .num direct c .num sign pa .num sign p drawing .num sign pa .num after ins measure .num the qu installed basis of .num paymen stan of trans tion em shall con um roadside s ls side sign mate als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ork shall be ca e adjacent and e contractor ssession of the e repair of an her own expe anels shall be e than ten sig contact with th anels shall be panels shall g num throug anels shall be stallation the ment for p uantity to be m d andor reins payment nt for work un ndard sp portatio traff nsist of the a sign on one or erials shall be all carry out t by the engine arried out in s d surrounding shall be resp ese materials ny damage re ense .
transported a n sections in o he sign faces s handled with be installed gh num. immediately i signs shall be payment measured for stalled in acco nder this item ecificati on and inf fic control d assembly and r more sign po available from the work as er .
such a manne roadway .
ponsible for a is taken until esulting from t and stored in a one row .
shall be avoid a nonmetallic d as shown nstalled follow e clean .
payment sha rdance with th shall be at the ions frastruc devices d installation osts .
m the owner fr indicated in er so as to av ny damage t such time as this work sha a vertical posi ed at all times c sling .
n in the c wing the instal all be the num his item .
e unit price .
cture andor reins from stock at d the contrac void damage t to or loss of they have be all be carried ition with the s s. contract doc llation of the s mber of roadsi stallation of a dti fredericto ct documents to the roadsid materials fro en accepted i out by the c sign faces pro cuments and sign post .
ide signs asse item num page num an extruded on nb .
s andor as e sign post om the time n the work .
contractor at otected with d standard embled and depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of roa ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num work s and the .num the res .num signs s .num signs s .num panels numbe .num materia nb .
.num any co measure .num the qu with thi basis of .num payme stan of trans adside sig tion em consists o ls dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b shall be carrie e adjacent and e contractor s sulting from th shall be handl shall be remov for each sig r as specified als shall rema y loss or da ntractors resp ment for p uantity to be m s item .
payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio n traff f the removal all carry out t by the engine ed out in suc d surrounding shall be respo his work .
led with a non ved from the gn shall be pa d on the plans ain the prope amage to ma ponsibility and payment measured for nder this item pecificat on and inf fic control d of an extrude the work as er .
h a manner s g roadway .
onsible at his nmetallic slin sign posts a ackaged and s. rty of the ow aterials during d heshe shall r payment sha m shall be at t tions frastruc devices ed aluminum indicated in so as to avoi sher own exp ng .
and disassem labelled wit wner and sha g removal t l replace any all be the num the unit price cture sign mounted the contrac id damage to pense for an mbled into num th permanent ll be transpor transporting a materials dam mber of signs e. d on one or m ct documents o the roadside y repair of su num mm sign pa t ink indicati rted to dti f andor storag maged or lost .
s removed in a item num page num more posts .
s andor as e sign post uch damage nels .
ng the sign fredericton ge shall be .
accordance depa over janua num num num artment rhead sign ary num descript .num this ite concret material .num all mate .num concre concret .num reinfor as indic .num materia .num anc .num backfill submitta .num submit forming .num submit .num ce re .num .num .num pro writ .num .num the pro and sig product .num all subm stan of trans structur tion em consists te foundation ls erials shall be te shall be de te shall meet t rcing steel sh cated on the p al for anchor b chor bolts nu shall be sup als tals are requ g part of this i tals are requi rtification tha ady mix conc the concret production o only concre plant certific oposed sourc ting a minimu this notifica proposed fo oposed desig gned by a pr tion is due to mittals for sho ndard sp portatio e foundat traff of the exca for an overhe e supplied by esigned prod the requireme all be supplie plans .
bolts shall con uts and washe plied in accor uired in acco tem .
red in accord at the concre crete associa te supplier sh of the concret ete supplied fr cation shall be ces of aggreg um of num day ation period s r use have no n mix proport rofessional e commence .
oring shall be ecificati on and inf tion fic control d avation shori ead sign stru the contracto duced and su ents of table num ed in accorda nform to the r ers shall be h rdance with num ordance with dance with num te supplier is ation plant ce hall submit p te in accordan rom such cer e maintained f gates and tes ys prior to the shall be incre ot been previo tions certified ngineer shal e in accordanc ions frastruc devices ing construc cture .
or .
upplied in acc num exposure c nce with num requirements otdip galvan num. any cross num and num s certified in ertification pro proof of confo nce with csa rtified plants s for the duratio st results sh proposed us eased to a mi ously approve d by the cont ll be submitte ce with num cture ction and ba cordance with class cxl .
.num and shall b of astm spe nized to astm referenced it num. accordance ogram or the ormance to t a anum .
shall be acce on of the wor all be submi se of such ma inimum of num ed for use in t tractor or his ed at least num . ckfilling of a csa anum be of the size ecification anum m anum class tem and refe with atlantic equivalent as he requireme ptable to the rk .
tted to the e aterials .
num days if the the owners p her agent an num days befo item num page num a reinforced num and the e and shape num type num. s c. erred to as c provinces s follows ents for the owner and engineer in aggregates projects .
nd stamped re concrete ov pag num num num verhead sig ge num num const .num the spec .num .num con .num exc .num .num plac .num con .num anc stan .num the .num .num .num the toler .num top .num ove foun .num bac .num the tops num measu .num the foun num basis o .num pay d gn structu ruction contractor s cifically directe concrete con nstruction of th avation shall shoring shall cement of rein ncrete constru hor bolts sh ndard drawin contractor m anchor syste anchor syste .num the con .num systems factor of included contractor s rances specif surfaces of t erhead sign s ndation .
kfilling shall b contractor s soiling seedin rement fo quantity to ndations for o of payment ment for wor departme ure found tr shall carry o ed by the eng nstruction meth he foundation conform to th l be installed nforcing steel uction method all be install gs num and may supply eit em a emb em b struc tractor shall s shall be des safety agains on the subm shall supply a fied for each g he foundation structures sha be carried out shall restore t ng andor mul or payment o be measur verhead sign t rk under this i sta ent of tra dation raffic contro ut the work gineer .
hods shall be n shall be as i he requiremen in accordanc shall conform ds shall be in led to confo d num and i ther edded ancho ctural inserts submit shop d igned for a sa st failure equa itted shop dra a plywood tem group of anch n shall have a all not be erec t in accordanc the work are lching to the s t red for paym structures co tem shall be andard s ansporta ol devices as indicated in accordance ndicated in th nts of num. e with num m to the requi accordance w rm with the tem num. or bolts drawings in ac afe working lo al to at least num awings .
mplate made hor bolts .
a level smoot cted until at le ce with num ea to its origin satisfaction of ment shall b onstructed in at the unit pr specifica ation and d in the cont e with csa anum he contract d irements of num with num. requirements ccordance wi oad of num kn num and a state to suit the b th trowelled f east num days a . nal condition .
f the enginee be the numb accordance w rice .
ations d infrast tract docume anum .
documents .
num. s noted on th item num .
n per anchor ement to this olt size and s finish .
after placing o this may in er .
ber of reinfo with this item tructure item num january num ents andor a the plans o rodbolt with effect shall b spacing to th of the concret clude shaping orced concret m. e num num as on a be he te g te depa over janua num num num num num num num num artment rhead sign ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mat stock a submitta .num the co engine constru .num genera .num the do .num the com num .num surface .num afte ma .num dimens .num prio pla .num inspect .num a v we .num .num the .num fau .num co stan of trans structur tion em consists o ls terials includ at dti freder als ontractor sha er a minimum ction al e contractor cuments .
e contractor mpatible and num. e finishing er erection t atch the fabric sional toleran or to tightenin tes in diamete tion and testi visual inspec lds as a resul the inspect with cancs e inspectors ulty welds sha rrected welds ndard sp portatio e traff f the erection ding the over ricton nb .
all submit the m of num days shall erect shall ensure congruent w he structure cation finish .
nces ng bolts any er and hole lo ing ction shall be lt of the trans ion shall be c sa wnum .
report shall b all be correcte s shall be rein ecificati on and inf fic control d of an overhe rhead sign s e erection pro before the sc the overhea e that dimen with aspects o shall have a gaps betwee ocation .
carried out portation of th carried out by be submitted t ed as specifie nspected .
ions frastruc devices ead sign struc structure shal ocedure stam cheduled star ad sign struc nsional tolera of the work s any blemishes en plates are before erect he overhead s y an independ to the engine ed in cancs cture cture .
l be availabl mped and si rt of erection .
cture as des ances and in supplied unde s or marks re e to be filled w tion to ensur sign structure dent inspecto er before ere sa wnum cla e from the o gned by a p scribed in th dicated dime er item num a emoved and with shims m re there are e to the work or certified in a ection of the s ause num .
item num page num owner from professional he contract ensions are andor item restored to matching the no cracked k site .
accordance structure .
ov pag num num num verhead sig ge num num .num erec .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num measu .num the erec num basis o .num pay sign d gn structu ction the contract storage facili .num storage with the blocking .
the contrac support inclu distorted ove following ere plate to be g manufacturer .num central h a minimum o equivalent w installed upo structures sh before final in if the galvan the bolts hav and washed with a zincr system as ide the contrac overhead sig rement fo quantity to cted in accord of payment ment for wor n structure as departme ure tr tor shall deliv ty for the ove areas shall b overhead s . ctor shall be uding sufficie erstressed or ection and p routed a non rs instruction holes in the ba of num mnum of s which must b n the structur hall be clean nspection .
ized coating ve rusted the clean using rich paint in entified in cg ctor shall not gn structure .
or payment be measured dance with thi t rk under this s identified und sta ent of tra raffic contro ver the overhe rhead sign st be at least num sign structure responsible f ent and satisf otherwise da plumbing of th nshrink non ns under the b ase plate sha sign panel o e securely a re on the sam ned to a brigh on the bolts e bolts shall b a nonorganic accordance gsb numgpnum tify the engi t d for paymen s item .
item shall inc der the contra andard s ansporta ol devices ead sign struc tructure if it ca num m from the e raised a m for the safe factory blocki amaged .
he structure metallic grout base plate .
all be blocked or equivalent ttached until me day it is er ht new condi is damaged be wire brush c solvent .
wh with cgsb numm .
ineer num da nt shall be the clude a separ act .
specifica ation and cture to the w annot be inst edge of the minimum of storage of th ng to ensure where draw t shall be pla to prevent es weight in sa the sign pan rected .
ition to the s during install hed to remov hen the surfa specification ays in advan e number of rate unit price ations d infrast work site and alled immedia travel lane o num mm ab he structure e that the me wings indicate aced in accor scape of grou and filled bag nels are insta satisfaction of lation of the ve the loose c ace is dry it s numgpnumm nce of the e overhead sig e for each typ tructure item num january num d shall supply ately .
of the highwa ove grade o and adequat embers are no e for the bas rdance with th ut .
gs or approve alled shall b f the enginee structure or coating or ru shall be coate or equivale erection of th gn structures pe of overhea e num num a ay on te ot se he ed be er if st ed nt he s ad depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of ove ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num the re structu .num the res .num the ove .num the ove .num all ma frederi .num any co measure .num the qu disman basis of .num paymen sign str stan of trans erhead sig tion em consists o ls dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b moval shall b re and the ad e contractor sulting from th erhead sign s erhead sign s terials shall cton nb .
y loss or da ntractors resp ment for p uantity to be ntled and remo payment nt for work u ructure as ide ndard sp portatio gn structu traff f dismantling all carry out t by the engine be carried ou djacent and su shall be resp he work .
structure sha structure sha remain the amage to ma ponsibility and payment measured fo oved in accor under this item entified under ecificati on and inf ure fic control d and removing the work as er .
ut in a mann urrounding ro ponsible at h ll be handled ll be dismantl property of aterials during d shehe shall or payment s rdance with th m shall includ the contract .
ions frastruc devices g an overhea indicated in ner so as to oadway .
hisher own e with a nonm led in one da the owner g removal t l replace any shall be the n his item .
e a separate cture ad sign struct the contrac avoid damag expense to r metallic sling .
ay .
and shall b transporting a materials dam number of ov unit price fo ure .
ct documents ge to the ove repair any su be transporte andor storag maged or lost .
verhead sign or each type o item num page num s andor as erhead sign ch damage ed to dti ge shall be .
n structures of overhead depa over janua num num num num num num artment rhead sign ary num descript .num this ite sign str material .num all mate submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num the co from dt .num the co receipt .num sign pa and wit .num direct c .num sign pa .num sign pa .num after in measure .num the qu installed basis of p .num payme stan of trans tion em consists of ructure .
s erials shall be als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall ti fredericton ontractor shall of the materia anels shall be h no more tha contact with th anels shall be anels shall be stallation the ment for p uantity to be m d in accordan payment nt for work un ndard sp portatio traff f the assembl e available from all carry out t by the engine l be responsib n nb to the w be responsib als until such t e transported an ten signs in he sign faces handled with secured to th signs shall be payment measured for nce with this it nder this item ecificati on and inf fic control d ly and installa m the owner f the work as er .
ble for transp work areas .
ble for all mat time that the m and stored in n one row .
shall be avoid a nonmetalli he structure in e clean .
payment sha em .
shall be at th ions frastruc devices ation of an ext from stock at indicated in porting unload terials and for materials have n a vertical p ded at all time ic sling .
n accordance ll be the num he unit price .
cture truded alumin dti frederic the contrac ding storing a r any damage e been accept position with t es .
with the plan ber of overhe num sign on a cton nb .
ct documents and distributin e or loss from ted in the wor the sign faces s. ead signs asse item num page num an overhead s andor as ng materials m the time of rk .
s protected embled and depa remo janua num num num num num num artment oval of ove ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num work s overhea .num the res .num signs s .num signs s .num panels number .num materia nb .
.num any co measure .num the qu remove basis of .num payme stan of trans erhead sig tion em consists of ls dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b hall be carried ad sign struct e contractor sulting from th shall be handle shall be remov for each sig r as specified als shall rema y loss or da ntractors resp ment for p uantity to be m ed in accordan payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio gn traff f the dismantli all carry out t by the engine d out in such ture and the a shall be resp he work .
ed with a non ved from the s gn shall be p on the plans .
ain the prope amage to ma ponsibility and payment measured for nce with this it nder this item ecificati on and inf fic control d ing and remov the work as er .
a manner so adjacent and ponsible at h metallic sling sign structure packaged and .
rty of the ow aterials during d he shall repl payment sha tem .
m shall be at t ions frastruc devices val of a sign fr indicated in o as to avoid d surrounding r herhis own e g. e and disassem d labelled wit wner and sha g removal t lace any mate ll be the num the unit price cture rom an overh the contrac damage to th roadway .
expense to r mbled into num th permanent ll be transpor transporting a erials damage ber of overhe e. p ead sign stru ct documents he overhead s repair any su num mm sign pa t ink indicatin rted to dti f andor storag ed or lost .
ead signs dism item num page num cture .
s andor as sign and the ch damage anels .
ng the sign fredericton ge shall be mantled and depa pave janua num num num num .
artment ment mark ary num descript .num this ite marking .num eith material .num all mate .num traffic num .num oil .num par num num num num num num num num num .
num .
not stan of trans kings tion em consists gs on roadwa her oilbased ls erials shall be paint based traffic the paint specification ra .
and s para .
num minimum maximu maximu minimum num pigment pigment silicon d titanium num change num paint co num change num add sio portion o te lead co ndard sp portatio traff of supply an ay pavement .
or waterborn e supplied by c paint shall meet c n modified as m shall meet the .num m changed fro m changed fr m changed fr m changed fro t composition t description dioxide as si m dioxide astm enum to olours to matc num seconds t onum shall be de of paint ntent if prese ecificati on and inf fic control d nd applicatio ne paint may b the contracto cgsb spec shown in tab tab modifications modifi e requiremen om num to num rom num to num rom num to num om num to num minimums i onum o astm enum ch samples pr to num seconds etermined usi ent not to exc ions frastruc devices n of yellow be used in the or .
cification num ble num. ble num s to cgsb num. ications for t ts for consiste n kgl num .
add yello rovided by dt s ng classical g ceed num mg cture and white pa e work .
numm but w nummnum this item ency para .
num yellow num num ow not less th ti gravimetric m kg aint materials with paragrap num and nopi white num num han num ethod on inso item num page num s for traffic phs of that ckup time oluble pav pag num vement ma ge num num .num pigment volatile m nonvola coalescin num penta by ma type of b white pa titanium yellow p titanium notes d arkings waterborne t .num the pain uniform s sprayed applied to .num the pain .num handling uniformit shall be stripe wit equipme .num the pain not chan in finish .
after the .num the colo supplied .num the che comply w .num the phys propert content b matter by m atile vehicle ng agent num anediol monoi ass of solid po binder aint dioxide gl paint dioxide gl num to be num of num m num titanium num lead co departme tr traffic paint nt shall be a smooth consi evenly and s o the paveme t shall be sup g and storag y consistenc capable of b thout side sp nt .
nt materials sh ge in service white and ye addition of ov our of the pa by the owne mical compo with the requir sical propertie chemica ty by massnum mass by mass numtrimethyl isobutyrate olymer num num num talc that m minimum dioxide pigm ntent if prese sta ent of tra raffic contro homogeneou stency free o smoothly at ent .
pplied readym ge qualities cy and absen being sufficie platter and ov hall be of a qu e to impair the ellow marking verlay glass b aint shall con er upon reque osition shall b rements of ta es shall comp table l properties min num num num rohm chemica equivale num num meets astm d ment shall me ent not to exc andard s ansporta ol devices us waterbase of skin dirt an its intended mixed for use shall provid nce of skinnin ently atomize erspray withi uality and con e visibility of t gs shall be vi beads .
nform to the st. be determine able num. ply with table num of waterbor max num num haas rhople al dtnumna ent dnum with a p et astm dnum ceed num mg specifica ation and ed mixture of nd other forei temperature without addin de an accep ng and thixot d to produce n the limitatio nsistency suc the markings sible in dayli colour of wh ed by the pa num. ne traffic pa tes ast ast cgsb numgp ex fastrack num emulsion or photovolt gree num type ii kg ations d infrast f particles we gn matter ca and covering ng water .
ptable degre tropic propert e a uniformly ons of conve ch that the pa .
the paint fil ght and unde hite and yello aint manufact aint st method tm dnum tm dnum pnum method num emulsio r engineerap en filter reflect tructure item num january num ell ground to apable of bein g solidly whe ee of settling ties .
the pai y applied pai ntional stripin aints colour w lm shall be fla er artificial lig ow paint chip turer but sha d num n dow pproved tance e num num a ng en g nt nt ng will at ht ps all depa pave janua prope nopic nontr volatile conten freeze viscos viscos stabilit skinni coarse num m num m settlin bleedi hiding reflec yellow white note num num .
artment ment mark ary num erty ckup time m acking time e organic co nt excluding w ethaw resis sity krebs un sity change k ty test num ng properties e particles m m g rate up to ng power mnuml ctance colour w nontrackin thickness a .num overlay num .num ge .num .num .num .num stan of trans kings inutes secondsnum ompound vo water gl stance nit ku num ku after hea c s by mass o num months l r difference ng time for re applied on dry y glass bead neral beads shall designed to material sha glass bead accordance glass beads the paint .
the refracti accordance ndard sp portatio traff physical pro c c tshear egular water y pavement ha s be true smoo o be resistan all be containe s shall meet with astm d ast s shall be colo on index of with cgsb s ecificati on and inf fic control d table num operties of w min pass num nil nil num num num num num num num based stripin aving tempera oth lustrous s nt to the effe ed in or amon t the gradatio dnum on sam ta grading lim tm sieve size num num num num num ourless to the the glass be specification num ions frastruc devices num waterborne t max te num as num num as as num as num ca nil cg nil num as as as as pf cg as g paint based ature num c spheres manu ects of traffic ng the beads .
on requireme mple sizes of able num mits for glass e m perc e extent that t eads shall no numgpnum met cture traffic paint est method stm dnum stm dnum stm dnum stm dnum altrans num gsb numgpnum stm dnum stm dnum stm dnum stm dnum fund cryptome gsb numgpnum stm enum d on num m c under humi ufactured from c wear and ents of table num to numg .
s beads cent passing num num num num num num num num num they do not im ot be less tha thod num .
numgnum num method num dnum dnum eter wnum w num method num num mils wet dity condition m glass of a c weathering .
e num whe g mpart a notice an num whe item num page num .num wedge num film ns num. composition no foreign n tested in eable hue to en tested in pav pag num num num num vement ma ge num num .num num .num num .num num .num d arkings roundness .num a minimu .num the perc of approx under ref reta pass .num failure to imperfections .num the surf scratches of milkine .num testing f gpnum m moisture res .num beads sh beads be .num beads sh dispensin painting .
.num moisture beaker t for num min dry beak .num after stand .num the start chemical sta .num exposure diluted a adversely .num glass be num g sam chloride s distilled w .num the samp cons departme tr um of num by centage of tru ximately num flected light a ained on the num sing the num u o meet round s face of the b s. not more t ess air inclus for imperfecti method num sistance hall be treate efore the bead hall not agglo ng equipment resistance w to which an e nutes the wat er .
r standing for dard stem of beads shall f the flow at th ability e of glass be acid or alkali y affect reflec eads shall be mple of beads solution num water three tim beads will be ple .
dulling o stitute failure o sta ent of tra raffic contro y mass of the ue spheres sh num beads in a and magnifica num um sieve um sieve size ness requirem eads shall be than num of t sions dark sp ons will be p . ed so as to ov ds are added omerate durin t whenever su will be tested equivalent vol ter shall be d r num minutes t num mm leng flow through he beginning o ads to paint f solutions sh ctive propertie resistant to d s placed in a normal solutio mes and air d e examined u of the surfac of this test .
andard s ansporta ol devices glass beads hall be determ culture dish tion as follow size under num under numx ments will be e smooth lus the true sphe pecks and inc performed in vercome the to the painte ng storage an urface and at d on a numg lume of distill decanted and he beads sha th and num mm the stem wit of the test is p film constitue hall not resu es of the bead deterioration b num ml be on left to soa dried .
under a micro ce of the be specifica ation and shall be true mined by ast by counting t ws numx magnifica magnification cause for reje strous and fr eres shall hav ipient fracture accordance w effect of wat ed marking .
nd application mospheric co sample of b led water sha d the glass be all be poured m inside diam thout stoppag permissible .
ents humidity ult in dulling ds .
by calcium ch aker covered ak for three h oscope and c eads or othe ations d infrast spheres .
tm d num o the number o tion n. ection .
ree of film c ve imperfectio es .
with cgsb s ter vapour or n and shall fl onditions are beads placed all be added .
eads transfer d slowly via a meter .
ge .
slight init y atmospheric of the surfa hloride as de d with num m hours rinsed w compared with er detrimenta tructure item num january num or on a samp of true sphere cavities pits o ons in the for specification r liquid on th low freely fro satisfactory fo d in a num m after standin rred to a clea a funnel into tial agitation t c conditions o ace that wou etermined on ml of a calciu with num ml o h an untreate al effects sha e num num le es or m num he m or ml ng an a to or ld a m of ed all depa pave janua num .
num num num artment ment mark ary num num .num du .num .num .num .num submitta .num the co paint an .num the co supplie use of t .num the co capable constru .num genera .num the spe .num the ta ow stan of trans kings al coating of the beads promoting s num a the adhere dissolved in day if kept r be made da the adheren weigh num saturate dry the agglome rinse th over the remove overdry place th dark roo present .
if all beads h and the be fluorescence yellowgreen cause for rej als ontractor shal nd glass bead ontractor sha ed conform to the materials .
ontractor shal e of applying ction al e contractor ecifically direc e work shall ac manual o wners work a ndard sp portatio traff glass beads shall have b silane coating and the adher ence coating n num ml of ac refrigerated in ily .
nce coating te num grams of b e the beads w beads in an o erated .
he beads in a em .
use suctio e the beads fr y the beads u he glass bead om .
a yellowg .
have a yellow eads are acc e the beads n fluorescenc jection .
ll submit in w ds .
all submit as o the requirem .
l submit in w the pavemen shall carry ou cted by the en be performed of uniform tr area traffic co ecificati on and inf fic control d s both a moist g. the bead rence coating test shall u cetone .
this s n a closed da est shall be p beads and pla with dansyl ch oven at num c funnel lined w on during this rom the funne until free flowi ds on filter pap green fluores wgreen fluore ceptable .
if are not prop ce is seen a writing before s received fro ments of this writing certific nt markings as ut the work a ngineer .
d in accordan raffic control ontrol manua ions frastruc devices tureresistant ds shall pass g test .
use a solutio solution may ark container erformed as f ace in alumini hloride solutio c for num minut with new filte s step .
el and place in ing .
per and inspe scence will be escence the a only some o erly coated a adherence co e work comme om each sup item and ins cation that the s outlined in t as indicated i nce with the t devices for al watcm .
cture silicone coa s the moistu on of num gra be used for between use follows um trays .
on using an ey tes .
beads w r paper and p n aluminium t ect colour und e observed if a adherence co of the bead and this is a c oating was no ences the na pplier certific structions on e equipment p the contract d in the contra transportation canada mu ating and an ure resistanc ams of dans several tests es .
a fresh so yedropper .
will be yellow a pour num ml o trays .
der ultraviole adherence co oating is prop s have a ye cause for reje ot applied an ames of the s cation that th the proper s proposed for documents .
ct document n association utdc part item num page num n adhesion e test per syl chloride s during the olution shall and of acetone et light in a oating is erly applied ellowgreen ection .
if no nd this is a suppliers of e materials storage and the work is ts andor as n of canada c and the pav pag num num num num num num vement ma ge num num .num num .num equ num .num num .num num .num num .num d arkings traffic paint goods act .
d traffic paint u permit are ad ipment general .num the con recomme shall not to the pa line painting .num line pai markings with shar .num the equ beads to pressuriz .num the equ to numc a .num the equ applied .
.num the con and sign vehicle a equipment fo .num equipme the requ required .num equipme islands a and sto .num equipme with dime cnum .
paint remov .num equipme the engi per num. damage departme tr shall be tra drivers certifie under the aut dhered to .
tractor shall s ended by the contaminate avement .
g equipment nting equipm s to the requir rp edges .
ipment shall o the wet pa zed overlay g ipment shall and maintaini ipment shall tractor shall s s to adequate and wet pavem or other pave ent for applyin ired thicknes rates .
ent shall be c at a width of num p bars at a w ent shall be c ensions as pe val equipment ent shall be m neer or as r num .
the to the pavem sta ent of tra raffic contro ansported in ed under the thority of the supply all equ manufacture the paint or ment shall be red thickness have a glass ainted line un lass bead gun have a heate ng a constan have a mete supply one or ely warn and ment marking ement markin ng other pave ss and dispen capable of pa num mm or num width of num m capable of pa er the manua t made availab required to co equipment s ment surface .
andard s ansporta ol devices accordance act may be e owners per uipment need r of the pavem other pavem e capable of s and at width bead dispen niformly at th n. er capable of t temperature ering device t r more shadow advise the d g paint ahead gs ement markin nsing glass b ainting the lo num mm and c mm .
ainting arrows al of uniform t le for remova orrect markin hall be capa specifica ation and with the tra employed by rmit provided ded for apply ment marking ment marking f applying ce hs of num or num ser and shall he recomme heating the p e during the s to measure th w vehicles m driving public .
ngs shall be c beads to the ongitudinal lin rosshatching s and similar traffic contro al of paveme gs applied in able of remov ations d infrast ansportation y the contract d that the co ing pavemen g paint produc materials or c entre lane a num mm as a l be capable o ended rate by paint to any te spraying opera he number of ounted with a of the slow m capable of ap wet paint un nes outlining g bars at a wi markings us ol devices for ent markings n error or non ving markings tructure item num january num of dangerou tor to transpo nditions of th nt markings a cts .
equipme cause damag and edge lin a uniform strip of applying th y means of emperature u ation .
f litres of pai an arrow boar moving stripin pplying paint a niformly at th crosshatche dth of num m sing template r canada pa as ordered b nconformanc s with minim e num num us ort he as nt ge ne pe he a up nt rd ng at he ed m es art by ce al depa pave janua num num num num artment ment mark ary num .num timing .num pav pav .num .num .num prema .num the est .num .num .num .num .num the item .num sho the oth .num surface .num pav suc .num applica .num all pre .num the thic dim .num the doe co and .num lon stan of trans kings of the work vement mark ving under the no sooner t lines no soo no later than arking e engineer s tablish the pos painted sym num and p painted dot auxiliary lan painted cent outline of ea location of e e contractor m to allow the ould the cont e centerline a erwise ensur e preparation vement mark ch as dirt loos ation pavement m esent a crisp e applied ma ckness retro mensions and e contractor s es not get o ntractor shall d the repair of ngitudinal line ndard sp portatio traff kings shall be e contract than num days oner than com n num days for shall provide sition of pave mbols at the b painted dots a ts to mark e nes otherwise treline as the ach crosshat each type of a shall notify t e engineer to tractors line as control per re they are pa kings shall be se particles a markings sha uniform appe arkings shall oreflectivity positioning o shall be respo on vehicles o be responsi f any damage es shall be of ecificati on and inf fic control d e applied with to allow the n mpletion of item r arterial highw the measur ement markin beginning of e along the cen dgelines that e the contrac control line tched island arrow .
the engineer o schedule the painting equi r num ainted parallel e applied onl and oily residu all be accura earance in da be to the sa the straight of other marki onsible for co or other priva ble for the co e that occurs the types and ions frastruc devices hin the follow new asphalt c m num and ways and num rements and gs as follows each type of ntreline t are not pa ctor shall pain and at least two e premarking ipment be un the contrac l to the center ly on clean a ue shall be re ately placed aylight and da atisfaction of tness and s ngs and abs ontrol of the p ate property .
osts of remov as a result of d widths show cture wing time fram concrete to c days for othe premarking s centreline ma arallel to cent nt edgelines weeks prior g crew .
nable to paint ctor shall pre rline .
and dry surfa emoved before based on p arkness .
f the enginee spacing of l ence of overs aint spray du .
in the even ving the paint f the paint or i wn in table num mes after co cure and for er classes of gs on the pa arking identifi treline as on using the pre r to the work parallel edge emark the ed aces .
any co e painting .
premarkings er with respe lines the a spray and trac ring applicatio nt that this o t off the priva its removal .
num .
item num page num ompletion of white edge highway .
avement to ed in table n tapers to emarked or k under this elines using dge lines or ontaminants and shall ect to paint accuracy of cking .
on so that it occurs the ate property pav pag num vement ma ge num num .num .num .num .num .num .num d arkings .num single br num m line .num single br auxiliary crosshatchi in the directi andor as dire stop bars sh lanes as ind pavement m follows for oilb for wate .num paint sha num m. .num overlay and num k retroreflectiv weeks and n yellow p white pa pavement m vehicles that .num tracking as determ pavement m as specified b departme tr types single so single bro combinat broken double so roken num mm and num m spa roken num mm lane or inters ng lines shall on of travel ected by the all be num mm dicated in the arking shall b based paint num erborne paint all be applied glass beads kgl of paint f vity shall me o later than fo paint num mc aint num mc markings shall cross over th of longitudin mined by the arkings that d by the engine sta ent of tra raffic contro s and widths line type olid oken tion solid be olid mwide lines b ace .
mwide lines section shall h l be num mm num units along engineer .
m wide appli contract doc be applied on numºc and rising numºc and ris to the pavem shall be appl for water bas et the follow our weeks aft cdm²lx cdm²lx l be applied he painted ma nal centre lan engineer .
do not confor eer shall be re andard s ansporta ol devices table num s of longitud c y w y w eside y y between traffi that mark the have a skip pa wide uniform g the directio ed at num to t cuments or a nly on dry pav g or sing .
ment surface lied at a rate sed paint .
wing requirem ter application in a manner arkings .
ne and edge m to the requ emoved ando specifica ation and num dinal painted colour w yellow white num num yellow white num num yellow num yellow num ic lanes shall e edge of trav attern of num mly spaced at n of travel to the edge of th s directed by vement havin to a minimum of num kgl o ments when t n of markings that reduces lines shall no uirements of t or replaced a ations d infrast d lines width mm num num num num num num lines x num have a skip velled lane th num m line and t num m and at a o num unit perpe he travelled la the engineer ng a surface t m dry thicknes of paint for o tested no so s. s tracking by ot exceed num this item doc as directed by tructure item num january num pattern of num hrough a tape num m space .
an angle of num endicular to it ane across th r. temperature a ss of num m oil based pai oner than tw the wheels o of line lengt cuments ando the engineer e num num num er num t he as nt wo of th or r. depa pave janua num num num artment ment mark ary num .num sampli .num the eac .num the .num tes co gla .num sho and .num .num measure .num the qu in acco .num for tab line .num for def line the .num for .num for basis of .num payme marking stan of trans kings ng and testin e contractor ch colour from e engineer sh sting costs s ntractor if tes ss beads sha ould the cont d in writing wi the contrac the appeal contractor .
testing cost and by the c ment for p uantity to be m ordance with t r longitudinal ble num me e types r crosshatch fined as the es which sha e island r painted arro r painted stop payment nt for work u g as identified ndard sp portatio traff ng of material shall arrange m the paint tr hall take ons shall be born st results fail .
all be taken fo tractor wish to thin num hours ctor shall ma testing the r ts from the ap contractor if t payment measured for his item lines the num easured from ing the num area enclose all not be mea ows the total p bars the nu nder this item d under the c ecificati on and inf fic control d s e for the eng uck on site .
ite random sa ne by the ow in the latter or new tests .
o appeal any s of his receip ke provision results of wh ppeal shall be est results fa payment sha mber of linea beginning to mber of squar ed by edge o asured as line number of all mber of stop m shall include contract .
ions frastruc devices gineer to take amples of gla wner if test case sample test results pt of test resul for the engin hich shall be e borne by the il .
all be for pave r metres of e o end of each re metres of of pavement es under num. types of arro bars in each e a separate cture e samples of ss beads num results are s es from anoth such appeal lts .
neer to obtain binding on b e owner if tes ement markin ach type col h line type inc yellow or wh curb and gu num but shall ows painted a lane .
unit price for f paint num l m kg minimum satisfactory a her batch of p may be made n additional s both the own st results are ngs supplied a our and width cluding the ga hite crosshatc utter andor be considere and r each type o item num page num minimum for .
and by the paint andor e only once samples for ner and the satisfactory and applied h of line per ap between ched island longitudinal ed as part of f pavement depa cons janua num num num num num num .
artment struction t ary num descript .num this ite work a in acco material .num genera .num all and .num ref fab .num de .num traffic c .num sig sig in t .num .num a g ow .num let scr .num sig for .num sig and .num tempo num .num pav .num .num stan of trans traffic co tion em consists o area traffic c ordance with t ls al materials sh d all required ferences to s brication .
lineation tcd control signs gn letters sym gn catalogue the contract d the owners num guide for sign wners sign sh tters and bor reenprocessi gn substrates the sign shee gn sheeting s d the sign me rary paveme vement mark marking tap glass beads adhesive ba marking tap retroreflectiv m viewing d entr obs retr tape ndard sp portatio ontrol traff f the supply control device he work area all be supplie safety equipm signs shall in ds shall be as s mbols and co andor work documents or s sign catalo num. n letter sizes hop upon req rders shall b ng ink .
shall be eith eting .
hall be secur essage or sym nt markings ing tape pe shall be c s and shall b acking .
pe shall ensu vity requireme istance rance angle o servation ang roreflected lu e respectively ecificati on and inf fic control d installation o es tcds an a traffic cont ed by the co ment and app clude barrica s shown in st olours shall c k traffic contr r as approved ogue can be p based upon uest .
e constructed er aluminium rely adhered mbol is legible composed of be manufactu re reflectivity ents as follow of numº yell le of numº ye uminance of y. ions frastruc devices operation ma d the provisio trol manual w ontractor incl parel for tcps ades with res tandard draw conform to re rol manual w d by the engin purchased fro posted spee d of black n m alloy or plyw to the sign s e to motorists .
f high quality ured in rolls num y for at least ws when me ow and white ellow and wh num and num cture aintenance re on of traffic c watcm .
uding all tcd s. spect to the m wing num atta equirements watcm or t neer .
om the owner ed and locati onreflective wood that pro substrate so t . y polymeric m num cm wide num months a asured per a e tape ite tape num millicandela elocation and control perso ds and sign materials use ached .
outlined in th to custom de rs sign shop on is availab vinyl sheetin ovides a smo that the finish materials pig e with pressur and shall hav astm enum as for yellow item num page num d removal of ons tcps supports ed in their he owners etails shown p telephone ble from the ng or black ooth surface h is smooth gments and re sensitive ve minimum using a num and white co pag num num num num num num num onstructio ge num num num .num num submit .num with that item .num sub num const .num the spec .num the equ type num .num traf .num .num .num num .num traf .num num .num traf .num .num d on traffic .num minimum pavement m .num when pa full dep retrorefle y w ttals hin num days of all retrorefle m. bmittals are re ruction contractor s cifically direct contractor s ipment on the es of work an ffic control pl the contrac apply to the t any of the c shall be stam the contract the engineer ffic control pe further to c required bas area and oth ffic control ag the contrac operational d work area tr the contrac contract .
departme control tr m skid resistan arking paint avement is tre th recycling ectivity of tem yellow paint white paint f the commen ective materia equired in acc shall carry o ted by the en shall be resp e contract in d conditions a ans tor shall dete types of wo contractors s mped by a pro tor shall prese r. ersons chapter num of ed on roadwa her pertinent f gent ctor shall pro decisions on affic control o ctor shall ide sta ent of tra raffic contro nce of tape sh eated by cold traffic paint porary traffic num m num m ncement of w als to be used cordance with ut the work gineer .
onsible for a n accordance at the work s ermine from rk under the c signing plans ofessional eng ent the traffic the watcm ay geometry factors .
ovide a tra behalf of the on the contra ntify the tra andard s ansporta ol devices hall be num bp d milling mic and associat markings as mcdm²lx mcdm²lx work the cont d on the con any crossre as indicated ll work assoc with the requ site .
section num contract .
s that are diff gineer .
c control plan m the contra traffic patter ffic control e contractor a ct. affic control a specifica ation and n per astm crosurfacing ted reflectoriz follows tractor shall s tract shall me eferenced item d in the cont ciated with t uirements of t of the watc ferent from th ns at the firs actor shall p rns and volum agent with and other su agent at the ations d infrast e num .
partial depth zation materia submit a decl eet the requir ms forming pa tract docume tcds tcps the watcm cm the typic he watcm st job meetin provide as m mes size or l overall auth bcontractors e first job m tructure item num january num h recycling o al shall ensur laration statin rements of th art of this item ents andor a and all relate for the variou cal layouts tha typical layou g for review b many tcps a length of wo ority to mak with regard t meeting for th e num num or re ng is m. as ed us at ts by as rk ke to he depa cons janua num .
num num num num artment struction t ary num num .num the day .num the pre .num applica .num tem as .num .num .num .num .num tem dire .num da .num work s .num up wh item to b .num wo of t .num any and adj bas measure .num the su devices lump su basis of .num payme .num notwith the eng .num for and .num ext und stan of trans traffic co e traffic con y and two lan e traffic con escribed in se ation of temp mporary pave per section num paving milling pain partial or fu microsurfaci mporary pave ected by the e maged or mis toppage on written or ich the engin m or the wat be corrected .
ork shall not r the engineer .
y work time d the time tak ustment of th sis of claim .
ment for p upply installa s and the pro um basis .
payment nt for work u hstanding num gineer for the rce account w dor tra work wo der item num .
ndard sp portatio ontrol traff trol agent sh es at night .
trol agent sh ection num of th orary paveme ement markin num of watcm nted markings ull depth recy ing .
ement markin engineer .
ssing marking rder of the e neer has iden tcm and the resume until t lost due to w ken by the c he specified payment ation operati ovision of traf nder this item num separat following typ work perform ork of a natur ecificati on and inf fic control d all ensure tha hall perform in he watcm .
ent marking ngs shall be p m for operatio s only ycling and ngs shall not b gs shall be rep ngineer the c ntified that tc e deficiencies the contracto work stoppag ontractor to b work limit ion maintena ffic control pe m shall be at t te payment sh es of work med as identi e or style not ions frastruc devices at at least on nspections an placed on the ons as follows be placed on placed at the contractor sh cds andor t are of a seri or has correct ge per num be in complia ted funds c ance relocat ersons in acc the lump sum hall be made ified under it t identified in cture ne traffic lane nd prepare re same day as s a chip seal s end of each hall stop wor tcps are not ous nature a ted all deficie .num and gc ance shall no completion d tion and rem cordance with m price .
e by the owne tem num in th the contract e is kept open elated docum s the work is surface unles day .
rk in any wo in accordanc ndor previou encies to the num for nonc ot be conside date and sha moval of tra h this item sh er for tcps a he contract d t documents item num page num n during the mentation as carried out s otherwise ork area for ce with this usly ordered satisfaction compliance ered for any all not be a ffic control hall be on a approved by documents performed standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num guide post details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num num num num num num num num num num typical guide post guide post adjacent to structure guide post at intermediate locations offset block rail to be spacing of guide rail delineator installed before post is cut off on tangents note num nummm galv .
steel washer num x num guide rail delineator nummm splice bolts nummm num post bolt nummm to nummm long offset block post detail num num num num num nummm galv .
steel nut rectangular washer rectangular washer slotted hole nummm x nummm at each post location num num num num num num num num file num num m num m on curves standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num guide post and guide rail details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num beam guide rail details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num guide rail structure details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num guide rail structure details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num inserts guide rail num num num x num guide posts traffic flow num num num see splice connection detail num x num slots in end shoe num num num num w here applicable top of curb or asphalt post num x num num for further placement information guide rail num long beam num num num b b post num x num barrier w all at face of finished grade curb gutter guide rail to barrier w all connection detail guide rail splice connection detail expansion typical movement due to bridge locknut clockw ise to allow w hile torqueing outside nut clockw ise from snug tight torque inside nut counter equivalent engineer approved special end shoe or num long armtec n o t e s num special end shoe to be hotdipped galvanized w ith num x num m m slots as show n. num m m galvanized splice bolts to be centered in slots before tightening .
all materials supplied installed by contractor .
see splice connection detail for more information .
numm m galv .
splice bolt w ith galv .
flat w asher num galv .
splice nuts num bolts num w ashers num nuts required for each end shoe num long armtec special end shoe spliced to first section of guide rail lap in direction of traffic see note num num num guide rail inserts section bb grade finished file num plnum plnum barrier w all see standard dw g. num or engineerapproved equivalent num w ith nc threads .
plated hex head bolts x numm m long cadmium mnumxnum w ith numm m nca insert type lfw standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num castinplace concrete barrier details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num concrete encased duct bank system january num traffic control devices standard drawing num file num numm rebar numm rebar numm rebar numm rebar fish rope asphalt klein cat .
no.num surface .
nummm below asphalt warning tape placed underground service encasement concrete contract documents as indicated in concrete encasement duct number of ducts in bedding sand dimensions shown on contract documents .
note backfill standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num under roadbed duct details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num note section aa underground service nummm below asphalt warning tape placed nummm c duct num mpa backfill asphalt nummm c duct num mpa a a wiring installed under item num klein cat .
no .
num surface .
file num num min num minimum num min travelled road num min standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num underground duct details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num file num min secondary cable trench ground rod notes see lighting layout drawing .
for number and location burdy cat .
no .
gar numc ground connector green ground wire exact location .
type rwunum flexible num strand num volt .
wiring to be stranded copper klein cat .
no .
num backfill num. . num num .
number and size as shown on wiring diagram size as indicated in the contract documents .
when required and as specified in the contract documents ground rod or ground plate num min nummm o rigid pvc underground duct nummm o under roadbed duct num mpa check existing and future utilities before commencing excavation work .
num final grade or asphalt underground service warning tape placed nummm below final grade or asphalt surface .
before any trenching to power poles check with nb power and aliant for check with aliant for fibreoptic cable location .
call num before digging .
standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num underground junction box detail january num traffic control devices standard drawing num edge of excavation backfill zone free draining backfill duct as per item num final grade section cc c c plan num num num num num num enclosure with polymer concrete lid edge of excavation file num pemnumpch d.t.i .
standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num power point multiple lights january num traffic control devices standard drawing num pole n.b .
power pole as per item num ground plate ground rod or installed file num control box final grade nummm pvc conduit final grade n.b .
power pvc duct to nummm conduit disconnect numm nummm x nummm x nummm wire for n.b .
power nummm sufficient connection provide conduit pressure treated post green num ground wire as per item num ground connector numm to by others nummm to d.t.i .
light wired to d.t.i .
standards standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num power point single light january num traffic control devices standard drawing num final grade nummm pvc conduit numm to final grade disconnect pvc duct to n.b .
power pole nummm conduit wire for n.b .
power n.b .
power pole nummm sufficient numm nummm x nummm x nummm connection provide pressure treated post green num ground wire as per item num ground plate ground rod or as per item num ground connector supplied by owner installed by others to d.t.i .
light file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num screw base detail january num traffic control devices standard drawing num kelly bar adapter supplied by contractor universal drive tool supplied by contractor anchor bolt supplied by owner screw base supplied by owner file num sign light schedule size as shown on note flow of traffic base num base num base num required number of bases indicated on sign schedule c of l l c of l c of l c of l bases num edge of travelled roadway c of roadway be aligned with these centrelines centres of screw bases are to kelly bar adapter supplied by contractor universal drive tool supplied by contractor anchor bolt supplied by owner screw base supplied by owner file num sign light schedule size as shown on note flow of traffic base num base num base num required number of bases indicated on sign schedule c of l l c of l c of l c of l bases num edge of travelled roadway c of roadway be aligned with these centrelines centres of screw bases are to standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num type e sign or light base details soil foundation january num traffic control devices standard drawing num file num section aa num required bars nummm long for numm reinforcing plastic clipon chairs reinforcing steel fibreform nummm x nummm nummm chamfer minimum of num required final grade nummm o duct as per item num delete for sign base num max num min upslope side num num unit to be nummm deep and hot dipped galvanized bolts and washers .
coil length nummm min .
nummm o nummm long rebar spacing note of nummm .
steel shall be lapped min .
num .
spaced as shown numm bars to be equally spaced numm bars num num num num num num num num .
concrete cover shall be a minimum of nummm on sides top and a minimum of nummm on the bottom .
as per csa gnum .
num required a a pole anchorage type dgrnum to meet aashto requirements nummm bolt circle .
standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num type f sign or light base details soil foundation january num traffic control devices standard drawing num file num num max nummin upslope side unit to be nummm deep and hot dipped galvanized bolts and washers .
coil length nummm min .
nummm onummm long section bb nummm chamfer final grade nummm x nummm fibreform nummm o duct as per item num for numm reinforcing plastic clipon chairs bars nummm long b b num required minimum of num required delete for sign base reinforcing steel num num of nummm .
steel shall be lapped min .
num .
num .
concrete cover shall be a minimum of nummm on sides topand a minimum of nummm on the bottom .
rebar spacing note spaced as shown numm bars equally spaced num numm bars num num num num num num num num num as per csa gnum .
num required pole anchorage type dgrnum to meet aashto requirements nummm bolt circle .
standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num type g sign or light base details soil foundation january num traffic control devices standard drawing num accessories nca type dgr__ __mm rebar spacing note section bb nummm chamfer final grade reinforcing steel num .
for numm reinforcing plastic clipon chairs spaced as shown numm bars bars nummm long equally spaced num numm bars b b millimetres unless otherwise num num num steel shall be lapped min .
num .
all dimensions are in noted .
num nummm x nummm fibreform num num num num num num num num num bolts circle .
___mm ___mm long bolts and washers .
coil length ___mm min .
unit to be ___mm deep and hot dipped num required concrete nummpa round bars in the form of deformed num .
grade num and shall be of nummm for numm bars and nummm for numm bars .
num.concrete cover for reinforcing steel shall be a minimum of nummm for the sides and top and nummm for the bottom .
steel shall meet cancsa gnumm minimum of num required delete for sign base nummm duct as per item num pole anchorage national concrete num max galvanized as per cancsa gnum .
num required file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num sign or light base detail bedrock foundation january num traffic control devices standard drawing num note nummm chamfer by the engineer .
into the rock with a grout approved reinforcing steel shall be grouted reinforcing steel into bedrock to accept numm reinforcing rods plastic clipon chairs for reinforcing steel cage nummm o duct as per item num num required minimum of num required num .
steel shall be lapped min .
bedrock line for type e see standard drawing num .
for type f see standard drawing num .
final grade nummm o holes shall be drilled delete for sign base use fibreform num min .
num min .
upslope side num .
concrete cover shall be a minimum nummax nummin of nummm on sides top .
of nummm .
type e type f pole anchorage type dgrnum to meet aashto requirements .
file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num angulation of sign foundations january num traffic control devices standard drawing num note flow of traffic roadway edge of travelled roadway base num base num base num anchor bolts anchor bolts are to be required number of bases indicated on sign schedule aligned with these centrelines c of l c of l c of l c of l c of l bases num file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num light standard detail single and double davit january num traffic control devices standard drawing num see standard drawing supplied by owner standard aluminum light see standard drawing num supplied by owner luminaire and lamp davit supplied by owner num or num frangible base file num supplied by owner standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num light standard wiring details num volt january num traffic control devices standard drawing num black wire white wire black wire ground wire fuse holder supplied by owner scrulug kpanumc green ground wire numv black wire ground wire supplied by owner scrulug kpanumc green ground wire black wire white wire white wire single davit aluminum light standard numv red wire red wire file num fuse holder this cable shall be support grip attached at the end of the davit supported by a csa approved this cable shall be support grip attached at the end of the davit supported by a csa approved neutral disconnect neutral disconnect csa electrical connector supplied by owner teck num num cable black wire white wire teck num num cable black wire white wire white wire black wire supplied by owner supplied by owner typical connection for double davit aluminum light standard typical connection for standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num light standard wiring details num volt january num traffic control devices standard drawing num numv numv red wire white wire red wire black wire ground wire supplied by owner fuse holder scrulug kpanumc green ground wire black wire red wire white wire black wire ground wire supplied by owner scrulug kpanumc fuse holder file num this cable shall be support grip attached at the end of the davit supported by a csa approved this cable shall be support grip attached at the end of the davit supported by a csa approved white wire white wire black wire red wire green ground wire black wire black wire red wire red wire teck num num cable teck num num cable csa electrical connector supplied by owner typical connection for double davit aluminum light standard typical connection for single davit aluminum light standard standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num light standard anchor details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num median flashing light details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num median flashing light item num or num cast in place concrete barrier nummm ss lockwasher supplied with anchor num required nummm galvanized flat washer median barrier num required num required installed by others light base light base as per aluminum shim if required maximum of num per anchor bolt nummm o x nummm bolt file num nut lock washer flat washer bolt supplied by owner nummm thick steel washer frangible base nummm thick steel washer bolt light shoe base light pole light base as per item num or num top of post frangible base standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num roadside sign post anchor details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num roadside sign details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num detail a nummm x nummm x nummm tbar exit panel service panel edge of aluminum sign post num max num max num max item num travelled roadway num num saddle clip post strap sign post sign panel panel bolt lockwasher and nut spaced at nummm centers square head complete with stop nut num required base as per item num or num nummm num x nummm long ss bolt with nummm file num strap installation see drawings num num num num and num for strap sequence see detail a for frangible bases supplied by owner standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num roadside sign strap sequence january num traffic control devices standard drawing num file num regardless of the number of panels the strap sequence of the third post shall be the same as that of the first post and the strap sequence of the fourth post shall be the same as that of the second post .
number of sign panels number of straps on first post number of straps on second post num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num strap sequence for twopost signs strap sequence for third and fourth post standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num roadside sign strap sequence january num traffic control devices standard drawing num file num regardless of the number of panels the strap sequence of the third post shall be the same as that of the first post and the strap sequence of the fourth post shall be the same as that of the second post .
number of sign panels number of straps on first post number of straps on second post num num num num num num num num num num num num strap sequence for twopost signs strap sequence for third and fourth post standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num roadside sign strap sequence january num traffic control devices standard drawing num file num regardless of the number of panels the strap sequence of the third post shall be the same as that of the first post and the strap sequence of the fourth post shall be the same as that of the second post .
number of sign panels number of straps on first post number of straps on second post num num num num num num strap sequence for third and fourth post strap sequence for twopost signs num num num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num roadside sign strap sequence january num traffic control devices standard drawing num file num regardless of the number of panels the strap sequence of the third post shall be the same as that of the first post and the strap sequence of the fourth post shall be the same as that of the second post .
number of sign panels number of straps on first post number of straps on second post num num num strap sequence for twopost signs strap sequence for third and fourth post standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num roadside sign strap sequence january num traffic control devices standard drawing num regardless of the number of panels the strap sequence of the third post shall be the same as that of the first post and the strap sequence of the fourth post shall be the same as that of the second post .
double hazard marker signs installed on single posts shall follow the strap installation of the first post for the specified number of sign panels installed .
note other than the gore exit sign all file num number of sign panels number of straps on first post number of straps on second post num num num num num num strap sequence for twopost signs strap sequence for third and fourth post roadside sign service panel strap sequence gore exit sign strap sequence single post standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num overhead sign structure foundation anchorage details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num overhead sign structure foundation base plate and template details january num traffic control devices standard drawing num depa table janua it num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num artment e of conte ary num tem num num num num j num num num num num num a num num num t num num num num num t num t num t num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num stan of trans ents descriptio geotextile sediment co filter screen jute mats erosion cont removal of e gabions random ripr rock weir armour stone individual ro gravel for fis topsoil hydroseeding fertilizing mulching root wads ..
trees and sh temporary w temporary w fish rescue culvert erosio soil reinforce standard dra num num sedi num num jute num num type num num type num num type num num type num num type num num type num num type num num gabi num num rock num num armo num num root num num tem num num end road num num end road ndard sp portatio on ntrol fence .. trol structure erosion contro rap e protection .
ck placemen sh habitat g hrubs water barrier .
water control on protection ement awings ment control mat details e a spillway e a spillway e b erosion e b erosion e c erosion e c erosion e d erosion ion backfilling k weir details our stone pro t wad detail i porary worki treatment fo dway foreslo treatment fo dway foreslo ecificati on and inf environment ol structure .. t works n fence structure for structure de control struc control struc control struc control struc control struc g details s otection syste n pool ng pad r culverts num ope num or ste r culverts num ope flatter th ions frastruc tal r sediment po etails cture for ditch cture details cture for ditch cture details cture for ditch em details nummm id eeper nummm id an num cture .
ond hes hes hes di number o pages num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num vision num page num of depa geot janua num num num num artment textile ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num the pla long ch amide o to make .num type n .num type w .num the ge .num the m recomm .num thread and bio tensile submitta .num the co supplie .num the co installa constru .num the co specific .num the are uniform .num ge pun .num the stre stan of trans tion em consists o ls erials shall be astic yarn of t hain synthetic or vinylidene e the filament nnum nnum nnum an wnum wnum and w otextile shall aterial shall mendations u for the seam ological degra strength equa als ontractor sha ed .
ontractor sha tion and instr ction ontractor sha cally directed b eas to be cov m and regular otextile shall ncture the fab e geotextile s ess folds wri ndard sp portatio f the supply a e supplied by the geotextile c polymer com chloride and ts resistant to d nnum geotext wnum geotextile conform to th be handled ntil incorporat ms shall be e adation and b al to num of t ll submit in a ll submit up ructions for ha all carry out t by the engine vered with ge surface free f not be placed bric .
shall be place inkles and cre pecificat on and inf environment and installatio the contracto e and the thre mposed of at d shall contain o deterioration ile shall be a shall be a she he requiremen and protect ted into the w equal to or be both factory a hat of the geo advance of th on request t andling of the the work as er .
eotextile shall from bumps a d on stumps ed so as to cr eases .
tions frastruc tal on of geotextil or .
eads used in least num by n stabilizers o n by ultraviole pervious she eet of woven nts as indicate ted as per t work .
etter than the and field sewn otextile .
he work a m the manufact selected geo indicated in l be prepared and depressio brush limbs reate a surfac cture e. sewing oper y mass of pro or inhibitors a et and heat ex eet of nonwov plastic yarn .
ed in table num the manufac e geotextile in n or sealed s mill certificate turers recom otextile .
the contrac d by shaping ons .
ice or other ce that is sm rations shall c opylene ethy added to the b xposure .
ven plastic ya num. cturers instru n resistance t seams shall h e for the geot mmended proc ct documents the ground to material that ooth and free item num page num consist of a ylene ester base plastic arn .
uctions and to chemical have a grab textile to be cedures for s andor as o present a may tear or e of tension ge pag t t g s e a a o u p t n num num num eotextile ge num property no tearing streng trapezoid me grab tensile strength both directio elongation at break apparent opening size uv degradatio permittivity thickness notes num num num .num the exce .num .num for fabr .num .num the .num num measu .num the cove .num ove num basis f .num pay iden require ote num u gth ethod n ns n µ on r se m values abov otherwise no special requi manufacturer ept as follows where more overlap of at roadbed con ric .
in no case sh contractor s the damage minimum of o rement fo quantity to ered with geo erlapped joints for paymen ment for work ntified under th departm ements of n nit astm n dnum n dnum dnum m dnum ret .
dnum ec num dnum mm ve the heav ted values a rement define rs installation than one wid least num mm nstruction at hall equipmen hall immediat ed area shall one metre bey or payment be measure otextile in acco s patches an nt k under this it he contract .
sta ment of tr environm table num onwoven a m nnum num num num num num num num num to num num num num to num vy line are m re minimum r ed in the con procedures s dth of fabric i m and all over least num mm nt travel on un tely repair da be covered yond the peri t ed for payme ordance with d seams sha em shall inclu andard s ransport ental num and woven g nnum nnum num num num num num num num to num num to num num to num num to num minimum ave requirements .
ntract docume shall be the sta s used the fa rlap joints sha m of fill materi ncovered fabr maged geote with a patc meter of the d ent shall be this item .
ll be measure ude a separate specifica tation an geotextiles type of fa num nnum num num num num num num num o num num to num num o num num to num erage roll v . ents .
andard of inst abric shall be all be securely ial shall be ke ric .
extile .
h of the sam damaged are the number ed as a single e unit price fo ations nd infras abric wnum w num num num num num max .
m num max .
no num min no num min .
no values marv tallation that s e joined by se y held in plac ept between e me fabric typ ea .
of square m e layer of fabr or each type o tructur item num january num wnum wnum num num num num num max .
num max ote num note ote num note ote num note v and unles shall be applie ewing or by a ce .
equipment an pe extending metres of are ric .
of geotextile a re num num num num num x .
num num num ss ed an nd a ea as depa sedim janua num num num num artment ment contr ary num descript .num this ite fence .
material .num all mate .num the fen .num the fab .num suppor submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the co environ well as .num the se prefabr .num in a run con pro .num the co from the .num the co during .num the co thereof .num the co approx dispose the sed .num sub sed stan of trans rol fence tion em consists o ls erials shall be nce may be pr bric shall conf rt posts are to als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall mental repres applicable pe diment contro ricated sedime areas of pote noff to transp ntrol fences in operly located ontractor shal e time of insta ontractor sha periods of pro ontractor sha f. ontractor sha imately but n ed of at a loc diment will not bject to the diment contro ndard sp portatio of the supply e supplied by refabricated or form to the re be supplied a red in accorda all carry out t by the engine install additio sentative as ermits and reg ol fence shall ent control fe ential sheet fl port sediment n these areas for effective l maintain the allation until th ll inspect all olonged rainfa all immediate all remove re not exceeding ation at least t be returned approval of ol fence at his pecificat on and inf environment installation the contracto r constructed quirements o as indicated on ance with any the work as er .
nal sediment defined in num ulations .
l be installed nce shall be i ow runoff wh ts and the s the contrac runoff contro e sediment c e completion sediment co all .
ely repair an etained sedim g onehalf the t num m away f to the work a the engineer sher own exp tions frastruc tal maintenance or .
on site from th of num type n standard dr crossreferen indicated in control fence num when ne as indicated installed as p here construc contract doc ctor shall ens l. control fence of the contra ontrol fences ny damage to ment prior to e height of th from any wat area or the w r the contra pense .
cture e and remov he specified in e wnum geotext rawing num. nced item form the contrac as directed b ecessary to c on the stand per the manuf ction activity m cuments do n sure that sed in a functiona ct or removal .
after each ra o sediment o it having a he fence and tercourse an watercourse o actor may ins al of a sedim ndividual com tile .
ming part of th ct documents by the contrac comply with it dard drawing facturers instr may cause th not provide fo iment control al condition c . ainfall and at control fence accumulated d this sedime nd in such a m or stall a secon item num page num ment control mponents .
is item .
s andor as ctors onsite tem num as g num and ructions .
he drainage or sediment fences are continuously t least daily es or parts to a level ent shall be manner that nd backup se pag num num num diment con ge num num .num the subj con .num .num .num at th at a not rem num measu .num the cont num basis o .num pay ntrol fenc contractor s ject to the en ntract .
sediment co disposed of o if the engine all or any pa deemed to h under this ite he time of rem location at le be returned t oved fence a rement fo quantity to trol fence sup of payment ment for wor departm ce shall remove ngineers app ntrol fence re outside the w er notifies the art of the sed ave complete em and the se moval the co east num m fro to the work a nd sedimenta or payment be measured pplied installe t rk under this i sta ment of tr environm all sediment proval but in emoved shall work site .
e contractor i iment control ed herhis obl ediment contr ontractor sha om any water area or the w ation to the s t d for paymen ed maintained tem shall be andard s ransport ental control fence all cases sh become the in writing prio l fence is to r igations for th ol fence shall ll excavate an rcourse and watercourse a atisfaction of nt shall be th d and remove at the unit pr specifica tation an e and the tim hall occur prio property of t or to the com remain in pla hat portion of l become the ny remaining in such a ma and shall dres the engineer he number of ed in accorda rice .
ations nd infras me of such rem or to the com the contracto mpletion of the ace the cont f the sedimen property of th sediment an anner that the ss and seed t r. f linear metre ance with this tructur item num january num moval shall b mpletion of th or and shall b e contract tha tractor shall b nt control fenc he owner .
nd dispose of e sediment w the area of th es of sedime item .
re num num be he be at be ce f it will he nt depa filte janua num num num num artment r screen ary num descript .num this ite screen .
material .num all mate .num the filte num t .num the m recomm submitta .num the co .num the fine as .num the con .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the co .num the po in such of the w .num the ge and in a .num the co applica .num the co related enginee stan of trans tion em consists .
ls erials shall be er screen sha type nnum .
aterial shall mendations u als ontractor shal e purpose of e particulate m to be effective e barrier mu nditions speci tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shal rtion of the g h a manner th watercourse .
otextile is to f a manner tha ontractor sha able .
ontractor shal items perta er .
ndard sp portatio of the desig e supplied by all utilize as a be handled ntil incorporat l submit a det the filter scre matter from m e over the en ust be able t ific to the site red in accorda all carry out t by the engine l construct the eotextile loca hat water cann form a contin at conforms w all maintain th ll remove fro aining to the pecificat on and inf environment gn supply in the contracto a minimum re and protect ted into the w tailed design een is to prov migration off ntire water dep to withstand where install ance with any the work as er .
e filter screen ated along the not pass betw uous sheet a ith the manuf he filter scree m the waterc filter screen tions frastruc tal nstallation m or .
equirement ge ted as per t work .
in accordanc vide an effecti site and is to pth .
all natural f led .
crossreferen indicated in n as per the d e bottom of th ween the bott and the seams facturers inst en in a funct course all ma following no cture maintenance eotextile mee the manufac ce with item num ive barrier to o be construct forces and t nced item form the contrac esign submitt he watercours tom line of th s are to be co tructions .
tional manne aterials and a otification to and removal eting the requ turers instru num. sediment sil ted in such a the predictab ming part of th ct documents ted under num se shall be he e geotextile a onstructed wit er throughout associated st and approva item num page num l of a filter irements of uctions and lt and other manner so ble weather is item .
s andor as num. eld in place and the bed th materials t the period tructures or al from the fil pag num num lter scree ge num num measu .num the desi num basis o .num pay en rement fo quantity to b igned supplie of payment ment for wor departm or payment be measured ed installed t rk under this i sta ment of tr environm t d for payment maintained a tem shall be andard s ransport ental t shall be the nd removed i at the unit pr specifica tation an number of li n accordance rice .
ations nd infras near metres e with this item tructur item num january num of filter scree m. re num num en depa jute janua num num num num num num artment mats ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num jute ma to mesh .num mats sh num gm .num staples submitta .num the co being s .num the co materia .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num jute ma manufa .num jute m same d hydrose .num staples with the measure .num the qu supplie .num overlap basis of .num payme stan of trans tion em consists o ls erials shall be ats shall be m h openings of hall be a min mnum .
s shall have th als ontractor sha supplied meet ontractor shal als .
tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ats shall be in acturers proce ats shall be i day as remo eeding .
s shall be driv e ground suc ment for p uantity to be ed and installe pped joints p payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio f the supply a e supplied by made of unble f approximate nimum of num he approxima ll submit upo t the specified l submit the red in accorda all carry out t by the engine nstalled as ind edures .
nstalled alon oval of erosio ven perpendi ch that the ma payment measured fo ed in accorda patches and s nder this item pecificat on and inf environment and installatio the contracto eached loose ely num mm .
m in width a ate dimension on request t d requirement manufacturer ance with any the work as er .
dicated on st g the full leng on structures icular to the g ats are secure r payment sh nce with this eams shall be m shall be at t tions frastruc tal on of jute mats or .
ely twisted jut and shall have ns as indicate the manufact ts .
rs recommen crossreferen indicated in tandard draw gth of all ce after final s ground in an ed in uniform hall be the nu item .
e measured a the unit price cture s as a ditch li te yarn num to num e an average d on standar turers certific ded procedur nced item form the contrac wing num and ditches and shaping of th n approved pa contact with t umber of squ as a single lay e. ner .
mm in diame e unit shippin rd drawing num cation that th res for install ming part of th ct documents d in accordan all topsoiled he ditches a attern and fin the ground .
uare metres o yer .
item num page num eter woven g weight of num. e materials ation of the is item .
s andor as nce with the ditches the and prior to nished flush of jute mats depa eros janua num num num num artment ion contro ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num geotex .num random of rock .num fill mat capable engine submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the co site env well as .num erosion drawing .num erosion tempora .num in a run con are .num the co .num the ap control stan of trans ol structu tion em consists o ls erials shall be xtile shall be s m riprap shal from the wor terial shall be e of forming er .
als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall vironmental re applicable pe n control stru gs num throu n control stru ary or partially areas of pote noff to trans ntrol structure e properly loca ontractor shall plication con structures sha ndard sp portatio ure f the supply c e supplied by supplied in ac l be supplied rk site .
obtained from an impermea red in accorda all carry out t by the engine install additio epresentative ermits and reg ctures shall ugh num. uctures may y constructed ential sheet fl port sedimen es in these ar ated for effect carry out the struction deta all be carried o pecificat on and inf environment construction a the contracto ccordance wit in accordanc m within the l able dike wh ance with any the work as er .
onal erosion co as defined in ulations .
be constructe be installed ditches ando ow runoff wh nt and the c reas the con tive runoff co work in accor ails and clean out as indicate tions frastruc tal and maintena or .
h the requirem ce with the re limits of the e hen compacte crossreferen indicated in control structur n num when ed to the di in natural sw or in complete here construc contract doc tractor shall e ntrol .
rdance with ite nout requirem ed in table num cture ance of an ero ments of num equirements o excavation an ed unless ot nced item form the contrac res as directe necessary to imensions as wales prior t ed ditches .
ction activity m cuments do ensure that e em num and it ments for the d num and num. osion control .num type nnum .
of num and m d shall be of therwise direc ming part of th ct documents ed by the con comply with i s indicated o to ditch cons may cause th not provide erosion contro tem num. different types num .
item num page num structure .
may consist a gradation cted by the is item .
s andor as tractors on tem num as n standard struction in he drainage for erosion ol structures s of erosion er pag num osion con ge num type a type spillw pond grub whe dow b type insta requ cann c type insta d type insta num .num clea rem .num .num the insta .num .num .num the duri .num the ther trol stru app e a structures ways of dyke d runoff from bbed areas o re runoff leav wn a natural sl e b structures alled in rock d uired for type not be driven .
e c structures alled in earth e d structures alled in earth anout consis oved materia sediment rem any part of th sediment pon contractor sh allation until th all erosion co ditches is esta .num in work control st ground is all erosion co contractor s ng periods of contractor s reof .
departm cture e plication s shall be inst s that are bui ditches or fro r at the end o ves the ditch t ope .
s are typically ditches where e c and d stru .
s are typically ditches or sw s are typically ditches or sw ts of removal als in accorda moval shall b he erosion con nd dyke .
hall maintain e heir removal .
ontrol structure ablished as an areas that a tructures typ s prepared for ontrol structure shall inspect a f prolonged ra shall immedia sta ment of tr environm table erosion cont talled as lt to om of a cut to flow num y e stakes uctures num y wales .
num y wales .
sta of sediment nce with num. e performed ntrol structure erosion contro es shall be ke n effective ero re hydroseed pes b c and hydroseeding ess shall be all erosion co ainfall .
ately repair a andard s ransport ental num trol structure construction details standard drawings num and num standard drawings num and num standard drawings num and num andard drawi num deposits reta .num. so as to caus e and in the c ol structures ept in place un osion deterren ded up to but d d shall be k g as approved removed und ontrol structur any damage specifica tation an es cle num the con sedimen of sedim within num spillway .
num the co sedimen of sedim within num notch .
num the co sedimen of sedim within num notch .
ng the co sedimen of sedim within num notch .
ained by the s se minimal d case of type in a function ntil the grass nt or as direct t no later tha kept in place d by the engin er item num. res after eac to erosion c ations nd infras eanout requ ntractor shall r t deposits pri entation reac num mm of the ontractor sha nt deposits pr mentation rea num mm of th ontractor sha nt deposits pr mentation rea num mm of th ontractor sha nt deposits pr mentation rea num mm of th structure and isturbance to a structures nal condition fr on hydroseed ted by the eng an september until the day neer .
ch rainfall and control structu tructur item num january num uirements remove the or to the leve ching a point crest of the all remove th rior to the lev aching a poi he crest of th all remove th rior to the lev aching a poi he crest of th all remove th rior to the lev aching a poi he crest of th disposal of th o the ground o to the rom the time ded slopes an gineer .
r numth erosio y on which th d at least dai ures or par re num num el he vel nt he he vel nt he he vel nt he he or of nd on he ly rts depa eros janua num num num artment ion contro ary num .num the co any wa or wate .num the co enginee measure .num the qu are sup .num the qu numbe basis of .num paymen control .num paymen of erosi stan of trans ol structu ontractor shal atercourse an ercourse .
ontractor shal er .
ment for p uantity to be m pplied constru uantity to be m r of such clea payment nt for work u structure as i nt for work un on control stru ndard sp portatio ure l dispose of t nd in such a m ll not remove payment measured for ucted and mai measured for anouts perfor under this item identified unde nder this item ucture as ide pecificat on and inf environment the excavated manner that t e any erosion payment sha ntained in acc payment for rmed in accor m shall includ er the contrac shall include ntified under t tions frastruc tal d sediment a he sediment n control struc ll be the num cordance with cleanout of r rdance with num de a separate ct. a separate u the contract .
cture t a location a will not be re cture without mber of erosion this item .
retained sedim num as app e unit price unit price for th at least num m eturned to the the authoriza n control struc ment deposits proved by the for each type he cleanout o item num page num m away from e work area ation of the ctures that s will be the e engineer .
e of erosion of each type depa remo janua num num num num artment oval of ero ary num descript .num this ite material .num none id submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific .num schedu enginee .num ero be .num if th all dee and .num at the t at a loc not be .num the co maintai necess remova .num the co and ditc .num the co sedime andor erosion stan of trans osion cont tion em consists o ls dentified .
als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b uling of the re er .
osion control disposed of o he engineer n or any of the emed to have d the erosion time of remov cation at leas returned to th ontractor is to ined at a min sary precautio al activity .
ontractor shal ch grades of t ontractor sha entation and o num and to t n control struc ndard sp portatio trol struc f the removal all carry out t by the engine moval of the structures re outside the w notifies the c e erosion cont e completed h control struct val the contr st num m from he work area o ensure that nimum during on is taken to ll be respons the adjacent w all restore th other disturbe the satisfactio cture .
pecificat on and inf cture environment of an erosion the work as er .
erosion contro emoved shall work site .
ontractor in w trol structure hisher obliga tures indicat ractor shall ex any watercou or the waterc all possible c g the erosion o ensure tha ible to match work areas e area of th ed ground wit on of the eng tions frastruc tal n control struc indicated in ol structures s become the writing prior to s are to rem ations for that ted shall beco xcavate any urse and in s course .
care is taken n control stru at no sedimen h the affected .
he removed thin the work gineer within num cture cture .
the contrac shall be subje property of t o the comple main in place t portion of th ome the prop remaining se such a mann to ensure tha cture remova nt release oc d ditches and erosion cont k area in acc num hours follo ct documents ect to the app the contracto etion of the co the contrac he work und perty of the ow ediment and d er that the se at ground dis al operation a ccurs as a re slopes with trol structure cordance with owing the rem item num page num s andor as proval of the or and shall ontract that ctor shall be er this item wner .
dispose of it ediment will sturbance is and that all esult of this the slopes deposited h items num moval of the re pag num num moval of e ge num num measu .num the rem num basis o .num pay cont erosion co rement fo quantity to oved in accor of payment ment for wor trol structure departm ontrol str or payment be measured rdance with th t rk under this as identified u sta ment of tr ructure environm t d for paymen his item .
item shall in under the con andard s ransport ental t shall be the clude a sepa ntract .
specifica tation an e number of arate unit pric ations nd infras erosion contr ce for each t tructur item num january num rol structures type of erosio re num num s on depa gabio janua num num artment ons ary num descript .num this ite filled wi material .num all mate .num gabion .num fas typ .num rocks u dimens not exc .num roc acc .num roc gab .num geotex .num gabion .num fac ass doc .num wh bas hor .num wir num .num sel form .num hot as .num wir .num the co num .
stan of trans tion em consists of th rock .
ls erials shall be baskets shall steners to sec e and propert used in the co sion of any ro ceed num mm ck used for cordance with cks shall be bion .
xtile shall be s baskets shal ctory fabricat sembled at th cuments .
hen the lengt sket walls sha rizontal width .
re mesh shall num mm and fab lvedge edges med are as st t dip galvaniz tm tests anum re shall be dim ontractor shall ndard sp portatio f the supply a e supplied by t l be fabricated cure the bask ties of the bas onstruction of ck equal to o in greatest dim basket fill ma astm cnum of a size that supplied in ac l conform to th ted so that t he work area h exceeds ho all be used to be a uniform bricated to be of the mesh trong as the b zed wire shal num anum and mensioned as l supply free d minimu applic me selve bind interlocking w ecificati on and inf environment and installation the contracto d of galvanized kets shall be s sket .
f gabions sha or greater than mension .
aterial when andor cnum t at least two ccordance wit he following m the sides en a into rectang orizontal widt divide the bas regular patte nonravelling .
shall be secu body of the me l have a min anum .
s a minimum draining back ta m twisted g cation sh dges ding wire fasteners ions frastruc tal n of gabion b or .
d wire mesh .
supplied in a all be clean ha n one and on tested by lo shall have an o layers of ov h the requirem minimum stan nds lid and ular baskets th diaphragm sket into equa ern with a ma .
urely fastened esh .
imum covera as indicated kfill behind the able num galvanized w cture askets fabrica material com ard sound an nehalf times t os angeles a n abrasion los verlapping roc ments of num ndards internal diap of the sizes i ms of the sam al cells of a le aximum nomin d together so age of num g in table num e gabion stru wire dimensio diameter num mm num mm num mm num mm ated from wire mpatible with t nd durable w the mesh size abrasion test s not greater t ck are require .num type nnum .
phragms can indicated in th me mesh as ength not in ex nal opening si that the joints mnum and shall num. cture in acco ons item num page num e mesh and the material with the least e and shall method in than num. ed to fill the be readily he contract the gabion xcess of the ize of num by s which are conform to ordance with ga pag num num num num abions ge num num submit .num the be s .num the insta .num the leas .num sub num const .num the spec .num the con .num the grad reco .num the defo .num the align .num bulg .num the .num the the l num measu .num the supp num basis o .num pay ttals contractor s supplied .
contractor s allation and in contractor sh st num days in a mittals are req ruction contractor s cifically directe contractor s ntract docume contractor s de and shall ommendations gabion baske ormations are rock for the e nment and a n ges in the gab geotextile sh contractor s lines indicated rement fo quantity to plied and insta of payment ment for work departm hall submit in shall submit nstructions fo hall notify the advance of ob quired in acco shall carry o ed by the eng shall prepare ents .
shall place th l assemble s. ets in any row avoided .
exposed rock neat compact bions shall not hall be placed shall backfill th d on the stand or payment be measure alled in accord t k under this it sta ment of tr environm n advance of upon reques r handling of engineer in btaining materi ordance with a ut the work gineer .
the area to re he gabions on the gabions w shall be fille faces of the t square appe t exceed num m in accordanc he areas beh dard drawing t d for paymen dance with th tem shall be a andard s ransport ental the work a m st the manuf the selected g writing for ap ial from the so any crossrefe as indicated eceive the ga n a prepared according t ed in stages to e gabion bask earance .
mm at the mos ce with num ind gabion st num. nt shall be th is item .
at the unit pric specifica tation an mill certificate facturers rec gabion .
pproval of the ource propose erenced item f d in the cont abions in acco d rock andor to the manu o minimize vo ket shall be ha st extreme po .
tructure in ac he volume in ce .
ations nd infras e for the gabio commended p e source of su ed .
forming part o tract docume ordance with r compacted ufacturers ins oid spaces an and placed to int measured ccordance wit n cubic metre tructur item num january num on materials t procedures fo pply of rock f this item .
ents andor a num and th soil foundatio structions an nd so that loc o ensure prope in any cell .
h num and t es of gabion re num num to or at as he on nd cal er to s depa rand janua num num num num artment dom riprap ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num random shown .num random third of .num random num tmnum .num roc hav .num roc hav .num random deval lo .num accepta andor f .num random .num ra con gra .num .num the spe ripr submitta .num the co gravelf propose stan of trans tion em consists of ls erials shall be m riprap mate in table num m riprap for e its length .
m riprap shall num and angular ck when teste ve a microde ck when teste ve a freezet m riprap used oss not greate ability of the r field testing pr m riprap mixe ndom riprap nsist of a rand avel subbase w finely shatte num ma e contractor ecified mixture rap material in als ontractor shall finely shattere ed source .
ndard sp portatio f supply and p e supplied by t erials shall be num. ach rock shal consist of cle surfaces suc ed by the mic eval loss not g ed by the fre haw loss not g d for backslop er than num a rock will be d rocedures car ed mixed shall dom riprap ma which shall co ered rock wh ay be substitu shall produc e mixed at th ndicated to fo notify the en ed rock mater pecificat on and inf environment placing of rand the contracto e a wellgrade ll have both th ean hard sou h that the roc crodeval test reater than num eezethaw tes greater than num pe stabilization and a freezet determined by rried out by qu be noted in t aterial of the d onform to the r hich conforms uted for gravel ce a consiste he proportion orm a very den ngineer in writ rials at least tions frastruc tal dom riprap .
or .
ed mixture an hickness and und durable r ks interlock w t method in a num. st method in a num. n or in erosion thaw loss no y the owners ualified perso the contract designated siz requirements s to the requ subject to th ent mixed ho n of approxim nse material .
ting for appro num days in a cture nd shall confo breadth grea rock having a when placed .
accordance w accordance w n control struc ot greater than s service reco nnel .
documents ze r thoro of num. uirements of he approval of omogeneous mately num b oval of the so dvance of ob orm to the gr ater than or eq a density of n with mto ls with mto ls ctures may ha n num. ords andor by as r mixed ughly mixed w num num f the engineer blended su by weight to t ource of suppl btaining mater item num page num rading limits qual to one ot less than num shall num shall ave a micro y laboratory d and shall with a pitrun num and r. pply of the the random y of rock or rial from the ra pag m num num num num num num num num num num num num num num n andom ripr ge num mass size note num kg mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num thickness mm note num otes num ap num ra num me rap ra note num num num num num num num proximate dia ndom riprap f easured perpe departm ran rnum rnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ameter for info for abutment a endicular to th st ment of tr environm table num dom riprap fin num rnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num ormation only and slope pro e prepared su tandard ransport ental num num grading lim ner by mass rnum num num num num num num num num num num y tection urface specifica tation an mits rnum rnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num ations nd infras num rnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num tructur item num january num num rnum num num num num num num num num num num re num num depa rand janua num num num artment dom riprap ary num constru .num the co specific .num the co materia .num control .num diff acc .num the und .num the co abutting .num the wo .num the co measure .num the qu supplie basis of .num paymen riprap a .num cost of disagre results bear the .num cos by stan of trans ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall als .
of the gradat ferences in op cordance with e contractor dertake the te ontractor shal g structures a e contractor s ork .
ontractor shall ment for p uantity to be d and placed payment nt for work un as identified u f the provisio eement betwe show that the e cost of the t st of any rete the contracto ndard sp portatio all carry out t by the engine clear the wor tion shall be b pinion betwee astm dnum shall provide sting required ll place rando are not damag shall be respo tamp random payment measured fo in accordance nder this item under the cont on of material een the owne e material do test .
esting to resol or .
pecificat on and inf environment the work as er .
rk area of all d by visual exam en the enginee num. e the equipm d. om riprap ma ed .
onsible at his m riprap mixed or payment s e with this item shall include tract .
ls labour and r and the con es not meet t ve the supply tions frastruc tal indicated in driftwood deb mination .
er and the co ment a sort aterial such th her own expe d during place shall be the m. a separate u d equipment ntractor shall the specified y of the speci cture the contrac bris snow ice ontractor shall ting site and hat the under ense to repair ement .
number of to unit price for e to test the r be borne by gradation ot ified material ct documents e and other ob be resolved b the labour rlying materia any such dam onnes of ran each gradation random riprap the contracto therwise the o gradation sha item num page num s andor as bjectionable by testing in required to als and any mage to the ndom riprap n of random p to resolve or if the test owner shall all be borne depa rock janua num num num num num num artment k weir ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num individu .num roc .num .num .num roc not .num random submitta .num the co rock at .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num rock w measure .num the qu accorda basis of .num paymen stan of trans tion em consists of ls erials shall be ual rocks shal cks shall be c microdeval freezethaw cks with visib t be accepted m riprap rnum als ontractor shall t least num days tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b weirs shall be ment for p uantity to be ance with this payment nt for work un ndard sp portatio f the supply an e supplied by t l have approx clean hard so loss not grea w loss not gre ble planes of w . num mixed shall submit upon s in advance o red in accorda all carry out t by the engine constructed in payment measured fo item .
nder this item pecificat on and inf environment nd installation the contracto ximate dimens ound and dura ater than num eater than num weakness an conform to ite request to th of obtaining m ance with any the work as er .
n accordance or payment sh shall be at the tions frastruc tal n of a rock w or .
sions as indica able and shall mto lsnum mto lsnum ndor marked em num. he engineer fo material from t crossreferen indicated in with standard hall be the n e unit price .
cture weir .
ated on stand l meet the foll num .
num. deterioration or approval o he source pro nced item form the contrac d drawing num number of ro dard drawing owing test req by water or w of the source o oposed .
ming part of th ct documents num. ock weirs con item num page num num. quirements weather will of supply of is item .
s andor as nstructed in depa armo janua num num num num artment our stone p ry num descript .num this ite material .num all mate specifie docume .num the ar weathe having a .num the hav .num wh mat .num individu or equa .num rock w will not .num the ac laborato .num the ap fragmen submitta .num the co least num construc .num the co specific .num the co stone a with the .num the co required .num the co work a area of stan of trans protectio tion m consists of s erials shall be ed size range ents .
mour stone ring and degr a density of n e rock when t ve a microdev hen tested by terial shall hav ual rock shall al to onehalf o with visible pla be accepted .
cceptability of ory andor field pproval of so nts to be obta als ontractor shall num days in adva ction ontractor sha ally directed b ntractor shall and filter blan e standard dr ontractor sha d. ontractor shall area is cleared the work .
ndard sp portatio n e f supply and p e supplied by e by mass of protection sh radation in wa ot less than num tested by the val loss not gr the freezet ve a freezet be angular an of its length .
anes of weakn f the rock sh d testing proc me rock frag ined at that q notify the en ance of obtain ll carry out t by the enginee place armour ket material awing num. ll verify the maintain the d of all driftwo pecificat on and inf environment placing of the a y the contract individual roc hall be rock ater free of o num tmnum .
microdeval te reater than num thaw test me thaw loss not nd each rock ness andor s hall be determ cedures carrie gments does uarry .
gineer in writ ning material fr the work as er .
r stone protec as indicated existing grad grades and s ood debris sn tions frastruc tal armour stone ctor for both a ck or gradati that is clean overburden est method in num. ethod in accor greater than num shall have bo ubject to mar mined by the ed out by qual not convey ting for appro rom the sourc indicated in ction system in the contr des and shal slopes of the now ice and a cture protection sy armour stone on limit as i n hard soun spoil shale a n accordance w rdance with m num. oth thickness a rked deteriora e owners se ified personne the enginee oval of the so ce proposed .
the contrac comprised of ract documen l notify the e underlying m all other objec ystem .
and filter bla ndicated in th nd durable and organic m with mto ls mto ls num and breadth g ation by water ervice records el .
ers approval urce of supply ct documents the composit nts andor in engineer if re material to ens ctionable mat item num page num anket in the he contract resistant to material and num shall num the rock greater than r or weather s andor by of all rock y of rock at s andor as te of armour accordance eshaping is sure that the terials in the ar pag num num num rmour ston ge num num .num .num con .num .num .num the abut .num .num arm rock resu .num .num .num no p .num the resu num measu .num the prot num basis o .num pay syst .num the reso the t shal .num ne protect the armour embankment ntrol of the gra any differenc testing in acc the contrac undertake the contractor sh tting structure the contract work .
mour stone pro ks below and ults .
the contrac throughout th the contract be bound and pushing or du contractor sh ult of water lev rement fo quantity to ection system of payment ment for wor tem as identif cost of the pr olve disagreem test results sh ll bear the cos the cost of a borne by the departm tion stone protec t so that the e adation shall b ce in opinion cordance with ctor shall pro e testing requ hall place the es are not dam tor shall be re otection shall the placemen ctor shall ens he entire armo tor shall place d consolidated mping of arm hall be respon vel variations or payment be measured m supplied and t rk under this i fied under the rovision of ma ment between how that the m st of the test .
any retesting contractor .
st ment of tr environm ction shall be embankment i be by visual ex between the astm dnum ovide the eq ired .
armour stone maged .
sponsible at h be placed su nt shall be con sure that dur our stone prote e the individua d to as great a our stone pro nsible for any w waves or wea t d for payment d placed in ac tem include a e contract .
aterials labou n the owner a material does to resolve th tandard s ransport ental e placed in c is fully protect xamination .
e engineer a num. uipment a s e protection su hisher own ex uch that each ntrolled to ens ring placeme ection mass .
al rock in such an extent as t otection shall b work or mate ather condition t shall be the ccordance with a separate un ur and equipm and the cont not meet the he supply of t specifica tation an conjunction w ted as soon a and the cont sorting site a uch that the u xpense to rep rock is stabl sure that a un ent the larger h a manner th he nature of t be permitted d erials required ns .
e number of t h this item .
nit price for ea ment to test th tractor shall b specified gra the specified ations nd infras with the cons after placemen ractor shall b and the labo underlying ma pair any such e secure and niform and co r rocks shall hat the whole the rock will a during placem to repair dam tonnes of the ach armour s e armour ston be borne by th adation otherw material gra structur item num january num struction of th nt as practical be resolved b our required aterials and an damage to th d supported b ontinuous cov l be disperse e structure sha llow .
ment .
mage which is e armour ston stone protectio ne protection he contractor wise the own dation shall b re num num he .
by to ny he by er ed all a ne on to r if er be depa indivi janua num num num num num num artment idual rock ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num the pro .num the m degrad .num individu breadth submitta .num the co supplyi constru .num the co specific .num the co underly measure .num the qu accorda basis of .num payme stan of trans k placemen tion em consists o ls erials shall be e rocks may oduction .
material shall ation in water ual rocks sha h greater than als ontractor sha ng of any ma ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor sha ying or surrou ment for p uantity to be ance with this payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio nt f the supply a e supplied by be made av be rocks th r and free of d ll be typically n or equal to o ll notify the e aterial from the all carry out t by the engine all ensure th nding materia payment measured fo s item .
nder this item ecificati on and inf environment and placing of the contracto ailable from hat are hard deleterious m num mm num onehalf of the engineer for e sources id the work as er .
hat the place al .
or payment s m shall be at t ions frastruc tal f individual ro or .
the work sit d sound du materials .
num mm long a eir length .
approval of dentified .
indicated in ement of ind shall be the n the unit price cture ocks .
te at the loca urable resist and shall have the sources the contrac dividual rocks number of in e. ations of the tant to weat e both the thi s of supply ct documents s does not dividual rock item num page num eir origin or thering and ckness and prior to the s andor as disturb the ks placed in depart gravel january num d .num num m .num .num .num .num num s .num .num num c .num tment of for fish h num description num this item c materials num all materia num gravel for particles fr it shall con num gravel for accordance num gravel fro document ubmittals the contra days in ad num the contra the comme construct the contra directed by stand transpo habitat n consists of the als shall be su fish habitat s ree of clay sil nform to the g fish habitat e with mto l om the existi s as being av actor shall no vance of obta actor shall su encement of t ion actor shall car y the engineer ard spec ortation env e supply and upplied by the shall consist o lt or other del radation limit gradati ast sieve num num num m num m num num shall show a s num. ing streambe vailable .
otify the engin aining material ubmit verificat the work .
rry out the wo r. cificatio and infra vironmental placement of e contractor .
of a well grade eterious mate s presented i tab ion limits fo tm e size mm mm mm mm mm mm a microdeva ed may be neer in writing l from the sou tion that the m ork as indicate ns astructu f gravel for fis ed granular m erials when te n table num ble num or gravel for pe al loss of not used in the g for approva urce proposed material mee ed in the con ure sh habitat .
material comp ested in acco num .
fish habitat ercent passin num num num num num num num num num num num t greater tha work if ide al of the sour .
ets the specifi ntract docume posed of clean rdance with a t ng n num when entified in th rce of gravel ed requireme ents andor as item num page num n uncoated astm cnum n tested in he contract at least num ents prior to s specifically gr pag num num num ravel for f ge num num .num the con .num .num .num num measu .num the supp num basis o .num pay fish habita e contractor nducting salva streambed m abandoned a all salvage a by environme the contract clean neat a rement fo quantity to b plied and plac of payment ment for wor departm at shall adhere age of existin material shall and are identif activity shall o entally accept tor shall be re and environme or payment be measured ced in accorda t rk under this i s ment of t environm to the followin g streambed only be taken fied in the co occur in the d ted and appro esponsible fo entally accept t d for payment ance with this tem shall be tandard transpor ental ng constructio materials n from areas ontract docum dry and in are oved techniqu r the salvage table conditio t shall be the s item .
at the unit pr d specific rtation a on practices of the existin ments .
eas separated ues .
e area and sh on .
number of to rice .
cations and infras as a minimu g watercours d from the ex hall leave the onnes of grav structu item january m standard w e which are b xisting stream salvage area vel for fish ha re m num num when being m flow a in a abitat depa topso janua num num num num artment oil ary num descript .num this ite from an material .num topsoil .num if a obt .num topsoil weight .
.num topsoil clods r thickne .num in a gre submitta .num the co the wo constru .num the co specific .num areas to day pre .num topsoil materia .num topsoil brough .num ha of r .num in equ .num top the and stan of trans tion em consists o n off site sour ls l shall be mat additional mat tain that mate l composition l shall be free roots and an ess of the laye areas of lawn eatest dimensi als ontractor shal ork site at lea ction ontractor sha cally directed b o be topsoiled eceding the pl l placement in als above sub l shall be spr t to a true and nd placement restricted acc areas of law uivalent .
psoil shall be slopes of the d on backslop ndard sp portatio of the placem rce .
terial salvaged terial is requir erial from outs n shall consis e of debris a y other coars er of topsoil to n restoration on .
l notify the e ast num days pri all carry out t by the engine d shall be sca acement of to n the work a bgrade unles read on the p d even surfac t and raking s cess .
wn restoratio placed on for e layer of borro pes or as direc pecificat on and inf environment ment of topso d and stockpi red beyond th side the work st of num to num nd stones lar se vegetative o be placed .
topsoil shall b ngineer of th or to importin the work as er .
rified or otherw opsoil .
area shall be c ss otherwise a prepared area ce meeting the shall be requi on topsoil sh reslopes from ow aanum qual cted by the en tions frastruc tal oil either ava iled under ite hat available o k site .
num sand and rger than num e material of be free of de e sources o ng material fro indicated in rwise loosened completed pr approved by t as to a dept e required gra ired in areas hall be rolled m subgrade sh lity material as ngineer .
cture ilable on site m num and num on the work s contain num to mm in greate f a size equa bris and ston of topsoil to b om off site .
the contrac d to a depth o rior to the pla the engineer .
th of num mm ade .
adjacent to fi d using a la houlder down s identified in e or including num .
site the cont o num organic est dimension al to or great es larger than be obtained fr ct documents of at least num m acement of an m num mm a nished lawns awn roller o in cuts and fil the contract d item num page num the supply tractor shall c matter by n and large ter than the n num mm in rom outside s andor as mm within num ny roadbed and shall be s or in areas r approved ls including documents to pag num num num psoil ge num num .num plac such .num top prio .num top to im .num .num if ex of th num measu .num the plac .num the num basis o .num pay cing of topsoi h a degree th soil shall not r approval of soil that is con mporting topso the contract authorization xcess topsoil m he owner .
rement fo quantity to ced in accorda area shall be of payment ment for wor departm il shall not be at balling and be placed a the engineer ntained within oil .
tor shall inco from the eng material exists or payment be measure ance with this e measured a t rk under this i sta ment of tr environm e carried out d clumping res fter the end r. n the work site rporate impor ineer .
s after comple t d for paymen s item .
along the slop tem shall be andard s ransport ental on frozen ma sults .
of the week e that can be rted topsoil in etion of the wo nt shall be th pe of the grou at the unit pr specifica tation an aterials or wh in which sep or has been s nto the work ork this mater he number o nd .
rice .
ations nd infras hen materials ptember numth salvaged sha only after re rial shall rema of square me tructur item num january num s are wetted t occurs witho ll be used prio eceiving writte ain the propert etres of topso re num num to ut or en ty oil depa hydr janua num num artment roseeding ary num descript .num this ite ditches .num hydros .num ro .num mu material .num all mate .num seed m by the e .num add .num the ca mix stan of trans tion em consists s and other pr seeding shall adside mix w nicipal mix w ls erials shall be mix shall be a engineer the ditional altern e seed mixes nada seeds a xture respect cre ha ca als an re kentucky b creeping r annual ry ndard sp portatio of supply a repared areas be identified b with mulch per ith mulch per e supplied by as indicated in e seed mix sh natives to the s for tables num act for canad tively .
co sp eeping red f ard fescue anada bluegra sike or white nnual ryegras ed top c species bluegrass red fescue yegrass pecificat on and inf environment nd applicatio s. by the followi r num hydr r num hydr the contracto n table num all be as indic municipal see num and num da no .
num grou table omposition o pecies fescue ass clover ss tab composition turf type tions frastruc tal on of hydros ng mix design roseeding b roseeding bm or .
num except tha cated in table ed mix may b num shall mee und cover mi num of roadside m ble num of municipa see alternativ num num num cture seeding on f nations m t for lawns an e num. be approved b et or exceed ixture and ca mix seed mix by mass num num num num num num al mix ed mix by m ve num alt foreslopes b nd other area by the engine the requirem anada no .
num l mass ternative num num num num item num page num backslopes as identified eer .
ments of the lawn grass hy pag num num num ydroseedin ge num num .num fert num .num bag perc .num .num see cond .num .num bind .num wat .num hyd for u colo cotto .num .num whe whic num submit .num the the m .num the the subm be s .num the num const .num the spec .num area stick .num ng tilizer shall b num npk s of seed a centages dat bags of seed ed and fertiliz ditions .
seed and fer der may be su ter shall be fre raulic mulch f use in hydros oured green w on fibres and hydraulic mu other specifie en applied th ch will allow m ttals contractor s materials supp contractor s component mission shall sampled by th contractor s ruction contractor s cifically directe as to be hydr ks roots and stones grea outside the w departm be a num thereafter .
and fertilizer te of bagging d shall also be er shall be k rtilizer that ha upplied in liqu ee of any imp for hydroseed eeding and s with an enviro or shredded ulch shall form ed materials a he hydroseed moisture to per shall submit u plied meet the shall submit u species and include the lo he engineer .
hall submit th shall carry o ed by the eng roseeded sha large rocks w ter than num work area .
sta ment of tr environm num npk m shall be lab and supplier e marked with kept dry and ve been subj uid flake or po purities which ding as specif shall consist o nmentally acc newsprint .
m a homogen and shall cont ing mix shall rcolate into the upon request e specified req upon request percentages ocations wh he proposed b ut the work gineer .
all be free of r which would im mm in the le andard s ransport ental mix for seedi belled identif s name .
h lot number .
protected fro ected to mois owder form .
would inhibit fied in table num of shredded w ceptable dye neous slurry w tain no growth be capable e underlying s the manufac quirements as a certificate s including w ere the lots binder applica as indicated ruts ridges an mpede growth east dimensi specifica tation an ing done ma fying mass om direct sun sture shall not germination num shall be wood fibres s or shredded when agitated hinhibiting ch of forming a soil .
cturers ando s detailed in th e of analysis weed and in of seed to be ation rate in c d in the cont nd deleteriou h of the seed ion shall be ations nd infras ay numst to lab kg mix com nlight and oth t be used .
of the seed .
e a product m shredded new straw mixed d or mixed in hemicals or c an absorptive or suppliers c he contract do for the seed nert material e used on the conjunction wi tract docume s materials s mix and mow removed an tructur item num january num bour day an mponents an her detriment made primarily wsprint with raw water with th compounds .
mat certification th ocuments .
mix identifyin content .
th e contract ma ith num. ents andor a uch as weed wing .
nd disposed o re num num nd nd tal y he at ng is ay as s of depa hydr janua num num seed fertiliz hydrau binder mulch num artment roseeding ary num .num final sh as port accorda .num the co depth o .num hyd .num hydrau tank ca homoge .num applica .num app gro .num bin bm .num hyd ty zer ulic mulch a r tackifier a haystraw b .num timing .num hyd pre .num .num .num hyd .num hyd ove .num .num afte hyd stan of trans haping of slo tions of the ance with item ontractor shal of num mm no s droseeding wi ulic mulch see pable of conti eneous slurry ation rates plication rates ound condition nder is require m. droseeding b ype of mater all application rat balesrollspro of application droseeding s eparation as d the enginee of the comm the engine hydroseedin droseeding sh droseeding d er at least num areas of poo er labour da droseed b bm ndard sp portatio opes and othe work are co m num. l ensure all s sooner than num ill not be perm ed fertilizer an nually agitatin is produced .
s shall be as ns .
d with both th b includes mu applicat rial te per manufa ocessed straw n hall be carrie defined by num er shall appro mencement of er shall be n ng .
hould not be one between of the area or or no grow ay and up to m incorporat pecificat on and inf environment er exposed ea ompleted to such areas ar num days prior to mitted on harde nd binder sha ng the mixture shown in ta he hydroseedi lching applied table num tion rates fo acturers spec w d out in all ca num. ove and prem f the hydrosee notified at lea performed du n may numst and hydroseeded wth shall be re o the end of ting a num tions frastruc tal arth surfaces enable hyd re prepared to o hydroseedin ened crusted all be thorough e during the hy able num an ng and mulch d after hydros num or hydroseed b kgha num num num cifications .
per num ases within num measure all a eding of any a ast num hours uring windy co d labour day d in the growi eseeded as de the week in num fertilizer mix cture shall be don droseeding to o a loosened ng .
d or rutted soil hly mixed with ydroseeding o nd may vary hing operation seed in accor d num days after c areas to be h area .
in advance o onditions or p y must produ ing season of etermined by which septe x as per num e in areas of o be done in condition to .
h water in a hy operation to en by num de ns of hydrosee rdance with num bm kgh num num num straw only completion of hydroseeded of the applica periods of rain ce a satisfac f that year .
the engineer ember numth o num shall be us item num page num cut and fill n stages in a minimum ydroseeding nsure that a epending on eding b and num .
m ha num num num per num the surface in advance ation of the nfall .
ctory growth r. occurs only sed .
hy pag num num num ydroseedin ge num num .num .num num measu .num the supp .num the num basis o .num pay hyd ng .num the hays out within .num growth w condition no hydrosee approval of th the contract and all other by a method .num where o susceptib water to r rement fo quantity to b plied and app area shall be of payment yment for w droseeding a departm straw mulchin n num hours of t will be based s of num eding shall be he engineer .
tor shall take installations approved by overspray com ble vegetation remove such o or payment be measured plied in accord e measured a t work under th as identified u sta ment of tr environm ng operation w the hydroseed on the perfo num. e carried out e all reasonab and where s the engineer mes in conta the contract overspray .
t d for payment dance with th along the slop his item sha nder the con andard s ransport ental which forms p ding operation ormance duri after the we ble care to pr such overspra r. act with the tor shall imme t shall be the is item .
pe of the grou all include a ntract .
specifica tation an part of hydros n in accordanc ng the next eek of septe revent oversp ay occurs the foliage of a ediately spray area in squa nd .
separate un ations nd infras seed b bm s ce with num. growing seas mber numth wi pray onto str e contractor s any trees sh y the affected v are metres of nit price for tructur item num january num shall be carrie son as per th thout the prio uctures sign shall remove hrubs or othe vegetation wit f hydroseedin each type o re num num ed he or s it er th ng of depa ferti janua num num num num artment ilizing ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num fertilize from su .num hydrau environ .num hyd .num hyd with .num water s submitta .num the co the mat .num the co tankful constru .num the co specific .num applica will be .num fertilizi .num the fert .num the co .num hydrau .num fertilize agitatio .num applica stan of trans tion em consists o s erials shall be er shall have ulphurcoated ulic mulch sha nmentally acc draulic mulch draulic mulch h the other sp shall be free o als ontractor shal terials supplie ontractor sha for the select ction ontractor sha cally directed b ation shall be permitted .
ng shall be ca e engineer s tilizer .
ontractor shal ulic mulch at t er at the rat on sufficient to ation rates sha ndard sp portatio f supplying an e supplied by a compositio urea .
all be shredd eptable dye .
shall contain h material sha pecified mate of any impurit l submit upo d meet the sp all submit the ted equipmen all carry out t by the engine by hydroseed arried out bet shall be notif l not perform the rate of num te of num kg o distribute th all not vary by pecificat on and inf environment nd applying fe the contracto on of num ed wood fibre n no growthin all form a hom rials .
ties which wo n request the pecified require proposed pr nt to be emplo the work as er .
ding methods tween midap fied at least the work und num kgha shal gha shall be e mix uniform y more than num tions frastruc tal ertilizer .
or .
num npk wit es or shredd nhibiting chem mogeneous sl ould inhibit the e manufactur ements as de roportioning o oyed in the w indicated in s and no direc pril and victor num hours in der adverse fi ll be mixed wi e introduced mly in the tank num .
cture th num of the ed newsprint micals or com lurry when ag e effect of the rers andor su etailed in the c of the ingred work and in co the contrac ct access to th ria day .
n advance of ield condition ith water in th immediately k. pa e nitrogen be t coloured gre mpounds .
gitated or mix e fertilizer .
uppliers certi contract docu dients and co onjunction wit ct documents he areas with f the applica ns .
he fertilizer tan y prior to spr item num age num eing derived een with an xed in water fication that uments .
overage per th num. s andor as equipment ation of the nk .
raying with fer pag num num num rtilizing ge num num .num the all o met .num num measu .num the supp .num area num basis o .num pay contractor s other installat hod approved where overs vegetation th remove such rement fo quantity to plied and app as shall be m of payment ment for wor departm shall take all tions and wh d by the engin pray comes i he contracto overspray .
or payment be measure plied in accord easured alon t rk under this i sta ment of tr environm reasonable c here such ov neer .
n contact with or shall imme t ed for payme dance with th g the slope o tem shall be andard s ransport ental care to preven verspray occu h the foliage o ediately spray ent shall be is item .
of the ground .
at the unit pr specifica tation an nt overspray urs the cont of any trees y the affected the area in rice .
ations nd infras onto structur ractor shall r shrubs or oth d vegetation square metr tructur item num january num res signs an remove it by her susceptib with water t res of fertilize re num num nd a le to er depa mulc janua num num num num artment ching ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num mulch s .num un ma spr .num app .num when a the und .num binder ground .num binder underly .num binder .num water regulato submitta .num the co the mat constru .num the co specific .num the co represe permits .num mulch s stan of trans tion em consists o ls erials shall be shall be hay o processed fo aterial and n reading or proved equiva applied the m derlying soil .
must be cap and shall rem shall not form ying soil .
may be supp shall be con ory agency .
als ontractor shal terials supplie ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall entative as de s and regulatio shall be applie ndard sp portatio f the supply a e supplied by or straw and s orm such as not so wet alent .
ulch shall for pable of join main effective m an impervio plied in liquid ntaminantfree l submit upo d meet the sp all carry out t by the engine apply additio efined in num ons ed with binde pecificat on and inf environment and applicatio the contracto supplied in eit bales or roll decayed or m an absorpt ing together e for num days ous seal whic flake or powd e and obtain n request the pecified require the work as er .
onal mulch as num when neces er at the manu tions frastruc tal on of mulch on or .
ther of the fol ls free of no compacted tive mat whic the mulch p from the time h would prev der form .
ed from a s e manufactur ements as de indicated in s directed by t ssary to comp ufacturers rec cture n exposed gro lowing forms oxious weeds so as to in ch will allow m particles to s e of applicatio vent the penet source appro rers andor su etailed in the c the contrac the contracto ply with item num commended a pa ound .
s and other u hibit even a moisture to pe ecure the m on .
tration of moi oved by the uppliers certi contract docu ct documents ors onsite en num as well a application ra item num age num undesirable and uniform ercolate into ulch to the sture to the appropriate fication that uments .
s andor as nvironmental s applicable ate .
mu pag num num num ulching ge num num .num app num .num .num .num .num the con .num .num the all o met .num ditc may num measu .num the and .num area num basis o .num pay proved unproc num kgha num lumps and th binder shall woodfibre or binder applic has been pla contractor s ntract period .
the contrac after the initia contractor s other installat hod approved hes carried o y subject to th rement fo quantity to b applied in ac as shall be m of payment ment for wor departm cessed hay o . hick clumps o be mixed in r paper mulch cation shall b aced .
shall maintain ctor shall app al application shall take all tions and wh d by the engin out in accorda he approval o or payment be measured ccordance wit easured alon t rk under this i sta ment of tr environm or straw mulc of mulch shall a solution o h and sprayed be completed n the mulched ply additional of mulch .
reasonable c here such ov neer .
ance with num of the enginee t for payment th this item .
g the slope o tem shall be andard s ransport ental ch shall be sp be broken ap of water with d uniformly ov within num ho d areas until mulch as re care to preven verspray occu num and areas er be placed shall be the a of the ground .
at the unit pr specifica tation an pread evenly part and disp sufficient gre ver the mulch ours after the mulch is no equired to re nt overspray urs the cont s requiring th without binde area in squar rice .
ations nd infras y and uniform ersed .
een dye or g hed ground .
e unprocessed longer requi estore the ar onto structur ractor shall r e hand place er .
re metres of m tructur item num january num mly at a rate o greencoloure d hay or stra ired during th eas expose res signs an remove it by ement of mulc mulch supplie re num num of ed aw he ed nd a ch ed depa root janua num num num num num num artment t wads ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num the tre native t .num tre and .num the tre ground mass is indicate .num the tre .num reinfor .num header of num m. submitta .num the co at least constru .num the co specific .num the roo standa .num header standa .num the tree measure .num the qu in acco basis of .num paymen stan of trans tion em consists o s erials shall be ees to be use to the work s ees may be sa d footer logs ees to be use and shall be s at least num m ed in the con ees shall be of rcing steel use r and footer lo als ontractor shall num days in ad ction ontractor sha cally directed b ot wads shall rd drawing num r and footer lo rd drawing num e root mass s ment for p uantity to be m rdance with th payment nt for work un ndard sp portatio f the supply a e supplied by ed as root wa site .
alvaged onsi as directed b ed for root w e removed fr m in diameter tract docume f sound wood ed to secure ogs shall be a notify the eng dvance of obt all carry out t by the engine be embedde num or as dire ogs shall be in num. hall be washe payment measured for p his item .
nder this item ecificati on and inf environment and installatio the contracto ads and hea ite from areas by the engine wads shall be rom the grou r. the trees s ents .
d and free of d the header an a minimum of gineer in writ aining materia the work as er .
ed into the si ected by the e nstalled horizo ed and free of payment shal shall be at the ions frastruc tal on of root wad or .
der and foote s being cleare er .
num to num nd complete shall be cut to decay breaka nd footer logs f num mm in d ting for appro al from the pro indicated in de of the out engineer .
ontally and an soil prior to in l be the numb e unit price .
cture ds .
er logs shall ed to be used mm in diame with roots s o a length of age or other d s shall be numm diameter and oval of the sou oposed source the contrac tlet pool facin nchored using nstallation .
ber of root wa be deciduous d as root wad eter at num m such that the num m above t damage .
m rebar .
have a minim urce of supply e. ct documents ng the flow a g numm rebar a ads supplied a item num page num s trees and s or header m above the e intact root he roots as mum length y of material s andor as as shown in as shown in and installed depa trees janua num num num num artment s and shru ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num trees docum .num tre .num shr .num trees a sound w .num plants excess .num nursery surroun .num topsoil .num stakes minimu .num trees s trunks .
submitta .num the co at least constru .num the co specific .num roots o other a .num excava ball .
.num each tr topsoil stan of trans ubs tion em consists o s erials shall be and shrubs s ents ees shall be w rubs shall be and shrubs s with a strong if supplied f of num mm fo y stock shall nding soil .
l shall meet th for supportin um of num m shall be tied t als ontractor shall num days in ad ction ontractor sha cally directed b of the trees a pproved mea ation for plant ree and shrub shall be place ndard sp portatio f the supply p e supplied by shall be of t white ash hy speckled ald hall be free o fibrous root s from the vici or trees and num l have a roo he requireme ng trees shall m long .
to stakes usin notify the eng dvance of obt all carry out t by the engine nd shrubs sh ans .
ing shall be to b shall be pla ed around the pecificat on and inf environment planting and the contracto the species i ybrid poplar a der andor re of disease in system .
nity of the w num mm for sh ot ball at lea nts of num. be steel tba ng trunk collar gineer in writ aining materia the work as er .
all be kept m o a depth of num aced on a be e root system tions frastruc tal maintenance or .
indicated bel andor yellow ed osier dogw nsects defect work site sh hrubs .
st num mm ar num x num x rs which neith ting for appro al from the so indicated in oist until plan num mm belo edding of top m in num mm li cture of trees and low or as in birch .
wood .
ts or injuries hall have ade in diameter num mm or wo her pinch nor oval of the sou urce proposed the contrac nting by the u w and around soil of num m fts tamped to pa shrubs .
dicated in th and shall be equate root s including the ood num x num m r are abrasive urce of supply d. ct documents se of wet bur d the root sys mm loose thic o eliminate vo item num age num he contract structurally systems in e roots and mm each a e to the tree y of material s andor as rlap bags or stem or root ckness and oids .
tr pag num num num ees and sh ge num num .num whe pen .num a be .num tree app .num the plan plan .num the follo grow natu num measu .num the plan num basis o .num pay shru .num hold expi hrubs en twothirds etrated into s erm shall be b es large eno roved by the contractor nting and as nt growth with contractor s owing growing wth within the ural disasters rement fo quantity to nted and main of payment ment for wo ub as identifie dback in the iration of the w departm backfilled th oil the remai built around th ugh to requi engineer .
shall be resp necessary th out causing e shall guarant g season an e warranty p . or payment be measured ntained in acc t rk under this ed under the amount of num warranty peri sta ment of tr environm he planting h ning depth of he rim of the re staking sh ponsible to w hereafter so erosion of the tee the trees nd shall repla eriod except t d for paymen cordance with item shall in contract .
num of the val od or until rel andard s ransport ental hole shall be f hole shall be hole and the hall be stake water each p as to mainta e surrounding s and shrubs ace at his co t those dama nt will be the this item .
nclude a sepa lue of the wo eased by the specifica tation an filled with w e backfilled to plant watered ed and tied a plant daily fo ain soil moist berm .
s for both the ost all trees aged by vand e number of t arate unit pri ork under this e engineer w ations nd infras water .
after o finish grade .
d again .
at the time o r at least tw ture condition e year of pla and shrubs dalism or floo trees and sh ice for each s item will be hichever is th tructur item num january num the water ha .
of planting a wo weeks afte ns required fo anting and th not sustainin oding or othe hrubs supplied type of tree o e held until th he least time .
re num num as as er or he ng er d or he depa temp janua num num num num num num artment orary wat ary num descript .num this ite barrier .
material .num all mate .num plastic require submitta .num the co plans a constru .num the co specific .num the co through .num the co least da .num the co thereof .num when waterco .num tem be measure .num the qu water b basis of .num payme stan of trans ter barrie tion em consists o ls erials shall be liners shall ments of cgs als ontractor shall nd details of t ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shal hout the perio ontractor shal aily during pe ontractor sha f. the tempora ourse all mate mporary wate left in place a ment for p uantity to be barrier supplie payment nt for work u ndard sp portatio er of the supply e supplied by be clear po sb num. l submit for a he proposed t all carry out t by the engine l maintain the od of use .
l inspect and eriods of prolo all immediatel ry barrier is erials pertaini er barrier loca and incorpora payment measured fo ed installed m nder this item pecificat on and inf environment y installation the contracto olyethylene a pproval at le temporary wa the work as er .
e temporary w document the onged rainfall .
y repair any no longer r ng to the tem ated within th ated into the fi or payment w maintained an m shall be at t tions frastruc tal maintenance or .
a minimum o ast num days ater barrier .
indicated in water barrier e temporary w . damage to t required the mporary water e limits of an inal embankm will be the nu nd removed in the unit price cture e and remov of num mils thic prior to startin the contrac in a functiona water barrier the temporar e contractor r barrier .
n embankmen ment as appro umber of line n accordance e. val of a temp ck and shal ng work unde ct documents al condition c after each ra ry water barr shall remov nt to be const oved by the e ear metres of e with this item item num page num orary water ll meet the er this item s andor as continuously infall and at rier or parts e from the tructed may engineer .
f temporary m. depa temp janua num num num num artment orary wat ary num descript .num this ite tempor .num this ite otherwi material .num all mate .num supply fence s solely a .num materia standa submitta .num two co profess .num the des .num the .num the exc .num the ant .num a p adv whe constru .num the co specific .num the the .num the fol .num dra tim ru des min stan of trans ter contro tion em consists o rary water con em applies to ise indicated ls erials shall be of materials shown on the as part of the als for temp ard drawing num als opies of design sional enginee sign of each t e flow capacity e proposed m ceed the minim e proposed m ticipate stream precautionary vance of any s en directed by ction ontractor sha cally directed b e contractor s written appro lowing inform ainage area me of concen noff coefficie sign flow qnum nimum specif ndard sp portatio ol works of the design ntrol works he culverts with in the contra e supplied by shall include e plans and twcw .
orary workin num. n drawings an er shall be su twcw plan sh y of the twcw method descri mum specified method of mon m flow increase work area cle stream flow in y the enginee all carry out t by the engine shall not weld oval of the eng mation is provi tration ent num fied flow cap pecificat on and inf environment supply con erein after ca h a nominal in ct documents the contracto e sediment c fence directe ng pads for nd design cal bmitted a min hall include b w iption and dra d flow capacity nitoring stream es and eanup proced ncrease antici r. the work as er .
or attach any gineer .
ded on the dr pacity tions frastruc tal struction ope alled twcw nside diamete s. or .
control fence ed to be inst work access culations for t nimum of num d but are not lim awings of the y of the twcw m flows and w dure and mitig pated to exce indicated in y part of the t rawings for ea cture eration main .
er id greate per num th talled by the s in wetlands the twcw s days before co ited to twcw desig w weather forec gation measu eed the flow c the contrac twcw to an ach watercou pa ntenance and er than num hat is addition engineer an s shall be su stamped and ommencing w gned to accom casts at the w ures to be imp capacity of the ct documents existing struc urse crossing item num age num removal of mm unless nal to such nd required upplied per signed by a work .
mmodate or work area to plemented in e twcw or s andor as cture without tem pag num num num mporary w ge num num .num .num .num the wor wor .num the due and .num the prol .num the cont repa .num .num .num the sedi .num whe mat .num num measu .num the con num basis o .num pay .num the not f d water con the contract of installation the measure flows exceed notwithstand minimum spe obtain the req twcw shal rk area dry .
t rk area to the contractor is to infiltration pumping .
contractor s onged rainfal contractor tinuously thro air any damag failure to ma identified by num .
this penalty twcw plan mnumsec mea work under iment control en twcw is erials pertain any parts of under the c approved by rement fo design sup ntrol works t of payment ment for wor contractor s functioning pr departm trol work tor shall cons n with the risk s taken to m d the design c ding the abov ecified flow to quired permit l separate the the twcw s e flow of the w s responsible n. methods to shall inspect t l. shall monitor oughout the e ge to the twc aintain a prop the engineer will not apply was followed asurements th this item sha fence as des s no longer r ing to the tw f the twcw ontract may the engineer or payment pply placeme twcw in acc t rk under this i hall be subjec roperly per num sta ent of tr ks environm sider these fac k of delay du inimize dama capacity of the ve the contra o satisfy the c ts .
e work area shall also con watercourse .
e for control a o remove infil the twcw a r and ensure entire period cw or parts t perly functioni r or a represe y during perio d and the co hat verifies th all include ins scribed in num required the wcw .
within the lim be left in pla r. t ent mainten cordance with tem shall be ct to a penalty num .
andard s ransport ental ctors in desig e to weather age to the site e twcw .
actor must pro commitments from the flow ntrol the introd andor remov ltrated water after each rain e that the tw of use includ hereof .
ng twcw or entative of df ods of flow ex ontractor subm at flows exce stallation repl .num .
contractor mits of an em ace and inco ance operat h this item sha at the lump s y of num pe specifica tation an gning a twcw r events .
the e and the en ovide twcw to the regula w of the wate duction of se val of any wa may include nfall and at le wcw operat ding evening r properly imp fo or delg xceeding the mits documen eeded the flow lacement and shall remove mbankment a orporated into tion and rem all be paid for sum price .
er day for eac ations d infrast w plan which submitted pl nvironment in ws which acc atory agencies rcourse and diment and d ater entering t the construc east daily du e in a functi s and weeke plement the t shall result in e flow capacit ntation such w capacity of t d maintenanc e from the w andor fill to b o the final em moval of tem r on a lump s ch day that th tructure item num january num h balances co lan must deta the event tha ommodate th s necessary t shall keep th debris from th the work are ction of sump ring periods o ional conditio ends and sha twcw plan a n penalties pe ty provided th as actual flo the twcw .
ce of addition watercourse a be constructe mbankment a mporary wate sum basis .
he twcw are e num num st ail at he to he he ea ps of on all as er he ow al all ed as er e depa fish r janua num num num num artment rescue ary num descript .num this ite stream death o .num for the biologis material .num none id submitta .num the co the biol constru .num the co specific .num the co activitie .num the co prevent .num bru wou .num afte wo .num all spec water fl .num a fish re .num after a might re the co lost or d .num for eac within th .num the the stan of trans tion em consists o diversions w or injury to the e purpose of st. s dentified .
als ontractor shall ogist .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall es that pose a ontractor shall t fish from mig ush logs and uld obscure fis er completion ork area to fac cies of fish sh ows above or escue will be c fish rescue th eenter the w ontractor shall damaged nets ch fish rescue hree weeks of e summary sh approximate ndard sp portatio of rescuing a where construc e fish .
this item the l submit the b all carry out t by the engine l arrange to h risk to fish .
install the bio grating into the debris shall sh is reduced n of the work cilitate capturin hall be captur r below the wo considered co he biologist m work area and be responsib s. e the biologist f completing th hall describe t numbers and ecificati on and inf environment nd salvaging ction activities e persons c biologists fish the work as er .
have the biolo ologists barri e work area .
be removed f or eliminated in num a ng the fish .
red from the w ork area .
omplete when may leave his d there is no o ble for the ca t shall submit he work .
the efforts tak d sizes of each ions frastruc tal fish from na s or comprom carrying out t rescue repor indicated in ogist at the w er nets or str from the wor d. nd num work area an n deemed by t sher barrier n other suitable re of the nets a written sum ken to isolate h fish species cture atural waterco mised habitat the fish rescu rt within one w the contrac work area at t ructures as di rk area as req stream flow nd promptly p he biologist .
nets in place i e option to pre s and for repla mmary of the the work are salvaged and ourses andor conditions po ue will be kno week of rece ct documents the time of an rected by the quired so tha may be cut o placed alive in if heshe deem event fish from acement or re results to the ea the specie d relocated .
item num page num r temporary ose a risk of own as the iving it from s andor as ny instream e biologist to at cover that off from the n permanent ms that fish m returning .
epair of any e contractor es captured fis pag num num sh rescue ge num num measu .num the acco num basis o .num pay .num pay con eng d rement fo quantity to ordance with t of payment ment for work ment will no nstruction for e ineer under a departme or payment be measured this item .
t k under this ite t be made f each culvert n alternative s sta ent of tra environm t d for paymen em shall be at for fish rescu installation a sequence .
andard s ansporta ental nt shall be the t the unit pric ues other tha s shown on t specifica ation and e number of ce .
an those ide the plans or ations d infrast fish rescues ntified in the r those preap tructure item num january num carried out e sequence pproved by th e num num in of he depa culv janua num num num num num num artment ert erosio ary num descript .num this ite riprap f material .num all mate .num geotex .num random submitta .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the wo .num the co excavat height .num sta of t .num sta of t .num after sh includin the culv .num the co standa measure .num the qu accorda basis of .num paymen stan of trans on protect tion em consists o for erosion pro s erials shall be xtile shall be t m riprap shall als tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b ork shall be pe ontractor shall te and shape slope and wid andard drawin the riprap is th andard drawin the riprap is num haping per num ng the faces o vert perimeter ontractor shall rd drawing num ment for p uantity to be ance with this payment nt for work un ndard sp portatio tion of the excava otection of the e supplied by type nnum meet l be type rnum red in accorda all carry out t by the engine erformed befo excavate and the excess ba dth specified in ng num appli he same as a ng num appli num with the end num the co of the sides of r. carefully plac num in the ou payment measured fo item .
nder this item ecificati on and inf environment ation for and e ends of con the contracto ting the requi num meeting the ance with any the work as er .
ore stream flow d shape the e ackfill and ro n standard dr ies where the nd flush with ies where the d of the pipe r ntractor shall f the excavati ce riprap in ac utlet pool .
or payment s shall be at the ions frastruc tal supply and ncrete culvert or .
rements of num e requiremen crossreferen indicated in w is diverted in existing ground oadbed emban rawings num roadbed fore the roadbed roadbed fore recessed into place geotex ion .
the geot ccordance with shall be the n e unit price .
cture installation o ts .
num. nts of num. nced item form the contrac nto the culvert d beyond eac nkment mater num andor num reslope is num slope .
eslope is flatte the roadbed xtile per num textile shall be h num on the number of c of geotextile a ming part of th ct documents t. ch end of the c rials from the num. or steeper an er than num an slope .
num on the prepa e cut to fit clo e prepared slo culvert ends p item num page num and random is item .
s andor as culvert and invert to the nd the slope nd the slope ared slopes sely around ope and for protected in depa soil r janua num num num num artment reinforce ary num descript .num this ite material .num all mate .num soil rei .num so .num soil rei submitta .num the co product .num the co instruct .num the co supplie recomm .num submitt constru .num the co specific .num the ma .num ge .num ge as .num the con .num equ num .num the ma of t stan of trans ment tion em consists o s erials shall be nforcement s oil reinforceme nforcement s als ontractor shall t specifications ontractor shall ions for handl ontractor sha r to ensure mended by the tals are requir ction ontractor sha cally directed b anufacturers i ogrid shall be ogrid materia recommended e contractor nstruction as r uipment shall num mm of cover e contractor anufacturers r the intact geog ndard sp portatio f the supply a e supplied by hall be geogr ent shall be a hall be tensa submit at lea s and a mill ce l submit befo ing and recom ll upon requ that work a e manufacture red in accorda all carry out t by the engine nstallation pro oriented such l shall be tens d by the manu shall ensure recommended not travel ov r which shall r shall imme recommendat grid and shall ecificati on and inf environment and installatio the contracto rid manufactu a biaxial geog ar bxnum or ast num days in ertificate for th ore incorporat mmended proc est make av area prepara er .
ance with any the work as er .
ocedures shal h that the roll l sioned by han ufacturer .
e that geogr d by the manu ver unprotecte be placed the ediately repa ions .
all repa be subject to ions frastruc tal on of geogrid s or .
ured from a po rid .
titan num o n advance of t he geogrid to b ting the mate cedures for in vailable at th ation and geo crossreferen indicated in l be observed length runs pa nd .
overlaps a rid sections d ufacturer .
ed geogrid or e same day as air damaged aired sections the approval cture soil reinforcem olypropylene or an approve the work the be supplied .
erial into the w nstalling the se he work site ogrid installa nced item form the contrac d along with th arallel to the r and securing o do not sepa over backfille s geogrid plac d geogrid in shall meet th of the engine ment .
polymer .
ed equivalent name of the s work the ma elected geogri a representa tion procedu ming part of th ct documents he following roadway cent of outside edg arate at over ed geogrid wit cement .
n accordance he performanc er .
item num page num . supplier the anufacturers id .
ative of the res are as is item .
s andor as terline .
ges shall be rlaps during th less than e with the ce standard so pag num num oil reinfor ge num num measu .num the reinf .num ove num basis o .num pay cement rement fo quantity to b forcement sup erlapped joints of payment ment for work departm or payment be measured pplied and ins s patches and t k under this ite sta ment of tr environm t for payment talled in accor d seams shall em shall be at andard s ransport ental shall be the rdance with th be measured t the unit pric specifica tation an number of sq his item .
d as a single la ce .
ations nd infras quare metres ayer of soil rei tructur item num january num of geogrid so nforcement .
re num num oil standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num sediment control fence january num environmental standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num jute mat details january num environmental standard drawing num ushaped steel wire no.num gauge or heavier num num foreslope varies backslope varies num minimum of nummm overlap staple detail note nummm long for loose or sandy soils notes num .
always use three strips of jute mats num .
jute mats are to be installed longitudinally in the ditch num .
lay first strip in ditch bottom standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num type a spillway structure for sediment pond january num environmental standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num type a spillway structure details january num environmental standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num type b erosion control structure for ditches january num environmental standard drawing num may vary with soil conditions as directed by the engineer all riprap shown is rnum size flow varies varies foreslope varies num sediment pit common only backslope varies varies num num geotextile under riprap depth width and side slopes of sediment pit notes num .
num .
a a c c b b varies section details on standard drawing num type nnum num varies see section bb file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num type b erosion control structure details january num environmental standard drawing num random riprap rnum geotextile section aa varies num num varies nummm for num num num num flow geotextile geotextile random riprap rnum section bb num num num num section cc sediment pit num varies varies num num num common only subgrade subgrade standard ditch varies num num num num hnum num common only num num varies varies varies num num increase to nummm for ditches nummm or more below subgrade ditch depth of nummm or nummm for ditches nummm or more below subgrade h plansection lines on standard drawing num file num h h nummm for standard num hnum standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num type c erosion control structure for ditches january num environmental standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num type c erosion control structure details january num environmental standard drawing num geotextile section bb section aa sediment pit num num random riprap rnum num num section cc num varies varies num num num common only subgrade varies num num varies subgrade num for standard ditch fill num num common only flow geotextile nummm minimum in ground nummm embedment num stakes per bale of bales may be deeper num minimum varies num num num num num num num varies num varies varies plan section lines on standard drawing num common full width num file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num type d erosion control structure for ditches january num environmental standard drawing num stakes num x num x num min .
direction of flow shoulder backslope numm in silty soil numm typical straw bales num typ .
upgrade bales section aa a a ditch bottom h num notes num the sediment pit of standard dwgs num and num is required for type d structure .
note num note num num if trench for bale embedment is excavated wider than bales backfill with excavated material .
foreslope backslope num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num file num numxnumxnum typ .
foreslope varies num shown embedment note num wide swales as reqd number of bales varies with slopes note num no .
of bales num num num num num height h from top of bales at ditch centre to point where highest bales intercept slopes .
num see table for typical number of upstream bales which are required to ensure min .
nummm for fs bs num install minimum of num bales downgrade as reinforcement .
joints of downgrade bales should be staggered from upstream bales .
standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num gabion backfilling details january num environmental standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num rock weir details january num environmental standard drawing num num num num num num num num num top of slope num num section aa n.t.s .
stream bed of realigned channel rnum random riprap mixed stream b b existing ground lowest point of rock weir rnum random riprap mixed stream lowest point of rock weir rock weir plan varies section bb n.t.s .
rnum random riprap mixed stream bed material rock weir rock num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num armour stone protection system details january num environmental standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num root wad detail in pool january num environmental standard drawing num numm rebar header log footer log num m long root wad trunk sized for site conditions random riprap mixed num num num num pool outlet file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num temporary working pad january num environmental standard drawing num min .
numm m nummm numm m orange perimeter fence sediment control fence nummm overlaps biaxial geogrid min .
min .
nummm overlaps geotextile type wnum min .
nummm of nummm subbase file num nummm standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num end treatment for culverts nummm id roadway foreslope num or steeper january num environmental standard drawing num num d numm embankment foreslope num or steeper existing ground to and matching into roadway embankment foreslope .
to allow for numm thickness of riprap rnum parallel excavate backfill embankment and existing ground type nnum geotextile culvert outlet features details of culvert after placement of riprap rnum on slope end view plan view numm numm numm at existing ground embankment toe of slope d varies per table below pool outlet only depth embankment foreslope num or steeper to and matching into roadway embankment foreslope .
to allow for numm thickness of riprap rnum parallel excavate backfill embankment and existing ground type nnum geotextile above top of pipe numm of backfill inlet of pipe existing ground per table below existing ground varies depth of invert below below pipe numm nom .
bedding numm d d outside diameter pool num d no less than num pool slopes varies outlet of pipe pipe offtake sum of slopes below existing ground min .
depth of invert below pipe invert min .
depth of pool num num num num num num num numm numm numm numm numm numm numm numm file num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num end treatment for culverts nummm id roadway foreslope flatter than num january num environmental standard drawing num num d numm existing ground type nnum geotextile culvert outlet features varies per table below pool outlet only depth embankment foreslope flatter than num at top of pipe backfill .
pipe invert to intercept roadway embankment foreslope to allow for numm thickness of riprap rnum at num from excavate backfill embankment and existing ground numm details of culvert after placement of riprap rnum to and matching into roadway embankment foreslope .
to allow for numm thickness of riprap rnum parallel excavate backfill embankment and existing ground type nnum geotextile above top of pipe numm of backfill inlet of pipe existing ground per table below existing ground varies depth of invert below below pipe numm nom .
bedding numm d d outside diameter end view plan view numm numm numm at existing ground embankment toe of slope d pool num d no less than num pool slopes varies outlet of pipe pipe offtake sum of slopes below existing ground min .
depth of invert below pipe invert min .
depth of pool num num num num num num num numm numm numm numm numm numm numm numm file num depa table janua it num num num num num num num num num num num artment e of conte ary num tem num h num h num o num o num o num f num f num e num p num a num m stan of trans ents haulage soil haulage asp overhaul co overhaul un overhaul so fixed rates .. force accoun extra work payment adju adjustment fo mobilization ndard sp portatio paym descr rock and ag phalt concrete ommon excav nclassified exc lid rock exca t ustments r asphalt bind ecificati on and inf ents adjus ription ggregate e vation cavation avation der price ions frastruc stments cture numbe page num num num num num num .. num .. num num .. num num di r of es vision num page num depa haula janua num num num artment age soil ary num descript .num haulag identifie .num cu http applicat .num the pro item or .num if n co .num where paymen .num where pay the .num if th the .num extra h along t placem private t .num notwith haulage under i .num revisio date of .num an sh .num a stan of trans rock and tion e rates for t ed in table num rrent haulage pwww.gnb.c ion ovision for pa in the contra no specific re ntract docum the contracto nt for haulage the owner pr e contractor t he owner rev e contractor th aulage to and he most direc ment of the ma trucks hstanding num e rates not le tem num. ons made to h the revision r n adjustment hall pay the re num markup w ndard sp portatio aggregat paym the haulage num on a ton e rates includ canumhaula ayment of hau act document eference to t ments then the or is required e and no mark rovides for pa he haulage ra vises the haul he revised rat d from the we ct route perm aterial at the w num and num ess than the h haulage rates result in the fo shall be mad evised rates to will be applied ecificati on and inf te ents adjus of specified nekilometre ding table num agehaulage ulage on any ts .
the provision e haulage sha d to include h kup on haula ayment of the ates as set ou lage rates du tes plus the num eigh scale loca missible by law work site .
.num the contr haulage rates s by the own ollowing e to cover the o the owners d only to the a ions frastruc stments soil rock an basis .
num are avail ratescurrent item shall be n of payment all be included haulage of ma age shall be m e haulage of m ut in table num ring the term num markup fr ation shall no w between th ractor shall p s as set out in ner during the e increase or of private tru amount of the cture nd aggregate lable from the yeare.asp e specifically t is made un d in the unit p aterials in the made by the o materials in th num plus a num of the contra rom the date ot be paid whe e material so pay to the o n table num e term of the decrease in ucks .
e increase or e materials s e following we and clearly s nder the item price for the i e unit price n owner to the he item the o markup .
act the owne of the revisio en the weigh ource and the owner of priv num for material contract sh rates and the decrease in r item num page num shall be as eb address stated in the m or in the tem .
no separate contractor .
owner shall er shall pay n. scale is not e location of vate trucks ls governed all from the e contractor rates .
depa haula janua num artment age asph ary num descript .num haulag kilomet .num cu http .num revisio date of .num an sh .num a stan of trans halt concr tion e rates in ta tre basis .
rrent haulage pwww.gnb.c ons made to h the revision r n adjustment hall pay the re num markup w ndard sp portatio rete paym able num ar e rates includ canumhaula haulage rates result in the fo shall be mad evised rates to will be applied ecificati on and inf ents adjus re applicable ding table num agehaulage s by the own ollowing e to cover the o the owners d only to the a ions frastruc stments for the haula num are avail ratescurrent ner during the e increase or of private tru amount of the cture age of aspha lable from the yeare.asp e term of the decrease in ucks .
e increase or alt concrete o e following we contract sh rates and the decrease in r item num page num on a tonne eb address all from the e contractor rates .
depa over janua num artment rhaul com ary num descript .num overha set out .num cu http .num the ov its origi .num if the o pay the stan of trans mmon excav tion aul rates whe in table num rrent overhau pwww.gnb.c erhaul rates nal position verhaul rates e contractor t ndard sp portatio vation paym en required u num. ul rates includ canumhaula are paid for t i.e .
bank mea s are revised he revised ov ecificati on and inf ents adjus nder an item ding table num agehaulage the volume in asure and ha by the owne verhaul rates ions frastruc stments m shall be pa num are avai ratescurrent n cubic metre auled more tha er during the t from the date cture id to the con lable from the yeare.asp es of excavate an num metre term of the c e of the revisio ntractor by the e following we ed material m es .
contract the o on .
item num page num e owner as eb address measured in owner shall depa over janua num artment rhaul unc ary num descript .num overha set out .num cu http .num the ov its origi .num if the o pay the stan of trans classified e tion aul rates whe in table num rrent overhau pwww.gnb.c erhaul rates nal position verhaul rates e contractor t ndard sp portatio excavatio paym en required u num. ul rates includ canumhaula are paid for t i.e .
bank mea s are revised he revised ov ecificati on and inf n ents adjus nder an item ding table num agehaulage the volume in asure and ha by the owne verhaul rates ions frastruc stments m shall be pa num are avai ratescurrent n cubic metre auled more tha er during the t from the date cture id to the con lable from the yeare.asp es of excavate an num metre term of the c e of the revisio ntractor by the e following we ed material m es .
contract the o on .
item num page num e owner as eb address measured in owner shall depa over janua num artment rhaul sol ary num descript .num overha set out .num cu http .num the ov its origi .num if the o pay the stan of trans id rock ex tion aul rates whe in table num rrent overhau pwww.gnb.c erhaul rates nal position verhaul rates e contractor t ndard sp portatio xcavation paym en required u num. ul rates includ canumhaula are paid for t i.e .
bank mea s are revised he revised ov ecificati on and inf ents adjus nder an item ding table num agehaulage the volume in asure and ha by the owne verhaul rates ions frastruc stments m shall be pa num are avai ratescurrent n cubic metre auled more tha er during the t from the date cture id to the con lable from the yeare.asp es of excavate an num metre term of the c e of the revisio ntractor by the e following we ed material m es .
contract the o on .
item num page num e owner as eb address measured in owner shall depa fixed janua num num r num artment d rates ary num descript .num fixed r task .
.num the rat added t .num fixed ra terms an .num the rat item reference num num s num p num a a c num a num p d a a t a num num p num s note num num .num the fix .num tim fre all p stan of trans tion ates shall app tes shall be to the fixed ra ates shall onl d conditio tes as set out smoothness payment of a antistripping admixture add cement see approval of num payment of a density asphalt conte asphalt conte thickness air voids portland cem steel h pile s . if a tender made at th and is actu num .
the tende stabilizer .
formula a the contra xed rate shall me required fo edericton or th profiling work ndard sp portatio paym ply for work p in accordanc ates units .
y be applied w ns in table num descript retesting appeal testing admixtures dition per ton note num nd and subse appeal testing ent ent and grada ment see not splices red quantity i he fixed rate o ually incorpor ered quantity payment will and is actually act .
include all tim or retesting sh e site of origin k required to te ecificati on and inf ents adjus performed in ce with table with the appr num shall apply table fixed tion g costs dens based on tot ne of actual a equent mix de g costs ation te num s included for only if the adm rated into the for this item i be made at t y incorporated me and equipm hall include all n for the crew est the work .
ions frastruc stments the contract e num and roval of the en y to the admin num rates sity tal asphalt a esigns p r an antistrip mixture is req asphalt conc is for the add the fixed rat d into the recl ment required l travel time i w whichever is cture for which the no overhead ngineer .
nistration of fi unit per hour see num per core per tonne of actual aspha binder per mix desig lump sum per tonne per splice pping admixtu quired for the crete placed o ition of portla te only if adde laimedrecycl d to complete t including retu the least amo ere is a define ds or marku xed rate wor fixe num num f alt num gn dti s labora num num num num num num num re payment w design mix f on the contra and cement a ed in the des ed material p the retesting .
urn from the d ount all stand item num page num ed and finite ps shall be rk .
ed rate num num num standard atory rate num num num num num num num will be formula ct. as a ign mix placed on dti office in dby time and depa forc janua num num artment e account ary num descript .num force a but for .num the fo under a .num the gc und .num if th agr suc terms an .num the ter accoun stan of trans t tion account is de which there is orce account a provisional s e contractor c num a lump der force acc he contractor ree on a pric ch work activ d conditio rms and con nt work .
ndard sp portatio paym efined as fore s not a lump work shall b sum .
may submit sum or unit count .
r chooses not e for the wo ity and the w ns nditions as se ecificati on and inf ents adjus eseen work th sum or unit be defined in in writing for price for eac t to submit a p ork the engin work shall be p et out in item ions frastruc stments hat is necess price in the c the contract r the enginee ch or any num price or if the neer shall pre performed as m num shall a cture sary to be pe contract .
documents ers approval mber of the w e engineer an epare a writte cost plus in a apply to the rformed on th and shall be and in accor work activities nd the contra en work ord accordance w administratio item num page num he contract carried out rdance with s described actor can not er for each with gc num. on of force dep extr janua num num num num artment ra work ary num descript .num extra w there i .num forese .num unfore .num w the pe .num the p forese num clarific .num the fo sum o .num ex pr .num th pla req .num if su as num clarific .num clarific num .
num .num work o .num ex ow co .num th an .num stan t of trans tion work is defin s not a lump een work fo eseen extra w here the dete e engineer a erformed as c hrase extra een work ite ations of g ollowing clarif r inplace uni xtra work pro rice basis sha he contractor ace unit pric quired and no the price su ubcontractor s per num .
ations of g cations are m orders xtra work mus wner shall no ontractor .
he work orde nd materials a this estima invoices for ndard sp sportatio paym ed as work t sum or unit b orce account work is work ermination of t nd the contra ost plus in ac work and em num and u gc num fications are it price under oposed to be all require app rs invoice for ce times the o markup is a ubmitted for as per num .
num .
gc num made for the a st be authoriz t pay for any er shall descr anticipated to ate shall be th r that work o pecificat on and in ments adjus hat is necess bid price in th is described ordered by th the cost of the actor can not ccordance wit the statemen unforeseen e made for the r gc num. performed b proval of such r the work sh units accepte allowed .
approval is .num the subc administration zed by the en such work u ribe the natur be used and he sole determ order .
tions frastru stments sary to be per he contract .
d in item num he engineer u e extra work agree on a p th gc num. nts referring extra work .
e administratio by the contra h price in writi hall show on ed in the wo s for work t contractor sha n of extra wo ngineer in writ nless a writte re of the wor d the enginee mination of th cture rformed on th .
under gc num. k can not be m price under g to it hereina on of extra w actor on a lum ng prior to co ly the approv ork no detai to be carried all submit an ork performed ting in the for en work orde rk to be done ers estimate o he rate of mar he contract bu made under g gc num the wo after shall ap work perform mp sum or in ommencing th ved lump sum led breakdow d out by an invoice to the d as cost plus rm of a work er has been is e the equipm of the value o rkup to be ap item num page num ut for which c num and if ork shall be pply to both med at lump nplace unit he work .
m or the in wn shall be n approved e contractor s under gc order .
the ssued to the ment labour of the work .
pplied on all ext pag num num tra work ge num num .num rep .num .num num .num lab .num .num .num .num .num d ports the enginee hours expen equipment o the end of ea the enginee information o our the contrac engaged in employees w .num the con approval submitted a change the various l previously su .num the con the extra overtime acc hours of a ca work for the to total hour .num the distr hour .
.num in the ca work or entirely to .num the over of hours hours to .num where th distributin a markup sh paid by the c .num the mark over num the number commensura departm pa er shall record nded and m owner on the ach day or sh er and contra on these repo tor shall show the extra w wages .
ntractor shall a list of the v d upon award e in any levies levies paid by ubmitted as pe ntractor must a work invoice cumulated by alendar week contractor s s that week .
ributed overtim ase where the rders the o o the work o rtime distribut worked on t be paid in ea he overtime i ng overtime to hall be added contractor .
kup shall be num as estima of hours to b ate with the tim sta ent of tr ayments ad d daily on a materials sup extra work hift .
actor shall eac rts shall be co w the actual work plus th submit to th various levies d of a contrac s paid or as o y the contract er num be prepared es .
y the contrac k during whic shall be prora me as calcula e contractor e overtime work orders .
ted to each w that work or ach case .
s paid on da o each work d to the total num if the va ated by the en be paid for th me supervisin andard s ransport justments daily equipm pplied by the as agreed to ch sign and r onsidered for basic and o he various le he administra s paid for his ct and shall b otherwise requ tor must be s num. to substantia ctors employe ch they have ated in the ra ated in num. extends herh ked during th work order s rder that wee aily rather tha order shall a of the actual alue of the w ngineer under he superinten ng on the extr specifica tation an ment report e contractor by the engin retain a copy r payment by overtime rate evies paid b ative services her employee be verified ann uested by the hown individu ate wage rate ees within the worked on w atio of total h num shall be r his normal wo hat extended hall be deduc ek to determ an weekly wo apply but on a basic and o work order is num. ndent andor ra work .
ations d infrast the equipme r subcontrac neer and the of these rep the owner .
es paid for ea by the contr s branch of t es .
this list sh nually or whe e owner .
ually if differe es and all lev e established work orders ours on each rounded to th ork hours to w d period sha cted from the ine the numb ork hours the a daily basis .
overtime wag num or les foreman sha tructure item num january num ent and labou ctor or hired contractor a ports .
only the ach individua ractor on the the owner fo hall initially be enever there is ent from those vies shown on d normal work and on othe h work order e nearest hal work solely on ll be charged e total numbe ber of regula e principle fo es plus levies ss and num all be paid fo e num num ur d at e al e or e s e n k er r lf n d er ar or s if or dep extr janua num num num artment ra work ary num num .num board .num th for fac .num th for su .num a all .num fo all div .num fo num .num materi .num an be ma .num a ma num .num equipm .num ra the .num .num th ho se .num .num .num tr w se .num stan t of trans he owner sha r the contrac cilities .
he owner sha r the contract upplied by the markup as owances .
or extra wor owances not viding the dai or extra work als ny materials s e invoiced by arkup as des copy of the s aterial item su ment ates for equip e crown con rates for e the enginee he number of ours worked b ection num of a service a approved ra per day on the servic normally se ansportation ork shall be p ection num of travel and work site t ndard sp sportatio paym all pay board a ctors personn all pay board a tors personn contractor .
described un rk which is ed in num ly rate by num k requiring mo upplied for an the contracto cribed in num. uppliers invo ubmitted for p pment shall b struction con equipment no er upon applic f hours to be by each mach the machine allowance of ates for mach extra work .
ce allowance erviced daily .
costs of equ paid if the tim the machine or float costs o and from th pecificat on and in ments adjus allowance to nel working on allowance to el working on nder num. completed in num and num hoursday .
ore than num ho nd utilized in th or at hisher s num. oice shall acco payment inclu be as set out ntracts act of t listed in the cation in writ paid for mac hine rounded rental regu onehalf hou hine and oper does not a ipment broug me spent on e rental regu s shall be paid he extra work tions frastru stments the contracto n extra work the contracto n extra work num shall be p n less than num shall be ours per day he extra wor suppliers invo ompany the c uding materia in the machi the province machine re ting by the c chine and op d to the neare lation .
ur service tim rator provide apply to truck ght to the wor extra work is lation .
d to transport k area if the e cture or at a daily r k and boarded or at a daily r and boarded paid on board num hours pe paid at an ho the daily rate rk at the requ oice price ex contractors in als from the c ne rental re of new bruns ntal regulatio ontractor .
perator shall b est half hour me per day s d the machin ks floats an rk site and us num hours or t equipment f extra work is rate set by th d in the cont rate set by th d off site at a d andor othe er day boar ourly rate det e shall apply .
est of the eng xcluding the h nvoice for eac contractors st egulation num swick .
on will be det be the actual and in accor shall be paid e works num ho nd other equ sed exclusive less in accor from another of num hours o item num page num e engineer ractors site e engineer location not er approved rd or other termined by gineer shall hst plus a ch separate tock .
num under termined by l number of rdance with d at the full urs or more uipment not ely on extra rdance with area of the or less .
ext pag num num num tra work ge num num .num .num num .num hire .num .num .num num .num priv .num .num d standby time the work site .num standby extra wo the number shall be paid ed equipment if extra work such equipm hired will be c rates for hir is used on ex .num the num num .num the rate .num if the is ful .num when th used sole .num equi daily .num the solel the contract substantiated .num the mar greater th .num the con hired eq ate trucks h a num marku markup shal the contract property dam departm pa e shall be paid e specifically time shall no ork was order of hours to b for commens t k requires eq ment may be classified as ed equipmen xtra work .
mber of hours num. may include e rate include l compensatio e engineer a ely on extra w pment which y rate provided contractor s y on extra w tor shall invo d invoice plus rkup shall be han num a ntractor shall uipment .
ired by the h up shall be p ll apply to the tor shall not b mage insuranc sta ent of tr ayments ad d at half the a for extra wor t be paid for e red .
be paid for ve surate with th uipment the c hired by the hired equipm nt shall be est to be paid fo the equipme es the operato on for the wa authorizes eq work the equ rents out at d it is utilized hall provide ork in order t oice the owne s a markup d e num if the s estimated b clearly mark hour paid on privat e rate for the t be entitled to ce in relation t andard s ransport justments applicable ren rk .
equipment th ehicles used e time superv contractor do contractor fr ment and not a tablished as p or machine an nts operator ors cost the ges regular a quipment to b uipment shall a daily rathe solely on ext proof of the to be reimbur er the total a efined as follo value of the by the engine on hisher inv te trucks hir truck and the reimburseme to the private specifica tation an ntal rate for th at was on the by the super vising on the oes not own o from some ot as a subcontr per num b nd operator s cost if that wa rate shall be and overtime be rented fro be paid for a er than hourly tra work .
amount of fu rsed .
mount of the ows extra work eer under num voice that the red by the ho operators wa ent for the cos e trucks .
ations d infrast e equipment e work site a rintendent an extra work .
or have at he ther source .
e ractor .
before the hire shall be in acc as the basis o considered a levies and o om a rental a at the rental ag y rate shall b uel for equip e hired equip is num or num. e work was c our to do ext ages .
st of any publ tructure item num january num brought onto t the time the ndor foreman rhis disposal equipment so ed equipmen cordance with of hire .
a flat rate tha overhead .
agency to be gencys rate .
be paid at the pment utilized pment owners less or num i carried out by ra work .
this lic liability and e num num o e n l o nt h at e e d s if y s d dep extr janua num num num num artment ra work ary num num .num subco .num th num .num th ma .num th su .num .num num .num public .num th ind .num th an .num num .num invoici .num inv be .num ea w .num ea the su als inv num .num delays .num th ca .num th num de stan t of trans ontracting he contractor num. he subcontrac arkups as sp he contracto ubstantiated in the marku greater tha the contra subcontrac holidays he contractor dividuals for p he amount pa ny workers c no other le ing voices for ext etween the co ach invoice sh ork done and ach work ord e contractors ubcontractors so attach a co voice submiss s he contractor arrying out the he contractor num submit a emonstrated t ndard sp sportatio paym r may have e ctor shall invo pecified in num or shall invo nvoice plus a up shall be num n num as e actor shall m tor .
r shall be ent public holiday aid to the con compensation vies shall be tra work mus ontractor and hall denote th d the invoice der shall be in s invoice .
in or hired eq opy of the su sion .
r shall have e extra work .
r may howev request in w that the extra pecificat on and in ments adjus xtra work pe oice the contr num num oice the ow markup as f num if the va estimated by t mark on herh titled to paym ys which fall w ntractor shall n levy and plu paid to the c st be submitte engineer .
he work orde date .
nvoiced separ the case whe uipment and bcontractors no claim fo ver in accord writing for an a work has d tions frastru stments erformed by a ractor for labo num num and wner the tot follows alue of the ex the engineer his invoice th ment on extra within the time be the actua us a markup a contractor .
ed on a mont er number th rately .
a copy ere all or a po invoiced to or hired equ r hindrances dance with gc adjustment delayed com cture a subcontracto our board m d num. tal amount xtra work is under num. hat the work a work for w e period of th al basic rate as per num. thly basis unl he location de y of the work ortion of the the contract uipment invoi s or delays t c num and to the comp pletion of his or approved materials equ of the sub num or les .num. k was carried wage costs ex he extra work paid the indi num. ess otherwise escription and k order shall work was pe tor the cont ces to the c that may be in accordanc pletion date sher normal item num page num as per item uipment and contractors ss or num if d out by a xpended on k. vidual plus e agreed to d dates of accompany erformed by tractor shall contractors caused by ce with item if it can be operations .
depa paym janua num artment ment adjus ary num descript .num payme allowed .num some p provisio determ .num suc item .num some contrac the wo .num suc .num other specific item num stan of trans tments tion nt adjustmen d for work ca payment adju onal sum pr ine whether t ch payment m num .
payment adj ct documents ork .
ch a paymen payment adj cally required num .
ndard sp portatio paym nts are amoun rried out unde ustments may rovided .
the he payment a adjustments justments ma s to be paid t adjustment justments ma but allowed ecificati on and inf ents adjus nts added to o er other items y be identified quality of th adjustment w may be for ay be added as a plus or may be for a ay be added for and prov ions frastruc stments or deducted f s. d in the contr he work per will be paid as mat density d to the con minus adjust asphalt binder d to the con vided such a cture from payment ract documen rformed unde s a bonus or d and smooth ntract for wo tment based r content und ntract for spe as a material ts due the co nts under an er the specif deducted as a ness under i ork not ident on quality or der item num o ecialized equ transfer ve item num page num ontractor as item with a fic item will a penalty .
tem num or tified in the r quantity of or num. uipment not ehicle under depa adjus janua num artment stment fo ary num descript .num compe betwee be calc .num the doc pub .num the asp pay .num the sha by con pay .num the dur .num the pa t p q wh pa wh pa .num the co bin and me .num stan of trans r asphalt tion nsation payab n the time of t ulated in acco e owner shal cument base blished month e price index phalt binder g yment adjustm e payment adj all be establish more than num ntract were o yment adjustm e payment ad ring the month e payment adj payment ad pg asphalt b pg asphalt b quantity of a hen pnumt pnumtxq hen pnumt anumtpxq e quantity of ntractor .
for der shall be d its corres easurements .
for emulsifi quantity of li asphalt and ndard sp portatio binder pr paym ble to the con tender openin ordance with th l adjust paym d on change hly and is avail is based on grade pg num ment for all gra justment shal hed for each m for the pric opened .
when ment establish djustment sha h for which it is justment for th djustment for inder price ind binder price ind asphalt binder the contracto q the owner de q asphalt bind each month calculated us ponding asp ed asphalt e itres shall be the specific g ecificati on and inf rice ents adjus ntractor or the g for the cont he following ments to the c s to mtos p lable on the o the price exc num .
one ind ades .
l be in dollars month of pavi ce index for th n the price in ed for that mo ll apply to the s established .
he month sha asphalt binde dex for month dex for month r in tonnes or receives add educts from p er is the tota in which a p sing the tonn phalt binder ach month in converted int gravity of the ions frastruc stments owner for th tract and the t contractor und pg asphalt b ohmpa websi xcluding taxes dex shall be per tonne of a ngsurface tre he month pre ndex differenti onth of paving e quantity of a ll be calculate er in dollars prior to tende h of paving su ditional payme payments due al for all grad ayment adjus nage of asph content de n which a pay to tonnes of a asphalt emul cture e difference in time of the wo der the applica binder price in ite .
s fob depots used to esta asphalt binde eatment in wh eceding the m ial is less tha g surface trea asphalt binde ed as follows er opening urface treatme ent from the o e the contract es of asphal stment is esta halt concrete etermined fro yment adjust asphalt binde sion in use .
n price of asp ork under this able item in t ndex .
the pri s in the toron ablish and ca r. a payment hich the price i month that ten an num there atment .
r accepted int where ent owner as follo tor as follows t binder supp ablished the accepted into om daily sto ment is estab er using the item num page num halt binder item shall the contract ice index is nto area of alculate the t adjustment index differs ders for the shall be no to the work ows plied by the quantity of o the work orage tank blished the of residue depa mobil janua num num num num num num artment lization ary num descript .num this ite .num the lu bid incl .num not material .num all mate submitta .num none id constru .num the co specific measurem .num mobiliza basis of p .num paymen .num the tota comple contrac .num there s an exte .num the pa regardle .num at no ti contrac standa of trans tion m consists of mp sum pric luding this item twithstanding s erials shall be als dentified .
ction ontractor sha cally directed b ment for p ation in accord payment nt for work un al of this item ted in the wo ct bid or greate shall be no ch ension to the c yments from ess of the num me shall the t ctors lump s ard speci portatio paym f the mobilizati ce bid for this m. num the m supplied by t all carry out t by the engine payment dance with thi nder this item will be paid o ork area on ite er than num ange in the lu contract comp the lump su mber of times total of the am um price .
fication on and inf ents adjus ion necessary item shall no maximum lum he contractor the work as er .
is item shall b shall be at the on the first pro ems other tha num. ump sum pric pletion date .
m price shall the contracto mounts paid to s frastruc stments y for the execu ot be greater t mp sum price r. indicated in be on a lump s e lump sum ogress estima an this item is ce of this item l be full comp or mobilizes .
o the contract cture ution of the w than ten perc e shall be num the contrac sum basis .
price .
ate provided t s greater than m due to a cha pensation for t tor under this work on the co cent of the to num. ct documents that the value n five percent ange in contra the work und item be grea item num page num ontract .
otal contract s andor as of the work of the total act scope or der this item ater than the depa table janua it num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num artment e of conte ary num tem num s num w num s num s num h num in num s num t num d num m num c num p num e num a num g num s num p num h num b num c num l num w num d stan of trans ents scheduling work schedul subcontractor supply of mat hiring practice nsurance sch signs traffic control detours maintenance o construction r pits and quar examination o asphalt concr geotechnical scales and w private trucks heavy equipm back up ala compaction .. lines and gra work progres disposal area ndard sp portatio sta descr le rs erials es hedule l persons of traffic flow roads ries of soils inform rete core dat instrumentati weighing proce s ment rms ades sion as ecificati on and inf andard condi ription w mation ta on edures ions frastruc itions cture numbe page num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num di r of es vision num page num ta pag ble of con ge num item num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ntents environme working co safety sup audited sa constructio falsework formwork partnering value engi advisemen limited fu specified w completion standard d num num st num num sa num num sa num num de departm des ental requirem onditions pport systems afety program on drawings a ineering nts nds work n date drawings andard stake afety net sup afety net sup eck overhang sta ment of tr standard co scription ments s m and calculatio e markings port system port system g bracket st andard s ransport onditions ons abutments piers teel girder specifica tation an num pa .. .. ations nd infras ber of ages num num num num num num num num num num num num num tructur item num january num re num num depa sche janua num artment duling ary num general .num notifica .num in n .num the ow stan of trans ation of the sta no case shall wner reserves ndard sp portatio sta art date may any work be s the right to l ecificati on and inf andard condi be provided i e performed p imit the start ions frastruc itions in the contrac prior to the dat date of the w cture ct documents te specified .
work .
s at the time o item num page num of tender .
depa work janua num num artment k schedule ary num descript .num this it constru .num the ini notice approva .num acc .num the init .num if th .num if th and .num .num .num the sch .num pur co .num the co estimat .num if a the gc .num the mo of work work s format .num prepare .num provide .num provide stan of trans e tion tem details t uction work s tial work sch of award of al by the eng ceptance of th tial work sch he schedule is he schedule d identify the if the ident initialed by schedule by if the identif the meeting accordance e engineer w hedule for the rsuant to gc ntractor is in d ontractor sha te at time of s an updated an en the prog c num paym onthly update k and propos schedule infor e the work sc e a separate b e a horizontal ndard sp portatio sta the contract schedules and hedule shall the contract ineer .
he initial wor hedule shall b s satisfactory is not satisfa required mod ified modifica both the con y signing it .
fied modificat g the contra with the eng ill distribute c e purposes of c num no pr default under ll attach an u signing of the nd revised wo gress estim ent of the pro ed and revised sed revisions rmation for ea chedule in the bar for each t time scale id ecificati on and inf andard condi tors respons d the format a be the work and not late k schedule w e reviewed fo y the enginee ctory the en difications .
ations are m ntractor and t ions are not m actor shall su ineers comm copies of the a f num and rogress claim r num or num updated and estimate .
ork schedule mate will be ogress estima d work sched to the previo ach item or ta e form of a ho rade or opera dentifying eac ions frastruc itions sibilities in t and requireme schedule su er than num da will not alter th or approval at er shall indica ngineer shall a made at the m the engineer made at the m ubmit a new ments .
approved sch gc num. ms will be pa num. revised wor is not attach e considere ate will be wit dule will inclu us schedule ask .
orizontal bar c ation or item .
ch week by the cture the preparati ents for perio bmitted withi ays prior to th he contract re t the first job m ate approval b advise the c meeting eac and the eng meeting then w initial work hedule which id by the ow rk schedule t ed to the mo ed incomple thheld .
ude informatio and shall inc chart .
e date of the ion and sub dic revisions .
n num days of he first job m equirements .
meeting as fo by signing it .
ontractor of t ch modificatio gineer shall a n within num day k schedule h shall be the wner during th to the month nthly progres ete and pu on in relation clude the unal monday of th item num page num bmission of .
f the formal meeting for ollows the reasons on shall be approve the ys following modified in initial work he time the ly progress ss estimate ursuant to to progress ltered initial hat week .
wo pag num num num num ork schedu ge num num .num iden desc .num the item may .num .num sev form pres sch num conte .num inclu .num inclu cons .num sho for w .num sho sch .num .num .num .num .num prov .num .num .num inclu .num inclu num specif num .num on g .num ule ntification of criptor that m format for th ms or by the c y be applicabl the critical p eral compute mats are gene sentation issu edule .
nt ude the seque ude the date struction .
ow the percen which a progr ow changes w edule includi major change activities mod revised proje other identifia vide a narrativ problem area corrective ac ude the dates ude the dates fic require grading cont the work sc designated a required for c departm the schedul ay be applica he schedule hronological o e to the work ath of the wo er scheduling erally accepta ues with the ence of const es for the com tage of comp ress estimate which have o ing but not lim es in scope dified since th ections of prog able changes ve report to d as anticipated ction proposed s for submittin s when free is ements tracts chedule infor areas of exca completion .
sta ment of tr standard co e description able to the wo descriptions order of the s k and the sch ork shall be in programs are able however e engineer p truction from mmencement pletion of each e is completed occurred in th mited to he previous su gress and com .
efine the follo d delays and d and its effec ng shop drawi ssue materials mation shall avation and em andard s ransport onditions ns may be b ork and the sc may be by t start of each it edule .
ndicated .
e readily ava r the contrac prior to the t initiation to co t and comple h schedule de d. he work sinc ubmission mpletion and owing topics the impact on ct. ings product s as defined include but mbankment w specifica tation an by item num chedule .
he numerica tem or any ot ilable and the ctor is advised time of subm ompletion of t etion of each escription as o ce the previou d if applicable n the work sc data sample in item num w is not limited work expect ations nd infras mber or any l sequence o ther logical pr e owner advi d to resolve t mission of th the work .
h major elem of the last da us submissio chedule and es if applicab will be require d to commen ted production tructur item num january num y other logic of the contra rogression tha ises that thes the format an he initial wo ent or item o ay of the mont on of the wo ble .
ed .
ncement date n and the tim re num num al ct at se nd rk of th rk s me depa work janua num num num artment k schedule ary num .num on pav .num the var .num for agg .num on stru .num the the .num the pha .num on cru .num the cru stan of trans e ving contracts e work sche rious stages o r asphalt co gregate produ uctures contr e work sched e various stag e work sched ase stage or ushing contra e work sched shed materia ndard sp portatio sta s edule shall ou or parts of the ncrete this o uction aspha racts dule shall out es or portions dule shall cle portion of the acts dule shall inc al along with e ecificati on and inf andard condi utline the seq e work .
outline shoul lt concrete pr tline the sequ s of the work arly indicate t e work .
lude the plan expected prod ions frastruc itions quence of wo d include co roduction rate uence of wor k. the commenc ned sequenc duction and ti cture ork with estim ommencemen e and placing rk along with cement and c ce of crushing me limits .
mated time lim nt dates sch sequence .
estimated tim completion da g for the differ item num page num mits for the heduling of me limits for ates of each rent sizes of depa subc janua num artment ontracto ary num descript .num the co subcon .num the co conside .num thi app item .num the en the com .num the co contrac .num the ap applica stan of trans rs tion ontractor ma ntractors .
ontractor sha ered for appro s submission proximate val ms to be su ngineer may a mmencement ontractor sha ct documents pproval for us ation is made .
ndard sp portatio sta ay apply to all apply in w oval as a subc n shall also i ue of the wo ubcontracted .
approve the s of the work p all ensure th s and has a c se of any sub ecificati on and inf andard condi have portion writing to the contractor for nclude a des rk the approx subcontractor proposed und hat the appro opy of the co bcontractor sh ions frastruc itions ns of the co engineer wi r the work .
scription of th ximate quant r by response der num. roved subcon ontract docum hall be exclus cture ontract carrie ith the name he items e tity multiplied e in writing t ntractor is en ments .
sive to the c ed out by an e of the com stimated qua by the unit p to the contrac ntirely familia contract unde item num page num n approved pany to be antities and price for the ctor prior to ar with the er which the depa supp janua num num num artment ly of mate ary num descript .num all mate supplied quality o .num all mate .num materia .num as spec testing .num the co manufa request .num the co the mat testing .
.num the con eng sup .num the co authoriz .num materia be of a rejected .num rejecte enginee .num where materia of remo stan of trans erials tion erial necessar d by the owne of materia erial provided al supplied by cified or as re samples of a ontractor shall acturer or sup ted by the eng ontractor shall terial supply d e owner will ntractor fails gineer to car pply dates .
ontractor sha zation of the e al which is not quality best s d material ed material sh er .
the contracto al be removed oval and dispo ndard sp portatio sta ry for the prop er shall be su al by the contra the contracto quested by th any material to l obtain for th pplier to carry gineer .
notify the eng dates to enabl not be respo to give suffic rry out the re all not chang engineer .
specifically id uited for its int hall be exped or fails to com and disposed osal of the reje ecificati on and inf andard condi per completion upplied by the actor shall be or shall conform he engineer t o be provided he engineer th y out such in gineer in writin le the enginee onsible for an cient advance equired inspec ge the source dentified in the tended use .
ditiously remo mply with such d of outside th ected material ions frastruc itions n of the work contractor .
new unless o m to the requi the contractor d by the contra he right to en spection sam ng of the sour er to perform y delays to t e notice to th ction samplin e of supply e tender but su oved from the h notice the e he work site s. cture except that li otherwise app irements of th r shall make a actor .
nter upon the mpling and te rces of supply the required the contracto he engineer ng and testin of any mate ubsequently re e work site a engineer may and the cont isted specifica roved .
he contract .
available for in premises of t esting as spe y sufficiently in inspection sa rs operations in writing to ng before the erial without equired in the after notificatio y require that t tractor shall pa item num page num ally as being nspection or the material ecified or as n advance of ampling and s where the enable the e scheduled the written e work shall on from the the rejected ay the costs su pag num num num pply of ma ge num num substi .num whe unit shal .num afte anot .num .num .num sub eng .num no p num free is .num the wor .num the mate .num the from have .num num .num care .num .num .num aterials itutions ere the spec tlump sum p ll be regarded r the award o ther materialp the submissi the proposed the engineer stitution of m ineer .
proposed subs ssue of ma owner shall rk as free issu contractor s erials from dt contractor s m the time of r e been accept any replacem own expense e of material the contract provide adeq of such mat incorporated the contract of bills of lad reconcile the the contract delivery point .num if such m repaired .num if such m manufact until its d departm cifications req price shall be as the standa of the contrac product other ion shall be co materialprod r may decide materialsprod stitutions wil aterial make availab e. shall be respo ti fredericton hall be respo receipt of the ted in the wor ment due to lo e. tor shall in ad uate and prop terial shall pr forthwith into tor shall provid ing or such o quantities of m tor shall be r t and for its sa material is dam by the contra material is reje ture of the ma isposition has sta ment of tr standard co quire the co based upon ard of quality r ct the contrac than the mate omplete includ duct .
not to entertai ducts shall n l be approved le specific ma onsible for loa n to the work a onsible for all materials from rk by the engi ss or damage dvance of rec per storage fa romptly place the work .
de the engine other docume material receiv responsible fo afe handling an maged while un actor at no cos cted by the e aterial the ma s been determ andard s ransport onditions ontractor to s the supply of required by th ctor may appl erialproduct s ding all techn in substitution not be made d prior to the a aterials as ide ading transpo area .
materials and m the owner ineer .
e shall be the ceipt of shipm acilities accep e the materia eer immediate entation the e ved .
or acceptance nd storage .
nder the contr st to the owne engineer due t aterial shall re mined by the e specifica tation an supply a spe f the material he item .
ly in writing t specified in the ical data and n during the pe without the p award of the c entified in the orting unload d for any dam rs stock until responsibility ments of mate ptable to the e al in storage ely upon rece engineer may e of free issu rol of the cont er .
to the quality emain the res ngineer .
ations nd infras ecified materi product so s to the engine e contract do case history a eriod of the co prior written a contract .
contract doc ding storing a mage or loss t such time tha y of the contra erial supplied engineer and except whe eipt of such sh y require to su ue material a tractor it shall of material as sponsibility of tructur item num january num alproduct th specified whic eer to substitut ocuments .
applications fo ontract .
approval of th cuments for th and distributin that may occu at the materia actor at hishe by the owne d on the recei ere it is to b hipment copie ubstantiate an at the specifie be replaced o s a result of th the contracto re num num he ch te or he he ng ur als er er pt be es nd ed or he or depa supp janua num num num artment ly of mate ary num num .num wh poi and suc ship or d .num .num the ship tak .num .num wh lon who doc .num wh con ma the .num .num return .num wh com of t demurra .num the co for the w .num in the e deducte stan of trans erials here material s nt in a damag d the quantitie ch damage o pment and pro deficiencies .
where any d the contract e contractor pment and th ing delivery .
such materia contractor fo hen containers ger required o shall dispos cuments .
here material ntract the co aterial report a stockpile site where any d the contract of excess ma here material mplete the wo the work .
age and dam ontractor shall work and sha event of dem ed from mone ndard sp portatio sta supplied and ged condition o es shown on th r discrepancie ovide the con damage or def tor to repair or shall account e contractor al shall not ex or purposes o s reels crate for their origi se of them o supplied by t ontractor sha any damage o e. damage or def tor to repair or aterial is made ava ork such exce mages be responsib all be responsi murrage or da ey owing to the ecificati on and inf andard condi delivered to t or where there he bills of ladin es to the en ntractor with a ficiencies are r replace the m t for the full a shall be resp xcept with the ther than the es and other t nal purpose utside the wo the owner is all immediate or deficiencies ficiencies are r replace the m ailable to the ess material sh ble for the pro ible for any de mage charge e contractor .
ions frastruc itions the work area e are discrepa ng the contra gineer who s a written releas reported ther materials at h amount of ma ponsible and li e written perm performance types of pack they shall be ork site unle s ordered and ly upon com s to the engin reported ther materials at h e contractor i hall remain th ompt loading emurrage and es being paid cture a by the own ancies betwee actor shall imm shall arrange se from respo reafter it shall herhis own ex aterial supplie iable for such mission of the of the work u kaging from fr ecome the pro ss otherwise d stockpiled p mencement o neer and take reafter it shall hisher own ex in excess of e property of unloading and d storage char by the own ner arrives at en the quantit mediately repo for an inspe onsibility for su be the respon xpense .
ed by the ow h free issue m engineer be nder the cont ree issue mat operty of the specified in t prior to the aw of operations charge of the be the respon xpense .
the amount the owner on d delivery of a rges .
er that amou item num page num the delivery ies received ort in writing ction of the uch damage nsibility of wner in each material after used by the tract .
terial are no contractor he contract ward of the check the e material at nsibility of required to n completion all materials unt shall be su pag num pply of ma ge num num partia .num upo pay of p and .num .num the purc unit equi calc .num in a resp repla part .num part for t .num aterials al payment on written req ment the ow payment of an stored in an c the owner m acceptably st partial paym chase price m of measure f ivalent to the culation would accordance w ponsible for th acement at h ial payment a tial payment m he specified it items num num departm t for mater quest by the wner will make n item and ma condition loca may make pa tored at the su ment will be a materials and for the item o purchase pri exclude the fr with section he care of the erhis own ex nd the incorpo may only be m tems as follow num num num num sta ment of tr standard co rials contractor a partial payme anufactured s ation and man rtial payment uppliers yard .
provisional u freight per the or by calculati ice .
in the ca reight cost .
num of the materials unt xpense of any oration of the made in the fis ws num num num andard s ransport onditions nd in accord ent to the con specifically for nner acceptab for the mate unit price for e suppliers in ing the perce se of paymen e general co til placed and y materials da materials into scal year the m num num num an specifica tation an ance with se ntractor for ma r the contract le to the engin rials prior to d the materials voice as prov entage of the nt for materia onditions the accepted in t amaged or los o the work .
material is to nd num .
ations nd infras ection num of aterials identifi t delivered to neer .
delivery if the determined vided to the e lump sum pr als stored per e contractor the work inc st between th be incorporat tructur item num january num f the terms ied in the bas o the work sit e materials ar by dividing th ngineer by th rice of the ite r num th shall be ful luding repair o e period of th ted in the wo re num num of sis te re he he m he lly or he rk depa hiring janua num artment g practice ary num descript .num in the e sex ag howeve to bene brunsw .num regula apply to .num for job docum stan of trans es tion employment o ge marital sta er that the fo efit groups s wick .
ation num o this contrac bs with part ents recruitin ndard sp portatio sta of persons on atus nationa oregoing shall such as those of the emplo ct. icipation by ng of labour s ecificati on and inf andard condi n a project th al origin colou not prevent e defined in oyment stand the governm shall be condu ions frastruc itions here shall be ur religion o the implemen the human dards act for ment of can ucted through cture no discrimin or political aff ntation of spe rights act o the province nada as ide h canada em nation by reas filiation it be ecial measure of the provin e of new brun entified in th mployment ce item num page num son of race ing agreed es designed nce of new nswick shall he contract ntres .
depa insur janua num artment rance sche ary num general .num the co set out .num the ins stan of trans edule ontract award in the insura surance sche ndard sp portatio sta shall require nce schedule edule is marke ecificati on and inf andard condi e the success e attached to ed e and is ions frastruc itions sful bidder to o and forming attached in th cture comply with part of the c he articles of terms and co ontract .
agreement .
item num page num onditions as depa signs janua num artment s ary num descript .num the pro contrac control .num sig .num sig am .num signs u dti dis .num cre num .num signs s nbdti .num all wo contrac .num the en the term an orde .num the com wa .num any ext stan of trans tion ocurement of ctor and shal l manual wa gns shall be m gns shall be c mount shall be used in the c strict office aft edit shall be g num. shall be loca s watcm .
rk associated ctor .
ngineer shall ms set out in er .
e contractor mply with the atcm .
y lost time re tension in the ndard sp portatio sta f all signs req ll be in accor atcm with re made available charged out a deducted fro contract shall ter completion iven on the fin ated erected d with the sig issue an imm the nbdti w shall immed e terms set o sulting from n contract com ecificati on and inf andard condi uired pursuan rdance with th espect to the e at dti fred at the owner om the first pr remain the p n of the contr nal progress e d and mainta gnage of the mediate cease watcm and t iately make out for the p noncomplian mpletion date ions frastruc itions nt to the con he requireme work conditi dericton nb .
rs current list rogress estim property of the ract .
estimate for s ained by the e contract sh e work order the contracto whatever adj particular style nce shall not b e. cture ntract shall be ents of the nb ions prevailin ted price for t mate .
e owner and igns returned contractor hall be the s r for any work or shall immed justments are e of work as be considered e the respons bdti work a g at the site .
these materia shall be retu in good cond in accordanc sole responsib k not in comp diately compl e necessary s defined in d by the ow item num page num ibility of the area traffic als and this urned to the dition as per ce with the bility of the pliance with ly with such in order to the nbdti ner for any depa traff janua num num num artment fic contro ary num descript .num this ite tcps .num for the approve requirem .num the co .num fur tc len .num sup the .num the other .num notwith approve .num for .num ext item stan of trans ol persons tion em details the as may be re e purposes of ed by the eng ments ontractor shal rther to chapt ps as require gth of work a pply of all nec e contractor .
e stopslow p hstanding num ed by the eng rce account w tra work of a m num .
ndard sp portatio s sta e contractor equired for va f this item w gineer .
l carry out the ter num of the w ed based on area and othe cessary safet paddle will be num and num gineer for the work identifie a nature or st ecificati on and inf andard condi s responsibil arious types o work area ma e work in acc watcm the c n roadway g er pertinent fa y equipment e available fro .num separate following typ d under item tyle not identi ions frastruc itions ity to provide of work perfor ay encompas cordance with contractor sha geometry tra actors .
and apparel f om the owner payment wil pes of work num in the co fied in the co cture e any and all rmed under th s more than the latest ed all be respon affic patterns for tcps sha r in accordanc ll be made b ontract docum ontract docum traffic contr he contract .
one work op dition of the w sible to provid traffic volum all be the resp ce with item num by the owne ments ando ments carried item num page num rol persons peration as watcm .
de as many mes size or ponsibility of num. er for tcps r d out under depa deto janua num artment urs ary num descript .num the co contrac .num suc for .num traffic num and .num no wo .num the co num hou operatio .num tempo approve .num co co stan of trans tion ontractor shal ct documents ch detours ha in accordanc control device d the watcm rk shall begin ontractor shal rs a day from onal for the d rary construc ed by the eng nstruction m ntractor .
ndard sp portatio sta ll construct d s. ave been inco ce with the ap es required fo m. n on a detour l ensure that m the time imm uration of the ction detours gineer prior to maintenance a ecificati on and inf andard condi etours at the orporated in t plicable items or detours sha until approva all required t mediately pre e detour opera other than th o construction and removal ions frastruc itions e locations a the contract e s. all be in acco l is received f traffic control eceding the op ation .
ose indicated n. of such deto cture and to a stan estimated qu ordance with t from the engi devices are pening of the d in the contr ours shall be ndard as indic uantities and the requireme ineer .
in place and detour and s ract documen the responsi item num page num cated in the will be paid ents of item operational shall remain nts must be ibility of the depa maint janua num artment tenance o ary num general .num the co be mai must be .num the co through .num surface travel a stan of trans f traffic f ontractor is ad ntained and e open to two ontractor sha hout the work es subject to along it at the ndard sp portatio flow sta dvised that a kept open at oway traffic a all schedule t k site in acco through traffi speed limit p ecificati on and inf andard condi any existing tr t a minimum at the end of t the work to rdance with th c shall be ma posted for the ions frastruc itions raffic pattern of one traffic he work day .
provide for he watcm .
aintained in a work area .
cture s or alternat c lane throug .
the safe and a condition su te traffic patte ghout the wo d efficient flo uch that traffic item num page num erns must ork day and ow of traffic c can safely depa cons janua num num num num artment struction r ary num haul roa .num haul ro .num haul ro provide .num constru respons .num co co work are .num the co getting trails on .num veh roa .num access to prov .num constru respons .num constru paid for environm .num the co cause s .num on any impede .num a vege the exte access t .num the co roads .
later tha stan of trans roads ads oads are offh oads shall be e safe and rea uction dust sibility except nstruction of ntract docum ea access ontractor sha permission f n private prop hicles and e adways and a s roads shall b ide safe and uction dust sibility .
uction of acce r by the owne mental pro ontractor shal sedimentation y new access ed ditches sh etated buffer z ent possible .
to public r ontractor sha any such ma an sunset eac ndard sp portatio sta highway acces constructed asonable acce control and t haul roads ments or as dir roads ll be respons from landown perty .
equipment us ccess areas .
be constructe reasonable a control and ess roads ma er .
otection l ensure that n of any wate roads constr all not drain d zone shall be roads all make ever aterials that a ch day and d ecificati on and inf andard condi ss to materia in a location ess for the en maintenance on lands co rected by the sible for proc ners to build sed during c ed in a locatio ccess for the maintenance ay be directed the use of an rcourses that ructed by or f directly into w e maintained ry effort to av re tracked on during the da ions frastruc itions l sources req as approved ngineer .
e of all hau ontrolled by t engineer sh curing access access road construction a on as approv engineer .
e of the acc d by the eng ny existing pri t cross such r for the contra watercourses between an a void tracking nto a public r ay if so neede cture uired for high by the engin ul roads sh the owner a hall form part s to and from s or to use e activities sha ed by the en cess road sh gineer and if s ivate or public roads .
actor natural and erosion access road a mud snow road shall be ed to the satis hway construc neer and in a all be the c and as indica of the work .
m the work s existing wood all utilize only gineer and i hall be the c so constructi c access road water flows s shall be contr and any wate and debris scraped or s sfaction of the item num page num ction .
a manner to contractors ated in the site and for ds roads or y approved n a manner contractors ion shall be ds does not shall not be rolled .
ercourse to onto public swept off no e engineer .
depa pits a janua num artment and quarr ary num descript .num notwith sources all time provinc .num the co regulato and the docume .num where royalty f .num wh cen .num the c mainten .num wh doc req .num wh be und .num the co addition .num sou .num the co work to .num wh qua cas .num the co sufficie during d .num co unc fac .num the with ca stan of trans ries tion hstanding the s in such a m es during the p ce of new bru ontractor shal ory requireme e governmen ents shall be the source of fee of num cent here materials nts per tonne w ontractor sha nance of the s here the sourc cuments the quirements out here the sourc considered a der num sh ontractor shal nal areas of th urces within t ontractor shal o achieve the here the sourc arry process se of a pit pro ontractor sha ntly large en drilling blasti nsolidated ov consolidated e. e waste mate h the laws o nada .
ndard sp portatio sta e ownership o manner that th period of the unswick and t l be responsib ents pursuan nt of canada provided to th f supplies for ts per tonne s are made av will not apply .
all be respo source .
ce is located o owner shal tlined in the c ce is identified a pit or quarry hall be carried ll operate the he source in t the work site l make every minimum of w ce is owned o all oversize ocess all natu all clear gru nough to ens ng and excav verburden sh overburden erial shall be of municipaliti ecificati on and inf andard condi of the proper he work plac contract and the governme ble to ensure t to the laws a for the ope he engineer b pits and qua hall be paid b vailable from e onsible at h on land contro l compensate contract docum d in the contra y in accordan out under the e source in su the future by shall be ope y effort to opti waste from th or controlled b material pro urally occurrin b and strip ure that no vation .
all be strippe shall be strip removed fro ies the prov ions frastruc itions rty the contra ces are maint d in accordanc ent of canada e heshe has o of municipal eration of the before comme arries is locate y the contrac excavation wit isher own e olled by the o e the contrac ments for the act documen nce with this e appropriate uch a manner y either herhis rated as spec imize the use he mined mat by the owner oduced during ng rocks up to the overbur contaminatio ed back a min pped back a m the work a vince of new cture actor shall op tained in a ne ce with the la a. obtained all p ities the pro e work and encing the w ed on land co ctor to the own thin the work expense for owner and is ctor in acco e development ts as being w item except bid items .
r so as not to s own forces cified in the c e of the resou terials .
r the contract g the course o num mm in g rden from the n of the sou nimum distan minimum di area and dis w brunswick a perate all pit eat and safe c aws of munici permits lease vince of new d copies of th work .
ontrolled by th ner .
site the roya r the develo specified in t rdance with t of the pit or q within the work that the wor o limit the ab or others .
contract docu urce and shal tor shall in th of the work greatest dime e source ov urce materials ce of num m fro stance of num sposed of in a and the gov item num page num and quarry condition at palities the es and other w brunswick he relevant he owner a alty fee of num pment and the contract the specific quarry .
k site it will rk described ility to mine uments .
ll adjust the he case of a and in the ension .
er an area s will occur om the face m from the accordance vernment of pit pag num num ts and qua ge num num .num .num the acco num sulphi .num agg shal thre rati .num the on to arries the location water drainin site .
contractor ordance with idebearing regate base ll have a tota e times the a o where npr npr shall b otal sulphur .
departm of the wast ng from this a shall be res the permits l g rock subbase sh al sulphur con acidgenerati rnpap num e determined sta ment of tr standard co e disposal si area can not i sponsible to eases and ot houlder mate ntent of less t ng potential num. d by the modi andard s ransport onditions ite shall be s impact on an restore the ther requirem erial and ran than num or ap as repr ified sobec p specifica tation an such that an ny stockpile a areas affec ents identified ndom riprap r a neutraliza resented by procedure ac ations nd infras j y runoff or s areas or fut cted by the d in num. p made from ation potentia the neutraliz cidbase acco tructur item num january num sedimentlade ture use of th work and quarried roc al np at lea zation potenti ounting base re num num en he in ck st al ed depa exam janua num artment mination of ary num descript .num prior to owner subsurf which m .num any su location express conditio collecte .num the ow that the will be stan of trans f soils info tion o submitting a s normal pla face investiga may or may n ubsurface inf ns indicated .
sed or implie ons are not ed .
wner makes e presence or representativ ndard sp portatio ormation sta a tender quot ace of busin ations and so ot be shown formation ava the owner d with respe necessarily no guarantee r absence of w e of the actua ecificati on and inf andard condi tation the bid ness the rec oil analyses if on the plans .
ailable is ba r makes no ect to any suc typical and es representa water on the al conditions a ions frastruc itions dder shall hav cord of all b f any made f . ased on the guarantees ch information may have c ations or war site and any at the time of cture ve access to a borings test for design of investigation representat n and cautio changed sinc rranties eithe subsurface e f construction and may exam excavations the work the n made at t tions warran ns the bidde ce the field er expressed explorations w . item num page num mine at the and other e records of the specific nties either r that these data were or implied when made depa aspha janua num artment alt concr ary num general .num asphalt informa .num any as specific either bidder the field .num respon be that stan of trans rete core d t concrete c ation .
sphalt concre c locations in expressed o contractor th d data were c nsibility for int of the bidder ndard sp portatio data sta core data are ete core info dicated and t or implied hat these cond collected .
terpretation a r. ecificati on and inf andard condi e provided b ormation avai the owner m with respect ditions are no and use of as ions frastruc itions by the owner ilable is base makes no gua t to any su ot necessarily sphalt concre cture r solely for t ed on the inv arantees repr uch informat y typical and m ete core data the biddersc vestigation m resentations tion and ca may have cha a in preparing item num page num contractors made at the warranties autions the anged since g a bid shall depa geot janua num artment technical i ary num general .num the ow others .num ins as .num .num .num in t pla sha pla .num .num .num it i pro .num the is n .num ge rep .num .num co .num stan of trans nstrumen wner may req within the wo tallation and listed in the c where the n construction consultation to expedite contractor appropriate the immediat cement and c all supply fill m ced and com the placem which is to s the same ele the extent o the material to endanger s imperative oject .
e contractor not damaged otechnical ins placed by the the enginee however any ntinuity of rec if instrumen restrictions o ndard sp portatio tation sta quire that geo ork area and other pertine contract docu need for geote n locations a n with the con e the installa shall provide by the engine te area of th compaction d material with pacted by ha ment of hand say that the fi evation withi of the hand p equipment a r the integrity that this in shall organiz or rendered strumentation engineer at er will endea y additional c cords is essen ntation is dam on the work w ecificati on and inf andard condi otechnical ins during the pe ent details rel uments .
echnical instr and installatio ntractor .
ation and re e access and eer .
e geotechnic o not ensure a maximum nd around the placed mate ll elevation im n num m of th placement of and methods of the geotec strumentation e his activitie inaccessible n damaged b the contracto vour to effect cost due to de ntial .
maged or des within the are ions frastruc itions strumentation eriod of work ating to the g rumentation o on details wil eading of the d other assi cal instrumen the integrity o particle size e instruments erial shall be mmediately su he surroundin fill will be de used by the chnical instrum n remain inta es to ensure t or unusable .
y the contrac ors own expe t the repairs elays will be th stroyed the ea subject to m cture n be installed k under the co geotechnical of an emerge l be determin e geotechnic stance as d ntation where of the instrum of num mm a s. concurrent w urrounding the g work .
etermined by contractor w ments .
act and serv that the geote ctors operati ense .
or replaceme he responsibi engineer ma monitoring .
d by the eng ontract .
instrumentati ent nature oc ned by the e cal instrumen deemed nece e normal met mentation the nd this mater with the surro e instruments the engineer which have be viceable thro echnical instr ons shall be ent as soon a ility of the con ay impose lim item num page num gineer or by ion shall be ccurs during engineer in ntation the essary and thods of fill e contractor rial shall be ounding fill s shall be at r based on een deemed oughout the rumentation repaired or as possible ntractor .
mitations or depa scal janua num num artment es and wei ary num weighing .num the co items th .num all weig shall be .num belt sc measur .num the on .num all .num truck p .num the co weighin .num if the o will pay weighing .num the we work fo .num the tru .num any m vehicle or cons .num the co carry th .num all hau every w request .num tare an case of stan of trans ighing pro g devices ontractor sha hat specify m ghing devices e installed at a cales and lo rement canad e engineer re approved tru costs associa platform scale ost of supplyin ng devices sh owner require y for the cost o g procedur eighing proce or the owner ck driver sha aterial hauled e dimensions sidered eligibl ontractor mus he gross weig ling units use week in whic ted by the en nd gross weig f a beam scal ndard sp portatio ocedures sta all supply the easurement f s shall be of a a location tha oader scales da mc .
eserves the r ck platform sc ated with the es will be subj ng setting up hall be borne b es that the co of the move .
res edure to be f will be carried ll be respons d in excess and mass r e for paymen st ensure all t ghts they inten ed in the work ch they haul ngineer .
ghts of hauling e to a maxim ecificati on and inf andard condi scales nece for payment b a size to safel at has been a s shall not ight to reque cales .
periodic chec ject to the req p any adjust by the contra ontractor mov followed by th d out for dete ible to ensure of the maxim regulation und nt as part of th trucks and oth nd to haul on k shall be tare material weig g units shall b mum of the ne ions frastruc itions essary for de by the tonne o ly and legally pproved by th be used u est periodic ch cks shall be b quirements of tments or rep actor .
ve hisher sca he owners w ermining paym e that the lega mum weights der the nb m he work unde her hauling u the highway ed at the start ghed under t be recorded ty earest num kg .
cture termining the or other mass weigh loads he engineer f nless inspec hecks to be m borne by the c f num. pairs as requ ales after the weighers on ment quantitie al axle limits a s provisions motor vehicle er any item of units are prop .
t of the work the contract ypically to the e quantities f s unit .
as described for the scale p cted and ap made by weig contractor .
uired and dis initial setup contract wo es only .
are not excee of regulatio act will not f the contract perly registere and at least o and more f e nearest num k item num page num for contract d herein and placement .
pproved by ghing loads smantling of the owner ork or other eded .
on num be paid for t. ed to legally once during frequently if kg or in the sca pag num num ales and w ge num num loader .num the .num mea .num mea con .num loa as m .num loa conc .num loa .num loa othe .num loa will .num the load whe .num the and num truck .num the .num the .num mea first mon .num mea con .num .num weighing p r scales p following pol asurement ca asurement ca ntractors are a der scales w materials unde der scales wi crete concret der scales wi der scales wi er material pri der scales th not be accept contractor s der scales to ether the scale contractor a certified the platform following pol term scales asurement ca setup of th nths .
asurement ca ntractors are a as a result o contractors contractor w .num a report office wit if the contra released from services .
on may schedul departm rocedure olicy icy shall appl anada is the o anada will pe abiding by the ill be accepta er item num num ll not be acce te and any o ll not be acce ill not be acce marily used f at do not com ted for use on shall be respo correctly wei es are owned at hisher own loader scales scales po icy shall appl used herein anada does n he calendar y anada will pe abiding by the of a routine in scale is non will be required of the altera thin num days .
ctors scale is m seizure by ce the scale e a reinspec sta ment of tr s standard co y to the cont only company erform periodi e provisions o able for weigh num num num eptable for we ther material eptable for we eptable for we for landscapin mply with the n the owners onsible for th gh within de d by hisher co n expense sh s. olicy y to the cont nafter shall me not perform re year nor ann erform periodi e provisions o nspection if a ncompliant a d to have thei tion or repair s placed und y measureme has been br ction .
andard s ransport onditions tractors loade y that may ins ic marketplac of the weights hing of raw m num num and num eighing manuf consisting of eighing winter eighing topso ng purposes .
equipment re s work .
he mechanica signated tole ompany subc hall ensure th tractors truck ean permane equest inspe nual inspectio ic marketplac of the weights a measureme a notice of n r device repa r shall be sen er seizure re ent canada rought back specifica tation an er scales used spect and cert ce monitoring s and measur materials used num. factured road f binder comb r sand or salt .
oil ornamenta estrictions on al condition a erances mate contractor a s hat measurem k platform sca ent and portab ctions of the ons of scales ce monitoring s and measur ent canada i noncomplian aired .
nt to the nea epairs must b prior to the into complian ations nd infras d on the cont tify loader sca g inspections res act and r d in road con d materials inc bined with agg .
al rocks and g the certificate and proper op erials used on supplier or o ment canada ales used on t ble truck platfo contractors s left in plac g inspections res act and r nspector dete nce will be is arest measure be completed scale being nce measure tructur item num january num tract .
ales .
to ensure tha regulations .
struction suc cluding aspha gregates .
gravels or an e of inspectio peration of th n the contrac other .
has inspecte the contract .
orm scales .
scales for th ce over twelv to ensure tha regulations .
ermines that ssued and th ement canad and the sca put back int ement canad re num num at ch alt ny on he ct ed he ve at a he da le to da depa scal janua num artment es and wei ary num .num upon th random .num the hav .num afte ma is c .num the of t .num if th pay .num if th co .num .num the ope ow .num the co scales the sca .num the co been p bearing signatu .num tes .num .num .num .num .num tes .num the tim .num scales accepte .num a repo time tes canada stan of trans ighing pro he request of m checks in or e term priva ving standard er being give ay continue us carried out .
e contractor s the engineers he testing pro y the private s he testing pro mpanys char the scales carried out a contractors e cost assoc eration as a wner nor will i ontractor sha to correctly w ales are owne ontractor sha roperly instal g the private ure and any p sting shall be for the first for each su prior to the f every twelve sting per num e private sca e testing is pe that do not ed for use on rt statement sting is perfo a and a copy ndard sp portatio ocedures sta f the enginee rder to verify c te scale com test weights en notice by t sing the scale shall have the s notice .
oves the scale scale compa oves the scale rge for the tes shall not be and the scale s expense .
ciated with an result of the t form the bas ll be respons weigh within d ed by hisher c ll ensure tha led and calib e scale com pertinent rema carried out fo setup of the bsequent set first use in the e months if th .num will be ale companys erformed as p have a dated the owners of accuracy rmed per num y to the engin ecificati on and inf andard condi er the contra calibration of mpany shall meeting the he engineer es but shall m e testing carr es are accura anys charge f es are not ac sting .
used again u es have been ny delay to t testing requ sis of any cla sible for the m designated to company a s t a private s rated as per mpanys name arks .
or each set of calendar yea tup that same e following ye he scales are at the contra s test sticker per num d sticker stat work .
shall be co num and d eer or posted ions frastruc itions actor shall eng certain scale mean any of requirements that the scale make no adjus ied out by a p ate without ad for the testing ccurate the c until necessa n determined he contracto uested by the aim .
mechanical c olerances ma ubcontractor scale compa r num an e or logo th f scales in the ar .
e year if move ear if not mov a permanent actors expens shall not be r . ting that they ompleted by t distributed as d in the scales cture gage a privat es .
f the compan s of num. es are to be stments to th private scale djustments or g. contractor sha ry adjustmen to be accura or for the tim e engineer s condition and aterials used o a supplier or ny has verifie nd have affixe he date of t e following ca ed .
ved .
t installation .
se .
removed unti y are in prope the private s follows the o s. te scale com ies listed in t checked the e scales until company wi repairs the o all pay the pr nts or repairs ately calibrate me the scales shall not be p proper opera on the contra r other .
ed that the s ed thereon a testing the t ases l superseded er calibration scale compan original to me item num page num mpany to do table num e contractor l the testing ithin num days owner shall rivate scale have been d all at the s are out of paid by the ation of the act whether scales have test sticker technicians d at the next will not be ny for each easurement sca pag num num num ales and w ge num num opera .num whi prev widt app .num extr scal .num sca whe sec .num the sca weig .num .num eac dista .num sca othe read num test w .num test requ mea app spe num scale .num the .num .num .num .num .num the weighing p tion of tr le it is accep vent vehicles th of a scale proval issued f rawide vehic es designed les with a de eels of equipm tion num of th contractor s les must be ghed .
split weighin h approach to ance of at lea les shall not erwise improp ding erratically weights an ting of scales uire a minim asurement c licable limit ecification .
house contractor s a minimum containing a a minimum r sufficient ligh type of struct an approved the interior of contractor s departm rocedure uck platfo ptable to affix from running e deck beyo for the particu cles offroad and built to w eck having no ment being w he occupatio shall not spli provided whi g is acceptab o the scales s ast num m from t be used at a perly installed y shall be shu d toleranc s regardless o um of num num anada within of error as hall provide a work area o functional de oom tempera hting to the le ture defined a d and maintai f the house .
hall provide a sta ment of tr s standard co orm scales x guiderail c g off the edge nd the width ular device ty d trucks scra weigh such ve o guiderail or weighed protru nal health an itweigh veh ch are long e ble only as a m shall be maint he end of the any time whic d. scales wh ut down imme ces for sc of type of sca num kg num num n the previou s specified b a scale house of num m by sk and chair .
ature of num c evel of intensi and the work ned firstaid a safe means andard s ransport onditions s curbing or oth es the use o h specified in pe is not per apers or loa ehicles .
curb on the ude over the e nd safety act .
icles to deter enough to ful means of esti tained level a e deck .
ch are poorly hich have be ediately notw cales ale or type or num lb of tes us twelve mo by the non e meeting the num m with a and adequa ity and of the k being perform kit mounted o of access to specifica tation an her edge bar of timbers or n the measu rmitted .
ders must b scale house edges will .
rmine the we lly support al mating the ax at the same p y set up dam een struck or withstanding num value of mate st weights th onths .
test r automatic w following min a minimum h ate ventilation e quality defin med .
on the wall a and egress f ations nd infras rriers to the other means urement can be weighed side or so n be subject to eight of a load l axles of the xle weights .
lane as the s maged andor r jarred or ar num. erial weighed hat have bee results shall weighing de nimum require height cleara n. ned by the sta at an accessib from the scale tructur item num january num scale deck t s to extend th ada notice o on extrawid narrow that th o closure unde d for paymen e vehicle bein cale deck for r inaccurate o re jamming o on them sha en certified b be within th evice nawd ements nce of num m andards for th ble location o e house .
re num num to he of de he er nt .
ng a or or all by he d m he on depa scal janua num num num artment es and wei ary num .num all road vehicle .num the co private s .num table measur scales .
pursua advat aggre all we fleetw mettle weigh .num this lis certified .num any of no long .num contrac appear .num the ow one inc review .num the co provide canada .num measur measur num brow dartmo bnumb numx phone stan of trans ighing pro ds leading to s and dust co ontractor shal scale comp num lists t rement cana the listed nt to the weig tek systems i egate equipm eigh systems way inc. ertoledo inc. htronix cana t may be exp d by measure the private s ger capable of ctors are ad ring or not app wner shall ma cluded in this this informati ontractors ow ed these weig a and the test rement canad rement canad wn avenue outh ns xnum num ndard sp portatio ocedures sta the scale ho ontrol shall be l provide toile panies the private s ada have cer accredited p ghts and mea accred nc .
ment atlantic s num inc. . ada panded as add ement canada cale compan f providing ins dvised to ver pearing on th aintain a curr s section .
thi on for tender wn standard te ghts have bee ting or inspec da may be co da atlantic di num ecificati on and inf andard condi ouse shall be e maintained et facilities in c scale compa rtified for cali private scale asures act .
table dited private m limited tr fr sa c at fr q ditional scale a. nies listed abo spection serv rify the acce is list prior to rent listing of s list will be ing or contra est weights m en certified w ction is perform ontacted as fo istrict ions frastruc itions e maintained within num me close proximit anies which ibrating and e companies num e scale comp moncton nb ruro ns redericton nb aint john nb anada tlantic canad redericton nb quebec qc companies a ove who are f vices will be s eptability by tendering on all qualified made availab ct purposes .
may be used f ithin the prev med by a priv ollows cture so as to pro etres of the sc ty to the scale have test s checking co s are author panies num num b num b num num da b num num num acquire test s found by mea truck from the the owner the basis of t firms and tha ble to any co for the testing vious twelve m vate scale co vide a safe p cale house .
e house for th standard wei ntractors tru ized to perfo num num num num num num num num tandard weig asurement ca e list .
of any comp that company at list may va ontractor who g or inspectio months by me ompany techn item num page num passage for he weigher .
ghts which ck platform orm testing hts that are anada to be pany either y. ary from the o wishes to n of scales easurement nician .
depa priva janua num num num artment ate trucks ary num general .num the pu contrac availab in divis .num the co definitio .num for the .num tr .num co sub .num .num .num .num .num pr lea .num .num lo pla mo .num pa the con applicat .num this ite materia contrac .num this ite stockpi .num this ite not limi stan of trans s urpose of this ctor to ensure ble work and sion num of the ontractor shal ns e purpose of th uck means a ompany truc bcontractor a any truck le spouse of an any truck lea any truck lea any truck th resident th rivate truck se arrangeme in the case direct payme ocal resident ce of busines onths or more ay period me e monday of ntinuing in two ion em applies al blending s ct. em also appli le to be reloa em does not a ted to excava ndard sp portatio sta item is to sp e that the own that they are e contract do l do all that is his item the f a straight truc cks means nd includes egally owned n officer of th ased by the c ased by the c he registration his includes f means a truc ent within the that the pr ent the paym t means a p ss in the are prior to the d eans each two the week in oweek period to the haulin sand topsoil es if the con aded for incor apply to the m ation borrow ecificati on and inf andard condi pecify the co ners of priva paid for that ocuments .
necessary to following defi ck or a truckt a truck leg d or registere e contractor contractor for contractor to a n of which ha franchise tran ck legally own e definition of ivate truck ments shall be person having a in proximity date of the co o week period n which the f ds thereafter .
ng of filter m and asphalt c ntractor choos rporation into movement or backfill ripra ions frastruc itions ontractual pro ate trucks re work in a tim o ensure that nitions shall a tractor with or gally owned ed in the nam r or on behalf a local resi as been transf nsfers .
ned or leased company tr is registered e made to the g residence y to the limits ontract .
d during the first private t material agg concrete both ses to haul a the work at a hauling of an ap or reclaim cture ovisions which eceive a reaso mely manner a the purpose apply r without a tra or leased me of an offi of a local r ident and ferred from th d by a local ruck .
with a truck e truckers age or a corpora s of the contr term of the c truck worked gregate base h within and any of the abo a later date .
ny other type med asphalt co h will be follo onable distrib and at rates a of this item is ailer .
by the co icer or the n resident he contractor resident o kers agent th ent .
ation having i ract for a per contract comm d on the co esubbase s outside the l ovenoted ma of material in oncrete .
item num page num owed by the bution of the as specified s achieved .
ontractor or ame of the r to a local other than a hat requires its principal iod of three mencing on ontract and shouldering imits of the aterials to a ncluding but pr pag num num ivate truc ge num num .num the tend .num .num the app com .num the viola num condit .num whe .num .num .num .num .num .num cks contractor s dered quantit the remaind private truc contractor lies when num mpany trucks owner shal ation of this c tions en private tr the contrac contract .
the contract for trucks on private truc they are hired the contrac requirements .num operator occu work work .num ohs cons or a ash .num wat .num operator material .
.num operator private truc contract for o or company private truc membership not distributin direct the co departm shall carry out y of each ma der num of cks regardles shall stop us num by weight s. l refuse to w lause .
rucks are hire ctor shall be tor shall give the contract .
cks must be d. ctor shall ens s r has success upational hea kplace hazard k area traffic s and whmi struction safe member of hcat .
tcm awarene r has met the r has carried o cks not avail other work d y trucks hau cks shall be in any organ ng the work ntractor to hir sta ment of tr standard co t the work in terial to which each materi ss of the tend sing compa t of the tend weigh and pa ed the followi responsible private truck .
properly equi sure that ope sfully complet alth and safet dous materia control man is training c ety associatio the associat ess training is required driv out a pretrip lable at the t do not later ha ling the num e hired in a nization .
in th under this ite re private tr andard s ransport onditions such a way h this clause a ial to which dered or actua ny trucks to dered quantit ay for any m ng conditions for the hirin k owners at le ipped registe erators of p ed the followi ty ohs awa l information ual watcm courses shall on nbcsa s tion of safety available on vers licence f inspection ea time of reque ave the right t allotted to the fair and reas he event the o em in a fair a ucks in acco specifica tation an that no more applies is hau this clause a al quantity of o haul a ma ty of that ma aterial hauled s shall apply ng of private east num hours ered and insu private truck ing safety trai areness system wh awareness .
l be provide safety servic y and health the nbdti w for the type of ach day that t est by the co to bump p e contractor .
sonable man owner determ and reasonab ordance with t ations nd infras e than num by uled by com applies is to f material .
aterial to whi aterial has be d by compa e trucks re s notice of the ured for the w ks have met ining mis training .
ed by the n ces new brun h consultants website .
f truck bein the truck is ontractor or w rivate trucks nner and with mines that the ble manner th this clause .
tructur item num january num y weight of th mpany trucks be hauled b ch this claus een hauled b any trucks equired on th e requiremen work for whic t the followin and ew brunswic nswick ssnb s and traine ng used to ha s used .
who leave th already hire hout regard t e contractor he owner ma re num num he .
by se by in he ts ch ng ck b rs ul is ed to is ay depa priva janua num .
artment ate trucks ary num num .num on priv .num the priv pa .num the hau wh and num to b ove per .num in t tim pro priv und adm dis .num the ma the ow the .num the pay inc .num .num .num .num .num .num the gc stan of trans s e private tru vate truck is e contractor vate truck in ay period .
e contractor ulage rates s atsoever from d except dedu num fuel supplie be deducted erweight mus riod that priv the event the ely manner a ovisions of g vate truck th der the con ministration c charge of the e contractor s aterial on the c event that th wner may pay terms of the a e owner may yment by the lude but not b the amount the dates t the distance the total am the amount the private t e owner may c num to verify p ndard sp portatio sta uck shall if av hired from th shall within n full for the shall pay the set out in ite m the amount uctions for ov ed by the con by the contr st be posted i vate trucks a e contractor as stated ab c num .
in the he owner sha ntract the a cost of num e owners liab shall not ente contract at a e owner dete the owner of agreement be y at any time contractor t be limited to and type of m the material w e of the haul o ount paid by of any deduc truck .
y at any time payment to th ecificati on and inf andard condi vailable be h e same loca one week a e work done e owner of ea ms num and t paid to the o verweight mat ntractor ando actor from th n a visible lo are hauling an does not pay ove the ow e event of dir all deduct fro amount paid of that amo bility under the r into an agre rate less than ermines that th f the private t etween the co or on a regul o the owner material haule was hauled or hours of wo the contracto ctions made b carry out an he owner of a ions frastruc itions hired from ea al resident .
after each p by the priva ach private t num .
there owner of the terial in accor or workers co e owner of th ocation at the ny materials o y the owner wner may pay rect payment m any amoun to the own ount which is e contract to eement with th n the haulage he contractor truck in accor ontractor and t ar basis requ of any privat ed by the priv ork if hired o or to the owne by the contrac audit on the a private truc cture ach local re pay period ate truck on truck haulage shall be no private truck rdance with th ompensation he private tr e scale hous on this contra of the privat y the owner t by the own nt due and p ner of the s to the exte the contracto he owner of a rates set out r has entered rdance with num the owner of t uire the contr te truck .
the ate truck on an hourly b er of the priva ctor from the records of the ck .
esident befor pay the own the contract e rates not le deductions o k by the cont he provisions deductions .
t uck for mater e at all times act .
te truck in fu directly purs ner to the ow ayable to the private truc ent of the de or .
any private t in items num into such agre num notw the private tru ractor to prov e proof of pay basis ate truck and payment to th e contractor item num page num re a second ner of each t during the ss than the of any kind tractor save under item the amount rials hauled s during the ull and in a uant to the wner of the e contractor ck plus an eduction a ruck to haul and num .
in eement the withstanding uck .
vide proof of yment shall d he owner of pursuant to depa heavy janua num num num artment y equipmen ary num descript .num the pu highwa definitio .num for the .num he fron .num ro con .num co exc mix mo .num sub top dep .num bac do em usage of .num heavy rock cu .num heavy such us .num da wo .num heavy emban or pum .num afte hau the .num stan of trans nt tion rpose of this ay and bridge ns e purposes of avy equipme ntend loader ck means fr nstruction wh mmon mater cavated unde xture of soil a ore competent bsubgrade m p of embankm pth depending ckfill means cuments pla mbankments .
f heavy equ equipment m ut or any fill th equipment m sage does no mage to the rse or contam equipment m kment as long ping occurs er completing uling if using e subgrade is the surcha placed alon subgrade an ndard sp portatio sta item is to ide construction .
this item the ent means sc rs and like eq actured rock hether excava rial means a er item num and rock eith t bedrock or means the sur ments .
the sp g on the natu the layer of aced on the uipment may be used hat has rock c may be used ot damage the roadbed is d mination such may haul over g as there is hauling with h g repairs if a trucks that m surcharged to rge shall con g the subgra nd sufficient w ecificati on and inf andard condi entify under w following def rapers rock t uipment used k produced fr ated under ite any type of s num or num er naturally o mixed by the rface at a spe ecified depth re of the unde f borrow aa e subsubgra to build ando comprising at to build and e roadbed .
defined as b h as waste ma backfill mate no rutting or heavy equipm any in accord meet the axle o allow haulin nsist of the s ade shoulder width for at lea ions frastruc itions what condition finitions apply trucks overw d to transport rom any typ em num or num soil suitable or imported occurring as i contractors ecified depth b is usually num erlying mater anumquality ma ade surface or haul mate t least the top or haul on c but is not limit aterial spilling erial that form pumping of th ment shall cea dance with num e mass requir ng with heavy same materia r to provide ast oneway t cture ns heavy equ y weight straigh materials .
e of bedrock num or imported for roadbed under item num in the zone o method of ex below subgra num mm but ma ial .
aterial as ind to subgrade rials on rock p num m of subg common mate ted to rutting g from the hau ms the top laye he underlying ase immediat num the rements of r y equipment .
al as used fo at least num m travel for a loa uipment may ht or trailer du k suitable fo under item num d constructio num .
it can al of weathered xcavation and ade in underc ay be a lesse dicated in th e elevation subgrade a rade .
erial subgrad g that gets pr uling units .
er of a comm g material .
if s tely .
contractor m regulation num or backfill an of cover ove aded vehicle .
item num page num be used in ump trucks or roadbed num. on whether so mean a rock above d loading .
cuts and the r or greater he contract in cuts or s in a solid de provided rogressively on material such rutting may resume num or if nd shall be er the sub .
hea pag num num avy equipm ge num num .num hea plac thro .num hea sub .num .num the less .num num other .num the ope .num failu ope .num any be c spe ment .num when h incorpora equipme .num the surc when in surcharg avy equipmen cement of ba ugh num avy equipmen bgrade elevati if the contra above subgr .num only on calendar .num only if th does not approval of s than num m of f the contrac engineer in contractor rations and c ure of the c rations in acc delays and c considered a ecified work d departm hauling over ated as bac ent .
charge mater corporated a e as the back nt is prohibite ckfill materia num. nt is prohibite on including act consists o rade may be a sections of th r year to form he existing ro become uns the engineer fill .
ctor shall sub support of su shall make complete such ontractor to cordance with costs to the c as a basis of date or comp sta ment of tr standard co the surchar kfill to subg rial will be m as backfill .
t kfill layer will n ed from haulin l unless a s ed from haul aggregate s of upgrading a allowed as fo he existing ro a new subgr oadbed does afe .
r is required p mit detailed ch request at all necessa h repairs to th stop hauling gc num .
contractor res f claim for ex pletion date a andard s ransport onditions rge is finish grade elevatio easured for the operatio not be measu ng over comm urcharge is c ing along an subbase agg an existing h ollows oad that will b rade and s not start to d prior to heav calculations t least num days ary repairs to he satisfaction when so or sulting from p xtra costs or as the case m specifica tation an hed the sur on by mean payment und on of removi ured for paym mon material constructed a ny roadbed regate base a highway hau be excavated deteriorate a vy equipment stamped and s before hauli o the road n of the engin rdered may r performing rep r extension o may be .
ations nd infras rcharge mate ns other tha der the appro ing and inco ment .
undercuts du as described surface cons and pavemen ling with hea or built up w ndor the hau t hauling over d signed by a ng is due to c bed damage neer .
result in susp pairs or susp of the limited tructur item num january num erial shall b n with heav oriate bid item orporating th uring and afte in num. structed abov nt .
avy equipmen within the sam uling operatio r culverts wit a professiona commence .
ed by haulin pension of h ension will no d funds date re num num be vy m he er .num ve nt me on th al ng is ot e depa back janua num artment kup alarm ary num general .num all truc kilogram stan of trans s cks working o ms are to be e ndard sp portatio sta on the contr equipped with ecificati on and inf andard condi ract and havi h a properly f ions frastruc itions ing a registe functioning au cture red vehicle m udible autom p mass greater matic backup item num page num r than num alarm .
depa comp janua num num artment paction ary num descript .num this ite aggreg soil and a .num all roa in the i specifie .num fro not .num for mo determ .num if th ove cor .num if th num den as .num for det .num for ag ensure num .num for ach gra ran .num .num for be sat as stan of trans tion em details the ate and rap aggregate adbed materia item under w ed percentage ozen material t be placed on ost soils and f ined by astm he sample us ersize particle rrected value he material b higher or lo nsity will be t tm dnum .
r coarse gran termined as p ggregate base that the mo num and the follo r aggregate hieved withou adation falls o ndom samples the average time of comp r soils placed a value not g turated moistu defined in num ndard sp portatio sta e general req construction e als shall be pl which the mat e of maximum s shall not be n a frozen ro for aggregate m dnum .
sed in carryin es retained determined a being placed ower than th the value cal nular materia per astm dnum esubbase a oisture conte owing basesubba ut adversely outside the s s of the comp e moisture co paction .
d in the top num greater than th ure content a num occurs u ecificati on and inf andard condi uirements to materials by laced in lifts o terial is excav m dry density e incorporate oadbed surfac e base and s ng out astm on the num m as per astm in the work h e percentage lculated using als and aggre num. nd soil the nt is such th se the mois breaking do specified grad pacted inplac ontent of aggr .num m to subg he optimum m as defined by pon completio ions frastruc itions be carried o y the contract of a loose thic vated or sup uniformly thro d into the ro ce without prio shoulder mate dnum has g mm sieve th dnum .
has a percen e in the sam g the actual egate subbas contractor sh hat compact sture content own or segre ding limits a ce material .
regate bases grade in emba moisture cont y astm dnum on of compac cture ut with respe tor .
ckness not gr plied and co oughout the l oadbed and or approval of erial the max reater than num he maximum ntage of over mple of num field percent se the maxim hall take all ion is achiev t shall be su egating the a as determined subbase sha ankments th tent as define num and such ction .
p ect to compac reater than th ompacted to ift .
roadbed ma f the enginee ximum dry de num but less th dry density size particles num the ma tage of overs mum dry den necessary m ved in accor uch that com aggregate su d by sieve a all not be less e moisture co ed by astm d that no ruttin item num page num ction of soil at specified at least the terials shall er .
nsity will be han num of will be the s more than aximum dry size as per nsity will be measures to rdance with mpaction is uch that its analyses on than num at ontent shall dnum or the ng damage co pag num num num ompaction ge num num .num the optim com the cont .num .num .num the dete .num no mini .num a te com .num .num .num num rap .num com cons num applic .num all a contractor mum moistur mpactive effort contractor sh tent for comp in the event apply water t or aggregate in the event decrease the energy imp ermined by on subsequent l imum compac est strip may mpaction equip the test strip each pass of this procedu strip determin the compac density throu at least num .num smaller c lifts shall be mpaction of r sidered to be ation of wa application of departm shall note t re content a t is a unique hall be respon action efficien material is t to the area to .
material is t e moisture con parted to the ne of the follo lifts shall be ction criteria d y also be use pment require p shall be pe f a compactor ure will contin nes the maxim ction equipme ughout the lift num vpm .
compactors w compacted to rap placed as achieved upo ater water shall b sta ment of tr standard co hat the mois nd more prec e parameter fo nsible for the ncy .
too dry for c be compacte too wet for co ntent of the so e soil shall wing astm te placed until defined .
ed to determ ed to achieve erformed on a r until an insit ue until the d mum number ent to be use and have a m will be allowed o a minimum s aggregate s on completing e carried out andard s ransport onditions sture density cisely the mo or each soil a placement of compaction as ed in order to ompaction a oil or aggrega be sufficient ests dnum the precedin ine a control this result .
a lift of placed tu maximum d ensity result of passes co ed for test str minimum mas d for test strip of num of the subbase agg g the roller pa in accordanc specifica tation an y relationship oisture density andor aggreg f the material s specified h increase the as specified h ate .
to achieve dnum or dnum ng lift has be l density and d material wi dry density c remains cons ontrol density rips shall be ss of num tonne ps at culverts e control dens gregate base attern approve ce with item num ations nd infras p maximum y relationship gate matrix co at the approp herein the c moisture con herein the c the specifie num. een verified a d the number ith density te control densit stant or decre y and field mo able to prod e and a vibrat .
sity .
or shoulder m ed by the eng num .
tructur section num january num dry density p at a specifie onsidered an priate moistur ontractor sha ntent of the so contractor sha ed density a as meeting th r of passes o sts taken afte ty is achieved eases .
the te oisture conten duce a unifor ory capacity o material will b gineer .
re num num ed nd re all oil all as he of er d. st nt .
m of be depa lines janua num num artment s and grad ary num descript .num unless deemed .num before all stak .num claims engine measur .num the co days in .num the pre andor contrac .num constru be repla .num the exp .num the co require .num the co .num the co grades .num if durin control engine with the .num if it sha .num standa embankm .num in emb centreli .num the co specifie stan of trans des tion otherwise no d necessary t commencing es marks an will not be co er in writing rements by th ontractor shal n advance of s eservation of the guidance ctor .
uction stakes aced by the e e cost of repla pense .
ontractor shal d. ontractor shal ontractor shal .
ng the const point stakes er in writing e control poin t is determine all relocate the ard stake mark ment const bankment con ine and shou ontractor sha ed foreslope ndard sp portatio sta oted the eng to establish li g the work th d measureme onsidered bec in sufficient t he engineer .
l notify the en starting each stakes and m e of the eng or marks car engineer .
acing or resto ll furnish set l furnish and s ll ensure acc ruction opera s or marks w at least num d t locations .
ed by the eng ese stakes an kings shall be truction nstruction the lder elevation all supply all up to subgra ecificati on and inf andard condi gineer shall fu nes and grad he contractor ents .
cause of alleg time to allow ngineer of the operation req marks that ha gineer and th relessly or wil oring such sta t and paint ba set all batter ess for the e ation the co would interfer days in advan gineer that th nd or marks e as indicated e engineer sh ns .
other stakes ade .
ions frastruc itions urnish and se des required fo r shall satisfy ged inaccurac for the verific e requiremen quiring stakin ave been set he contracto lfully destroye akes andor m arricades aro boards .
engineer for t ntractor finds re with the w nce of starting hese stakes o as identified b d on standard hall supply st s marks and cture et stakes ma for the work .
y himselfhers cies unless th cation or chec nts for stakes g or marks .
by the engin or shall be t ed or disturbe marks shall be ound stakes a the checking s that the loc work the co g the operatio or marks are by the contra d drawing num takes for toe d grades nec arks and furn self as to the he contractor cking of stake andor marks neer for the c the responsib ed by the con e at the contr and marks wh and control o cation of the ontractor shal ons which are in conflict th actor .
num. of slope and cessary to m item num page num ish data as meaning of notifies the es marks or s at least num onvenience bility of the ntractor will ractors own hen and as of lines and engineers ll notify the e in conflict he engineer d subgrade maintain the lin pag num num num num nes and gr ge num num highwa .num the the t .num the with num deep f .num the elev mea .num the .num .num num struct .num the build stru .num .num the cons .num the and num tolera .num the meth the p .num this cros .num area on t rades ay cuts engineer sh top of backslo engineer sha grades indic fills or cut engineer sh vation as a ch asurement an se stakes sha cuts a ba at the fills a sta lift of ensu tures engineer sh ding line or w ucture .
the contract required .
engineer sh struction prog engineer sh other contra ances graded surfa hod or other m presence of th s measureme ss slope locat as which are he ground wit departm all supply sta ope .
all provide fo ated for the s ts hall set inter heck on the i d staking .
all be set as f ck of ditch st e point of me ake will be se f fill being plac ure that the fo hall provide working point tor shall refer all provide be gresses .
all provide la act items in ac ace of materia method appro he engineer .
ent shall be ta tions .
determined t th the words sta ment of tr standard co akes for the s r the contrac shoulder on f rmediate stak inclination of follows ake will be se asurement .
et in such a lo ced and at th oreslope is m pile layout c ts as designa rence and ma enchmarks fo ayout for foun ccordance wit al placed sha oved by the en aken along th o be outside cut or fill w andard s ransport onditions subgrade cen ctors use offs front and the kes at appro the slopes e et to ensure t ocation as to e extreme ed aintaining the centreline of ated on the p aintain these or grades whi ndation excav th this item .
all be checked ngineer and s he centreline a the specified whichever is a specifica tation an ntreline and s set stakes on e back of ditch oximately eve excavated or that the back be represent dge boundary e specified lin roadway c plans for eac marks and ca ch will be tra vation approa d with a num m shall be condu and shoulde tolerances w applicable .
ations nd infras shoulders bac n each side of h on back .
ery num metres constructed kslope is not ative of the e y of the standa ne and grade .
centreline of ch major com arry out addit ansferred to th ach roadway m straight edg ucted at select r of the work will be spray p tructur item num january num ck of ditch an f the alignme of change at the point o overexcavate elevation of th ard lift so as t bearings an mponent of th tional layout a he concrete a y cuts and fill e by stringlin ted locations k as well as a painted direct re num num nd nt in of ed he to nd he as as s ne in at tly depa lines janua num artment s and grad ary num .num for agg .num the a m .num sho me num .num for fine .num fin out .num the co num. toleranc .num the loc should specifie .num transve same l specifie .num the loc toward the spe .num all lines continu toleranc .num the fin contrac .num all hum contrac materia .num when t be refe .num the co until su stan of trans des gregate base e criterion for minimum sam ould the requ eet the specifi num at hisher e grading che e grading of t to the grades ontractor shal the varianc ce .
cation of the c er point to s ed in table num erse checking location poin ed in table num cation of the the shoulde ecified materia s and grades uous transition ces over the e ished surface ct documents mps or depr ctor by resha al as required the material i renced to the ontractor shal ch time as th ndard sp portatio sta esubbase che r acceptable p ple size of num uirements of ed tolerances r own expens ecking shall b shoulders or s slopes dim l meet the de ce at any po checking shal houlder point num. g shall be pe t station ba num. checking dia r at the next al specified in intermediate n for any one entire referen e at any plac s by more tha ressions exc aping or remo .
s to be place e edge of pav ll be respons e work is acc ecificati on and inf andard condi ecking shall b placement sh num locations sh num not s and shall co e. be performed r other restric mensions and esign lines an int checked l be longitudi t and based erformed from ased on the agonally whe location poin n table num to the points e point to ano nce distance l ce shall not d an the toleranc eeding the s oving the defe ed adjacent to ement .
sible to mainta cepted by the ions frastruc itions be conducted all be that num hall be equal t be met the onduct a new by stringlining cted or narrow tolerances a nd grades wit to any othe nally from ce on the speci m the centrel specified m en requested nt as defined num. s of measurem other shall ex ength .
deviate from t ces specified specified tole ective areas o a pavemen ain the lines e engineer or cture by stringlinin num or greater to or within th e contractor s w stringline su g between ev w areas to be as directed by thin the tolera r point shall ntreline point ified material ine point tow material type d shall be fr by the refere ment shall be xist and shall the lines and in table num erances sha andor repla nt the finished and grades the area is pa ng on a rando of the results he specified to shall repair th urvey of the w very stake loc e paved shal y the enginee ances as show not exceed t to centreline and referenc ward the shou and referenc rom the cent ence distance such that a s be within the d grades spec num. all be correct acing the are d surface ele of the roadw aved .
item num page num om basis .
s based on olerances .
he work to work as per cation .
l be carried r. wn in table the stated e point from ce distance ulder at the ce distance treline point e based on smooth and e prescribed cified in the ted by the ea with new vation shall way surface lin pag nes and gr ge num su s s s aggr aggre aggre note rades urface being ubgrade or un ubgrade or un ubgrade or un regate subbas egate base p egate base fi grade stakes except for fin undercut me departm graded ndercut ndercut ndercut se top lift placement ne grading s shall be plac ne grading for eans the surfa sta ment of tr standard co table num grade tol roc friable ro a ced at station r which the st ace at the spe andard s ransport onditions num lerances material ty k except fria ock sandston soils aggregate su aggregate b aggregate b ns longitudina tations shall b ecified depth b specifica tation an ype ble rock ne shaleetc .
ubbase base base al reference d be at num m s below subgra ations nd infras to num m num num num num num distances of num spacing .
ade in a cut o tructur item num january num olerance mmnum mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num m spacing r fill .
re num num g depa work janua num num num artment k progress ary num descript .num this ite effectiv emban with ap .num erodibl work are .num for the or othe .num a w the .num a w or suc num .num the ex therein .num the co have its .num the num stabiliza .num stabiliz is not p .num for wo expose item num .num suc cut dis .num work a too larg by the e .num stabiliz contrac erosion .num stockp stan of trans sion tion em describes ve protection kment work pproved work e material inc eas e purpose of t rwise unstabi work area ma e numday perio work area ma one large fill ch large work num applies .
xtent of each shall be as i ontractor may s own numday day period s ation zation shall m practicable to ork areas tha ed areas shal num. ch work area toff date for cretion of the areas that ca ge per num engineer .
zation is not ctor shall add n control meas iles including ndard sp portatio sta s the proced of the env in erodible m schedules cludes any ma this item a w ilized on a giv ay encompas od or ay be part or a requiring ma k area in whic work area s indicated on t y work on mo y period .
shall begin the mean hydrosee do hydroseed at can be com l be acceptab as shall be mu hydroseeding engineer .
nnot be com num shall h required on t dress the rele sures .
g topsoil piles ecificati on and inf andard condi dures and tim vironment an materials by p submitted pe aterial that ha work area is a ven day it is s several sm all of a large aterial from s ch the cutfill station limits the approved ore than one e day that gru eding of all e ding mulchin mpleted within bly shaped to ulched under g per num. pleted within ave all erodib the top surfa ease of suspe shall be mu ions frastruc itions meframes the nd orderly p performing th er item num. as the potenti an area of the date specific .
all cuts and f cut and fill on several cuts a work is not a estimated q initial and su work area ubbing stripp erodible mate g of such ma n the numday opsoiled whe item num if th placement of the numday ble materials ace of a fill o ended solids lched under i cture e contractor progression o he work dilige al to release e work site w . fills if they all ne large cut t andor borrow able to be co uantities and ubsequent wo at a time bu ping cut fill co rials or whe aterials .
period all d ere specified he numday pe f topsoil in su period becau mulched und or on the floo through the tem num .
p r shall follow of the exca ently and in a sediment .
which has be can be comp that satisfies s w to complete ompleted with duration of c ork schedules ut each work onstruction be n the engine itches slopes and hydrose eriod extends uch cases wi use cutfill qu der item num or of a cut h installation of item num page num w to ensure vation and accordance en grubbed pleted within several fills e. for each in num days cutfill work s. k area shall egins .
eer deems it s and other eded under beyond the ill be at the uantities are as directed owever the f applicable wo pag num num ork progr ge num num uncom .num wor the shal hydr .num wor with the .num .num wor num num num other .num eros in ac .num eros cont num .num area failu con .num area prec num .num if sta item sun .num the work .num roc eng plac rock und .num ession mpleted wo rk areas that numday perio ll be stabiliz roseeding are rk areas that cutsfills unc end of the num abandonmen valid cause .
v order by the work for reas rk areas that except any .num and num sionprone em ccordance wi sionprone cu trolled by sed respectively as that have ure before hyd ntractors expe as that have cipitation run and hydrose abilization of m the contra days and sta item num w k progression ck cuts shall ineer agrees ce for use at k cut foreslop er num or rock fills sha stabilization i num or ot departm ork areas have been u d shall be sta zed as direc e completed .
have not be completed sha numday period o nt shall mean valid cause w engineer or sons not attrib are not comp work areas at the contra mbankments c th item num a uts shall be ex diment contro y or as otherw been accep droseeding h ense and then been accepta noff or slope eded under it erodible mate actor shall pa atutory holida work progres n. be subject to that some of a later date .
pes and ditch otherwise rel all be subjec if the slopes a herwise relea sta ment of tr standard co nder continuo abilized per num cted by the een under con all be mulched or by the numth d n ceasing con would include r officials from butable to the pleted at the t the contracto actors expens constructed w and as elsewh xcavated such ol fence and wise directed b ptably shaped has been don n hydroseede ably shaped a failure shall tem num. erials has not ay to the ow ays that the re sion tracking o the work a the in situ roc the stabiliza es are to be lease sedime ct to the work are to be tops ase sediment .
andard s ransport onditions ous construct num .
work engineer p ntinuous cons d per num a day after aba nstruction on t unworkable s m dfo del e contractors time of winter or failed to m se .
within num m of here specified h that runoff i or erosion c by the engine d but are dam e shall be a ed under item and hydrosee be repaired t been perform wner a penal equired work g report is area and num ck andor blas ation requirem topsoiled or ent .
k area and num soiled or are d . specifica tation an tion but are n k shall continu per item num struction or t and num at t andonment w the cuts and site condition lg or other r s actions or fa r shutdown s ulch under num f natural wate d in the contra s directed to control struct eer .
maged by pr acceptably rep m num. eded but are reshaped un med by the num lty of num k remains uns considered a day require sted but unex ments of num are deemed numday requir deemed to be ations nd infras not completed ue on the cut num until final that have be the contracto whichever is s fills in a wor ns due to prec regulatory ag ailure to act .
hall be mulch num shall b ercourses sha act documen one or more ures per item recipitation r paired and re e subsequentl nder the prov numth day as de num for each stabilized .
as official doc ments of num xcavated rock num do not ap d to be an ero rements of num e an erodible tructur item num january num d by the end o s and fills an shaping an en abandone ors expense b sooner .
rk area witho cipitation or a ency to ceas hed under ite be mulched pe all be stabilize nts .
exit points an m num and ite runoff or slop eshaped at th ly damaged b visions of ite escribed in th h day exce cumentation o num unless th k may be left pply unless th odible materi num includin material unde re num num of nd nd ed by ut an se m er ed nd m pe he by m his pt of he in he al ng er depa dispo janua num artment osal areas ary num descript .num disposa all othe .num in case impact .num for dis during t .num disposa docum shall n waterco .num contrac disposa .num if th res law pro .num the and .num .num disposa num .num the mi highwa .num entranc at an a .num entranc perpen distanc shall be and oth .num disposa finished erosion and to entranc stan of trans s tion al areas are f er surplus exc es where soil managemen posal of know the work the al areas sha ents where t ot be within ourse .
ctors shall be al areas and he contracto sponsible for a wns buildings oven to have b e contractor d rehabilitatio stabilization al areas shall prior to the pl nimum distan ay shall be num ces to dispos ngle opposing ces shall not dicular to or ce of num metre e placed at le her debris sha al areas sha d appearance n obtaining g the satisfac ce shall be eit ndard sp portatio sta for the dispos cavation mate or rock is s t branch of d wn contamina e contractor s all be located the materials num metres o e responsible are responsib r places a dis any damages s or any othe been caused shall be resp n of disposal n of disposal a l be cleared o acement of a nce between num metres unle sal areas shal g the flow of t t exceed num r at the ang es .
all mater east num metres all not be left all be constru e and shall guidance from tion of the e ther removed ecificati on and inf andard condi sal of waste f rials not iden uspected of delg at num ated soil or ro shall apply to d outside the placed in the of any water to obtain per ble for all cos sposal area o s to septic tan er part of th by placemen ponsible for a areas .
areas shall be of all merchan any waste .
the entrance ess specifical ll be at right a traffic on divid metres in op le defined in rials being pu s beyond the in the disposa ucted such th be hydrose m the describe engineer .
win or shaped to ions frastruc itions from clearing tified for stoc being contam num fo ock and const delg for an e rightofw em shall not b rcourse or b rmission from sts thereof .
on private pro nks wells or e property w nt of the dispo all costs asso e carried out i ntable timber es of two disp lly altered by angles to the ded highways pening width n num fro ushed or othe rightof way al area entran hat the slope eeded mulch ed work prog ndrows of ea o a uniform an cture g grubbing an kpiling .
minated the or advice .
truction or de approval to way or as sp block or impe e allowed to m property ow operty the o namental tree whether such osal area mate ociated with t in accordance r in accordanc posal areas o the engineer centreline of s. and shall ex om the right erwise depos y i.e .
beyond nce .
es are stable hed or other gression deta arth or debri nd level condi ndor excavat contractor sh molition wast o operate .
pecified in th ede natural dr o cause siltat ners to use th wner shall in es or shrubs h damage is erial .
the supply m e with num ce with num on the same r in writing .
f twoway hig xtend back a ofway for a ited in the dis d the entrance and left in rwise stabiliz ils as noted s on either ition .
item num page num tion and for hall call the te produced he contract rainage and tion of any heir land as no way be driveways alleged or maintenance num .
num and side of the ghways and along a line a minimum sposal area e. boulders a neat and zed against in item num side of the dis pag num sposal are ge num num licenc .num for natu .num the be r .num inqu eas ce of occu waste dispos ural resource licence will b responsible fo uiries should b departm pation sal areas on c es dnr for a be issued for a or approving t be made to th stan ment of tr standard co crown land th a licence of o all crown lan he locations o he crown lan dard spe ransport onditions he contractor occupation .
nd adjacent to of individual w nds branch at ecificatio tation an r shall apply t o the work si waste disposa t num num ons nd infras to the nb dep ite .
dnr dist al sites on the num .
tructur item num january num partment of trict staff shall e crown land re num num l d. depa envir janua num num artment ronmental ary num descript .num the c specific regula concern the con .num ref .num measur of wate practica approp .num environ comme .num if n the ava me .num if any s plant o contrac represe work .
.num the co .num gu but app environm .num the co who ha address for wate .num the co rainfall deficien .num the ow technic the plan stan of trans l requirem tion ontractor sh cations and ations of the n the protecti ntractor in acc ferences to w res determine ercourses aff al and not ne riate bid item nmental prot encement of th ot possible to contractor sh ailable on site easures as soo suspected arti or animal sp ctor shall cea entatives of th ontractor shal idance to the t not limited to proval and mit mental insp ontractor sha as completed s environmen er and runoff ontractors rep events the en ncies immedia wner may reta ians will mon ns and specif ndard sp portatio ments sta all carry out in such a m province of on of the env cordance the watercourse ed by the app fected directl ecessarily all s. tection meas he work .
provide the e hall as a mini e prior to the c on as practica ifacts of histo pecies or an ase work in he appropriat l follow sound contractor in the environm tigation specif pection all be respons environment ntal issues a issues includ presentative s ntire site shall ately addresse ain an environ nitor the work fications as w ecificati on and inf andard condi t the work manner so a f new bruns vironment and rewith .
in this item m propriate regu ly or indirect l inclusive o sures shall environmental mum have all commenceme al in the work orical or archa y contamina accordance te agencies a d environmen applying thes mental manage fied in the app sible for des tal managem cquire staff a ding holidays shall monitor l be inspected ed .
nmental inspe k with regard ell as any app ions frastruc itions on the con as to be in swick andor d any approv mean waterc ulatory autho tly by the w n the plans be installed protection pr l materials req ent of any wo progression .
aeological val ated soils a with gc num and the engin ntal constructi se practices to ement manua plicable enviro signating an o ment manual and procure and weekend the weather d for environm ector who alo to complianc plicable acts a cture ntract accord compliance the governm vals or permits coursewetla orities as nece work will be and in the s d whenever rior to the com quired for the ork and shall ue are uncov are identified until the site neer has app on practices .
o hisher work al the recomm onmental asse onsite enviro emm trainin materials wh ds .
forecasts and mental mitigat ng with the e ce with enviro and regulation ding to the with various ment of can s issued to th ands .
essary for the detailed to specifications possible pr mmencement o environmenta install the en vered or any e d during the e has been r proved resum k shall be deriv mendations co essment ea onmental rep ng and has th en there is th d prior during ion deficiencie ngineer and c onmental requ ns .
item num page num plans and s acts and nada which he owner or e protection the degree s under the rior to the of the work al protection nvironmental endangered work the eviewed by ption of the ved from onditions of .
presentative he ability to he potential g and after es and any construction uirements of env pag num vironment ge num num enviro .num the and .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num tal requir onmental m contractor s the following sediment an included in th .num sedimen prior to a debris and e and adjacent the watercou precautions material into fertilizers ce machinery an no grubbing shall take pl indicated in measures are does not hav num mgl num mgl f other lev .num installatio accordan within a buf constructed f mm of clean the soil expo no blasting dfo .
in dewaterin quarry the c suspended s background background by delg .
.num erosion when de construct payment departm rements mitigation shall complete conditions nd erosion co he specificatio nt and erosion and after rainf excavated ma t areas for dis urse .
shall be take a watercour ment lime p nd pollutants excavation lace within th the contract e installed in ve a suspende over backgro from backgrou vel approved on inspectio nce with the a ffer zone an for the install gravel or roc sed so as to p shall take pla g an excava contractor sh solids level by levels during levels for lon and sedimen ewatering is ted inspecte under the ap sta ment of tr standard co e the work in ntrol measure ons .
n control mea fall events to t terial within th sposal or plac en by the co rse including aint or fresh c shall be locat embankmen he buffer zon documents order to ensu ed solids leve ound levels du und levels for by delg .
on maintena applicable item y temporary ation of a dra ck placed the provide enviro ace in or nea ation whether hall ensure th y the time it re any short te ger term exp nt control me conducted d maintained ppropriate item andard s ransport onditions n accordance es shall be c asures shall the satisfactio he work area cement in a m ntractor to pr but not limite concrete .
ted or stored nt constructio nes on both until the ap ure that runo el in excess of uring any sho r longer term ance and re ms from the c work area a ainage struct same day the onmental pro ar a waterco r a roadway hat any turbid eaches a wat erm exposure osure num ho asures requi for roadway d and repaire ms pertainin specifica tation an e with the me carried out as be inspected on of the eng a shall be rem manner such t revent discha ed to creosot in areas not i on or installat sides of eac ppropriate sed off by the tim f ort term expos exposure num epair of thes contract docu access roads ture shall be ey are built to otection to the ourse without y cut founda d water pum tercourse of e less than num ours to num da red to achiev y or founda ed in accorda ng to the work ations nd infras asures identi s detailed on d maintained ineer .
moved from th that it can not arge or loss o te hydrocarb in danger of f tion of draina ch natural wa diment and e me it reaches a sure less than num hours to num se structures uments .
s haul roads e surfaced wit o provide suf e watercourse prior written ation excavat ped out or re no more than num hours and ays or other l ve this level ation excavat ance with and k. tructur item num january num fied in num the plans an and repaire he watercours be returned t of any harmf bons biocide floodwaters .
age structure atercourse a erosion contr a watercourse n num hours .
days or s shall be s andor area th at least num fficient cover t e from runoff .
n consent fro ion a pit or eleased has n num mgl ove d num mgl fro level approve of complianc tions shall b d measured fo re num num .num nd ed se to ful s es as rol e in as num to m a a er m ed ce be or depa envir janua num .
artment ronmental ary num num .num .num .num the pur and .num ins sha com .num wa a s sha .num .num .num .num if it cof bet .num the act and .num .num ear be add app .num nat con tha env exp stan of trans l requirem it shall be th expense to that may be properties a the contra damage res e contractor rpose of creat d the appropr tream work s all notify the mmencement ater control fo sitespecific m all be accomp installing th completion constructing or stemming th pump runs w stream imm t is necessary fferdams con tween an oute e engineer tually comme d the contrac no work sh jurisdiction t rthwork shall as detailed dition to thos propriate item tural material ntain any friab at would mak vironmental h posed to the n ndard sp portatio ments sta he contractor the satisfacti required and butting and b ctor shall be ulting from th shall not pl ting a tempor riate regulator shall be carri engineer in t of instream w or all culvert i method ando plished using e new culve g a temporary he flow upstre whenever the ediately below y to isolate th sisting of as er streamsid upon receivin nce will arra ctor prior to co all commence that the work be carried ou in the cont se indicated ms. s produced a ble soluble o ke the mater hazard from natural eleme ecificati on and inf andard condi rs responsibi on of delg a d to obtain pe beyond .
e responsible he dewatering ace an earth rary access s ry authorityie ied out betwe writing at le work .
nstallations in r sequence is one of the fol ert in the dry y clearlight c eam and pum ere is sufficie w the work a he stream fro s a minimum de wall of san ng notice fro nge an onsit ommenceme e until the en site is appro ut in accordan ract docume the enginee andor supplie r reactive min ial prone to the presence ents after plac ions frastruc itions lity to install any erosion c ermission to p to repair a g. h or rock ca structure with es in writing .
een june numst ast num days in n natural wate s indicated in llowing metho y and divertin coloured plas mping the flow ent water and area .
om the work a layer of num ndbags and a om the contr te meeting w ent of the instr gineer verifie oved for the co nce with item ents and if a r shall order ed by excavat nerals or oth decompositio e of the pare cement in the cture inspect and control measu pump or relea at herhis own auseway in t hout specific a and septemb n advance of ercourses ot n the plans o ods ng the water ticlined diver w around the w d having the k area the c nummil clear p an inner wall o ractor as to w with represent ream work .
es with the reg ommenceme num .
erosion additional me r and approv tion or from p er deleterious on or disinte ent material o work .
maintain at ures for pits a ase any turbid n expense a the watercou approval of th ber numth .
the f the anticipa ther than thos or item num i rcourse throu rsion channe work area e discharge ba ontractor sha olyethylene s of earth fill .
when constru tatives from d gulatory agen nt of instream n control mea easures are e such work its and quarri s materials o egration or p or its byprod item num page num hisher own and quarries d water onto any and all rse for the he engineer e contractor ated date of se for which s specified ugh it upon l in the dry ensuring the ack into the all construct sandwiched uction shall delg dfo ncies having m work .
asures shall required in k under the es shall not r conditions present any ducts when env pag num vironment ge num num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num tal requir additional co by the contra a copy of the the duration designated to any ruts crea smooth and b in order to p occur within num equipment s and equipme new roadbe all exposed with hay mulc temporary b .num whereve installed .num the brid enough clearance .num at le .num at le .num suffi .num approved .num a flat .num two outer be tr .num tempora channel .num approach evergree .num felled tim .num tempora required .
departm rements onditions of ap actor .
e watercourse of the contr o act on beha ated by equip blanketed wit prevent the s num m or a wat hall not be st ent operation d being const erodible mat ch at the end bridges er crossing a so as to clea ge shall have landward of e below the u ast num m ab ast num m ab ciently high a d types of tem tbed trailer bo or more pre r two of whic avelling over ary bridges s is straight and h ramps sha en boughs tha mber shall not ary bridges sh .
all exposed sta ment of tr standard co pproval as de e and wetlan ract and sha alf of delg or pment within h haystraw m pread of inva tercourse of w ationed and m ns shall be lim tructed .
erial within num of each work stream is ne rspan the wa e foundations the stream underside of t bove the bed bove the ice o above the grou mporary bridg ody frame dec fabricated lam h are aligned them .
shall be insta d narrow and all consist o at are trample t be skidded o hall be remov d erodible soil andard s ransport onditions etailed in the c nd alteration p all be made r an employee num m of a w mulch .
asive plants wetland .
materials sha mited to the f num m of a wa k day .
ecessary a p atercourse .
s of skids or bank shoul he stringers m of the waterc or water surfa und at both e es include the cked with ste minated squa d collinear wit alled over a the banks ar of rock or c ed in place .
or dragged ac ved as the w shall be stab specifica tation an contract docu permit shall b available upo e of dfo .
watercourse s no washing all not be store footprint of th tercourse or prefabricated logs placed lders and hi meets the foll course ace the day of ends to have d e following el or squared aredtimber s th the wheels section of th re high and st lean coarse cross any tem work progress bilized immed ations nd infras uments shall be kept on the on request o hall be imme of tools or m ed in a wetlan he existing r wetland sha temporary b on undisturb gh enough owing criteria f installation daylight visib d timbers and swamp mats s of the equip he watercour teep .
e free drain mporary bridg ses and they iately after re tructur item num january num l be carried o e work site fo of an inspecto ediately grade machinery sha nd at any time roadbed or th ll be stabilize bridge shall b bed ground fa such that th a and le .
d of girders th pment that w rse where th ing gravel o e. are no longe emoval .
re num num ut or or ed all e he ed be ar he he will he or er depa envir janua num .
num num num artment ronmental ary num num .num .num complian .num failure will res environ of can comme any env work .
.num delays the req any ext .num in orde environ and pai pollutio .num the co product basin system .num it shall and reg water an .num the co drainag .num the co public a .num the reg stan of trans l requirem unless temp weather fore as soon as melt andor all tempora documents .
nce and de by the contr sult in the c nmentrelated nada and m ences the wo vironmental d to the contra uirements of tension of the er to comply mental repres d according to n control ontractor sha ts camp refu or into any s andor grou be the contr gulations and nd runoff ontractor shal ge or natural w ontractor sha and private pr e contractor gulatory agenc ndard sp portatio ments sta porary bridge ecast and the the integrity rain events t ry bridges sh .
lays ractor to carry contractor b acts or regu may result in ork as specifie damage result actors work o this item wil e contract co with this item sentative may o the applicab l all not dump use or other area which m undwater .
ractors respo to obtain all n control ll perform the watercourses .
ll dispose of roperty or an shall comply cies having ju ecificati on and inf andard condi es are designe e water level of any bridg the bridge sha hall be remo y out the wor eing liable f ulations of the n suspension ed andor take ting from his operation res l not be cons mpletion date m and applica y direct that a ble items in the spill or disp debris into a may ultimate onsibility to fam necessary pe e work in a m water resultin y portion of th y with all req risdiction rega ions frastruc itions ed to accomm beneath eac ge is threaten all be immedi oved prior to rk in accordan for any fines e province of n of work u es remedial m her inaction o ulting from su sidered as a b e. able permits additional env e contract do pose of any o any watercour ely cause pol miliarize her ermits and ap manner so a ng from the w he work com quirements of arding the disp cture modate a num ch bridge sha ned by increa ately remove the dates s nce with the r s levies or f new brunsw under gc num measures to r or improper a uspension of basis of claim and regulati vironmental m ocuments .
overburden rse reservoir llution to wat himself with t provals for th as to not obs work in a ma mpleted or und f delg mu posal of wate numyear flood all be closely ased runoff d ed .
pecified in th requirements penalties m wick and the g num until the repair or com ctions in carry work for failu m for extra co ons contrac mitigation be trees brush r or other na ter drainage the applicable e operations .
truct the flow anner not de der constructio nicipal codes r from excava item num page num d event the monitored .
ue to snow he contract of this item made under government contractor mpensate for ying out the ure to follow osts nor for ctors onsite carried out petroleum atural water or storage e legislation .
w of surface etrimental to on .
s and other ations .
env pag num num num vironment ge num num releas .num the any fuel .num num fuel st .num the up a .num equ priv .num fue grou num wetlan .num to m ensu vege .num .num in w cons .num veh road tal requir se of fuel contractor aspect of the andor other this shall app of the owner torage an contractor s and absorption ipment shall vate well .
l and other ha undwater sour nds minimize the ure that all e etation and a the cleaning shovels or sim wetland areas structionrelat icles and equ dways and ac departm rements and other including any e contract sh hazardous ma ply to the wor andor any c d handling shall take prop n materials at not be fuelle azardous mat rce private w spread of inv equipment en again before th g shall consis milar tools to there shall b ted activities s uipment used cess areas .
sta ment of tr standard co r hazardou y subcontracto all be respons aterials regar rk site all lan crown land b g per environm the work are ed within num terials shall no ell .
asive plant sp ntering areas he equipment st of digging o the extent pra be no grubbin shall be confin during const andard s ransport onditions us substan ors andor an sible for all co rdless of the c ds being used being utilized f ental protectio ea during fue m of a water ot be stored w pecies such a near or in t leaves such or scraping o acticable .
ng or ditching ned to the clea truction activit specifica tation an nces ny agents of ontainment an cause of the re d by the cont for the work u on measures lling and main rcourse wetla within num m o as purple loos wetland hab areas .
off the vegeta g except for aring limits .
ties in wetlan ations nd infras f the contrac nd cleanup of elease .
tractor and un under the con s such as hav ntenance of th and or groun of a watercou sestrife the c itat is cleane ation and mud culvert instal nds shall use tructur item num january num ctor involved f any release o nder the contr ntract .
ving spill clea he equipment ndwater sourc rse wetland o contractor sha ed of mud an d by means lations and a only approve re num num in of rol an t. ce or all nd of all ed depa work janua num num artment king condit ary num clean pr .num during conditio .num the co clear a leave th .num if th req .num if th eng mo damage t .num the wo work u .num if any s repair thereof stan of trans tions remises the course o on satisfactor ontractor sha way all rubb he premises i hese requirem quiring him to he contracto gineer may ca oney owing to to work ork shall be a ntil the work such loss or d restore and f shall be com ndard sp portatio sta of the work ry to the engin ll upon the c ish surplus a n a neat and ments are no remedy the s or fails to rem ause the situa the contracto at the risk of t is accepted b damage occur reexecute th mpleted within ecificati on and inf andard condi the contract neer .
completion of and waste m tidy condition ot met the en situation .
medy the situa ation to be re or .
the contracto by the owner rs before the he lost or da n the specified ions frastruc itions tor shall keep f the work r material remai n satisfactory ngineer may ation within num emedied and m or arising from r. final accepta amaged work d time .
cture p the work a remove all te ning on or a to the engine give written num days of re may deduct t m any cause nce the con k so that the area in a ne emporary stru about the wo eer .
notice to the eceipt of the he cost there which may o tractor shall i e work or t item num page num eat and tidy uctures and ork site and e contractor notice the eof from any occur to the mmediately he portions depa safet janua num num num artment ty support ary num general .num the co the nat municip discrep .num the co .num the co that wil platform .num constru the con .num the co accorda .num safety working .num constru displac .num all wor constru safety l safety n .num a safet contrac .num in orde constru and num .num the nb .num where require section num a .num all .num the and stan of trans t systems ontractor shal tional building pal or local pancy the mor ontractor shal ontractor shal l cause perm ms uction safety ntract docum ontractor sha ance with item platforms sh g surface at th uction platfor ement .
rkers employ uction activity ines at all tim et suppor ty net support ct documents er to provide uct the suppo num. e anchor asse b. the contrac ments for th s the num ton and num. structural ste e safety net s d the diaphrag ndard sp portatio sta ll observe con g code the p regulations re stringent re l work specif ll ensure at a anent deform platforms sh ents .
all be respon m num. hall be desig he level of the rms shall be ed in the ins y on or outsid mes .
rt system t system shal s. e support for rt system for emblies shall ctor chooses he work the ne clevises a eel fabrication support syste gm forming s ecificati on and inf andard condi nstruction saf provincial reg having auth equirements s ically in refere all times that mation .
all be provide sible for the ned and con e girder botto e adequately stallation or r de of the spa l be provided r safety nets safety net lin be made ava to employ e contractor and the num mm shall conform em and the s hall commenc ions frastruc itions fety measure ulations perta hority provide shall apply .
ence to can no part of the ed by the co design and nstructed to m flange .
y fastened a removal of s andrel girders d by the contr s the contra nes as indica ailable by the safety nets shall supply m steel cable m to cancs safety nets m ce .
cture es as referenc aining to work ed that in a csa snum e work shall ontractor at th the construc provide a co and secured lab overhang s shall be pr ractor at the l actor shall s ated on the s owner from s as a mean y and instal e indicated on a snum and snum ust be in pla ced in but no kplace safety any case of and cancs be subjected he locations ction of the p ontinuous and to prevent g brackets or roperly secure ocations indic upply all ma tandard draw stock at dti f ns to satisfy l the hpnum n the standar num. ace before the item num page num ot limited to y andor any conflict or sa snum .
d to loading indicated in platforms in d unbroken accidental r any other ed to static cated in the aterials and wings num fredericton the safety numxnum steel rd drawings e deck slab sa pag num fety suppo ge num num .num onc net .num .num .num whe the asse ort system ce the safety cables clevis with the exce remain the pr the anchor b the end of the ere the contr safety requir embly and sh departm ms net system is ses and the h eption of the roperty of the bolts shall be e work .
actor choose rements for t all remain in sta ment of tr standard co s no longer re hpnumxnum st anchor bolts e contractor .
installed in th s to employ a the work the place at the e andard s ransport onditions equired in the teel sections .
all removabl he anchor bo a system othe e anchor bol end of the wo specifica tation an e work the c . le portions of olt assembly a er than safety lts shall be i ork .
ations nd infras contractor sh f the safety ne and shall rem y nets as a m nstalled in th tructur item num january num hall remove th et system sha main in place a eans to satis he anchor bo re num num he all at fy olt depa audit janua num num artment ted safety ary num descript .num this ite work p details .num the bid the cer nbcsa .num ten .num the co letter provide .num evi co .num evi eva aud .num the co stan of trans y program tion em outlines th performed on dder shall sub rtificate of re a or approv nders without ontractor sha of good sta e the following dence of co nstruction sa dence of an aluated by th dited safety p e contractor ntract .
ndard sp portatio sta he contractor this contract .
bmit as part o ecognition pro ved alternative t certification ll maintain a nding in p g or status fro afety associat audited safe he engineer u rogram will be shall mainta ecificati on and inf andard condi rs responsibil .
of their tende ogram by the e. at tender ope valid cor rocess certif m other mem tions using the ety program c using the nb e at the discr ain a valid c ions frastruc itions lities with res er a certificat e new brunsw ening will be r as evidenced fied by nbcs mber associa e nbcsa re certified by an bcsa safety retion of the e cor until fina cture pect to an au te of recognit wick constru rejected .
d by a letter sa .
alternativ ations of the eciprocal proc n independen audit instrum engineer .
al completion udited safety p tion cor is ction safety a r of good sta vely the con canadian fe cess or nt agency w ment .
accept n of all work item num page num program for ssued under association anding or a tractor may ederation of hich will be tance of an k under the depa cons janua num artment struction d ary num general .num the co includin .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num six cop profess schedu above .num the des .num drawin .num the co .num the .num .num .num .num the per .num at dev .num no fab drawing engine stan of trans drawings a ontractor sha ng but not lim bridge bearin bridge expan cofferdam in removal of o falsework formwork shop drawin shop drawin shoring temporary d filter screen shop drawin overhead sig large concre precast conc pies of the dra sional engine uled construct listed items .
e engineer s sign calculatio gs and desig ontractor shal e contractor r the contra construction the produc specified req that the c requirement e contractor s rson responsi the time of viations in the brication and gs and design er as per num ndard sp portatio and calcu sta all supply the mited to the fo ngs nsion joints cluding bracin obsolete brid gs of all meta gs for prestre etour structu gs for culvert gn structures ete pipes and crete box cul awings and tw eer shall be s tion demolitio shall in writi ons .
n calculations l review all sh represents by actor has d n conditions o t requiremen quirements a contractor ha ts of the work shall confirm ible .
submission e shop drawin or construct n calculations num num ecificati on and inf ulations andard condi e engineer w ollowing ng ge structures alwork essed concret res ts per num d lverts .
wo copies of submitted to on andor fabr ng to the co s shall be spe hop drawings y this review t etermined a or will do so nts catalogue and as checked k and the con this review o the contrac ngs from the r ion shall com s are required num and num ions frastruc itions with drawings s te beams num and num the design ca the engineer rication of any ontractor ac ecific to the pr prior to subm that and verified e numbers a and coordin ntract docum of each shop d ctor shall no requirements mmence on d until drawin num unless appro cture s and design num alculations st r at least num y of but not e cknowledge r roject for whic mission to the all field me nd similar da nated each ents .
drawing by da otify the eng of the contra any aspect ngs are receiv oved otherwis n calculations tamped and s days in adva exclusively lim receipt of dra ch they are su engineer .
easurements ata meet or shop drawin ate and sign gineer in writ act document of the work ved and retu se by the eng item num page num s for items signed by a ance of the mited to the awings and ubmitted .
and field exceed the ng with the ature of the ting of any ts .
k for which rned by the gineer .
co pag num num onstructio ge num num .num in a bea .num the draw .num .num .num draw as th .num wel .num .num .num .num the infor .num draw and the site num tempo .num the eng .num the num of t stru .num the .num the main exec .num the any ade on drawing addition to the ms shall supp contractor s wings .
the owner m for conforma identification not imply tha wings shall s he grades an ding done on welding with valid qualifie certified in ac welding outs accordance w welding to th contract doc provisions rmation are a wings bearing being those contractor p until the com rary acce contractors ineer .
contractor mber of the pr he work at ucture .
contractor s contractor ntenance an cution of cons contractor s property of quacy of any departm gs and cal e above note ply the engine shall not be r makes no co nce to the co of any discre t the owner i how clearly th dor species o any of the ab hin the provin ed welders c ccordance wit side the provi with csa wnum he permanen cuments or au defined unde also applicable g the seal an submitted an prior to the co pletion of the ess struct drawings for shall notify t rofessional en least one m hall submit dr shall have d removal of struction meth shall also be r the owner d temporary ac sta ment of tr lculations standard co ed drawings eer with two s relieved of re mmitment to ontract docum epancies from s providing a he size and s of all materia bove items sh nce of new b certificate issu th csa wnum .
ince of new b num. t structure sh uthorized in w er num num e to num. d signature o d received by mmencemen e work .
tures r temporary a the engineer ngineers wh month in adv rawings upon the sole r temporary su hods required responsible to due to the d ccess structu andard s ransport s onditions contractors sets of beam esponsibility f review the s ments either i m the require comprehens spacing of all ls .
hall conform t brunswick sh ued by the pr brunswick sh hall only be c writing by the num and of a professio y the enginee t of the work ccess structu in writing of ho will be res vance of the n request for responsibility upports struc d in their use .
o the owner t design const re .
specifica tation an supplying pre layout drawin for results ob submitted sho in part or in w ements of the ive identificat members an to the require all be perform rovince of new hall be perform carried out if e engineer .
num rela onal engineer er shall be m k detailed and ures shall be f the name ponsible for t construction r temporary ac for the de ctures and fa to make good truction main ations nd infras ecast prestre ngs .
btained by the op drawings whole .
e contract do tion of such d nd their conne ments of csa med by a we w brunswick med by a wel specifically in ating to the r as defined ade available d shall be ma prepared by and licence the design an n of the tem ccess structu esign erectio acilities and t d any damage ntenance su tructur item num january num essed concret e use of thes or calculation ocuments doe iscrepancies .
ections as we a wnum .
elder holding or by a welde lder certified ndicated in th owners soi under num e at the site b aintained at th a profession or registratio nd constructio porary acces ures .
on operatio the design an e which befal uitability ando re num num te se ns es .
ell a er in he ls num by he al on on ss n nd ls or depa cons janua num num artment struction d ary num .num the co further on the the ow purpose .num the co res .num the to t bor co .num the dim num .num item .num any su location express bidder the field .num the ow implied when m .num the co engine num .num the .num the par .num the design r .num structu the req stan of trans drawings a ontractor sha soils studies express unde wner in conne e. e data and ntractor may sponsible for o e contractor the suitability ring data stud ntractor .
e use of the o minish or dero num and num m num shall a ubsurface inf ns indicated .
sed or impl contractor th d data were c wner further that the pre made will be ontractor prio er written ce num that e structure ha e structure rameters and e structure is equiremen ral members uirements of ndard sp portatio and calcu sta ll be permitte or reports w erstanding tha ection with the information y erect tempo obtaining any hereby waive y adequacy a dies reports owners soil ogate in any w num. pply to the w formation ava the owner ied with re hat these cond collected .
makes no gu esence or ab representativ or to the load ertification sig as been cons has been c d ready to sup nts incorporated csa snum .
ecificati on and inf ulations andard condi ed access to hich may hav at these data e design of t may not be orary access y further data es any claim andor accura or other infor boring data a way from the work .
ailable is ba r makes no espect to an ditions are no uarantees re bsence of wa e of the actua ding of the te gned by the structed in acc constructed o pport the loads d into tempor ions frastruc itions the owners ve been prep and informat the permanen applicable t s structures and informati shehe may acy for the pu rmation availa and informatio responsibilitie ased on the guarantees ny such info ot necessarily epresentation ater on the s al conditions a emporary acc designated cordance with of sound ma s for which it rary detour s cture s soil boring d pared by the o tion have bee nt structures to the precis and the co ion required f have against urposes of th able from the on by the co es of the con investigation representat ormation an y typical and m s or warranti site and any at the time of cess structur professional h the contrac aterials cons was designed structures sha data and any owner or its en prepared a s only and f se locations ontractor shal for hisher pur t the owner w he contractor e owner and u ontractor sha ntractor noted n made at t tions warran d further ca may have cha ies either ex subsurface e f construction res shall pro l engineer i ctors plans sistent with d. all be design item num page num y applicable consultants and used by for no other where the ll be solely rposes .
with respect r of any soil used by the ll in no way d in num the specific nties either autions the anged since xpressed or explorations .
ovide to the dentified in the design ned to meet co pag num num num onstructio ge num num .num tim stru .num .num .num stru stru .num .num .num .num tem desi num gradin .num tim stam age .num tim .num stru .num .num .num num propr .num at t pres prop on drawing ber lumber a uctures shall b where timbe stresses for j num .
where timbe stresses for spf grade uctural steel uctures may b csa snum for csa standa allowance of floor beams i csa snum .
mporary conc igned to meet ng and mate ber and lum mped with th ncies authoriz ber piles used uctural steel s steel shall be steel membe design capac where the gr yield point of rietary sho the time of t senting allow posed to be in departm gs and cal and timber pile be designed t er and lumber joint and pla er and lumber r beam an no .
num. members in be designed to members su ard snum for m num on live is as specified rete footings t the requirem erial requ ber used in e grade mar zed to mark lu d in the falsew hall meet the e free of kinks ers with redu city of the me rade of the st f the steel is num oring form the construct wable loads ncorporated in sta ment of tr lculations standard co es incorporat to meet the re do not bear ank grades sh do not bear d stringer corporated in o meet the re bject to static moving loads loading is use d in csa snum or piers sup ments of csa uirements the construc rk used by t umber in can work shall me requirements s and bends a ced crossse mbers shall n teel members num mpa .
ms and acc tion drawing shall be sub nto the work .
andard s ransport s onditions ted into tempo equirements o a valid and le hall not excee a valid and le grades sha nto temporar quirements o c loads s such as c ed and the dis or pporting false a snum or aci st ction of false he canadian nada andor lu eet the require s of astm anum and shall hav ectional areas not be used .
s is not speci cessories submission bmitted for a specifica tation an orary works o of csa snum .
egible grading ed those per egible grading all not exce ry works oth of one of the fo cranes trucks stribution of w ework or oth tandard num. ework formw n lumber ma umber approv ements of cs num or csa gnum ve no welds ac s due to hole fied the eng the manufa any proprieta ations nd infras other than tem num. g stamp perm rmitted for sp g stamp perm eed those her than tem following s etc .
provid wheel loads to er such elem work shall b anufacturing ved by the en sa num .
numm grade cross the tens es cuts whic ineer shall as cturers tech ary element tructur item num january num mporary detou missible desig pf grade no missible desig permitted fo mporary detou ded an impa o stringers an ments shall b e graded an association o ngineer .
e numw .
sion flanges .
ch reduces th ssume that th nical literatur or compone re num num ur gn o. gn or ur ct nd be nd or he he re nt depa false janua num artment ework ary num general .num the co the wo .num the co of all fa .num the the .num the tec .num falsew and sub .num the co comple .num the co effects .num falsew .num the foll .num fal dea .num bra sho .num co the .num tim .num the mm .num fal loa slab .num fal ind .num the me .num sui up initi stan of trans ontractor shall rk in accordan ontractor shal alsework requ e contractor s e work so as t e contractor hniques seq work shall incl bstantially co ontractor sha eted structure ontractor shal on the comple ork design sh lowing conditi sework shall ad live wind a acing required own clearly on nnection poin computed de mber cap beam e minimum si m in diameter .
sework for s ds that would b placed at o sework shall icated in the c e falsework d embers under itable method any settleme ial set of the c ndard sp portatio sta l be responsib nce with item ll furnish con ired for the e shall have tot to ensure it co shall be sole uences and ude all tempo nstructed and all certify that result from th ll carry out th eted structure hall be in confo ons are the m be designed and stability lo d to maintain t n all drawings nts of bracing esign load but ms shall be co ize of bolts us upport of the d be imposed one time .
be constructe contract docu drawings shal total dead loa ds shall be us ent in the fals concrete has b ecificati on and inf andard condi ble for all fals num. nstruct erect rection of the tal control of t onforms to th ely responsib procedures a orary support d maintained t no perman he falsework d he work such e result from t ormance with minimum requi and construct oads .
the rigidity of .
members sha t not less than onnected to tim sed in the co e superstructu were the ent ed to produce uments .
ll clearly show ads .
ed to set the sework which been achieve ions frastruc itions sework design maintain an work .
the work and e falsework r ble for the de and for coord ts and founda to sustain the ent stresses design .
h that no per the falsework .
cancsa snum irements for a ted to provide the falsework all be designe n num of the e mber piles by onnection poin ure shall be d ire superstruc a finished str w the amoun forms to the h may occur d. cture n and constru nd subsequen d shall effectiv requirements .
esign constru dinating the va ations and sh e loads which or other de manent stres .
num and as all falsework d e the necessa k under all loa ed to develop effective stren y drift pins or e nts of bracing designed and cture except ructure true to nt of calculate required grad before or dur uction and sha ntly remove a vely direct an .
uction means arious parts o all be proper h will come up etrimental effe sses or other specified here design and co ary rigidity and ading conditio the strength ngth of the me equivalent .
g members sh d constructed portions abov o the lines and ed deflection de or camber ring placeme item num page num all carry out and dispose d supervise s methods of the work .
rly designed pon it .
ects on the detrimental ein .
nstruction d to support ons shall be required by embers .
hall be num d to support ve the deck d grades as of bending and to take nt and until fa pag num num num lsework ge num num .num num piles a .num fals .num mud .num .num .num .num piles .num .num whe scre num remov .num the be c be p .num fals inclu stren .num fals until com .num fals work anticipated to the falsework .num these sh .num anticipate engineer .num deck settle and founda sework shall b dsills shall only mudsills shal the soil bear may submit a on soil design engineer .
soil bearing p s shall be driv the contrac calculated se en steel scaff ews shall prov val release and carried out in permissible .
sework shall uding concret ngth .
sework suppo l the concrete mpressive stre sework shall king towards t departm otal settlemen k drawings .
hall include fal ed settlement r. k slab forms ement relative ations be founded on y be permitted l only be supp ring pressure an alternate be n parameters pressure shal ven to the bea ctor shall prov ervice load on folding type f vide full and ev or removal of a staged man not be remo te above the orting a contin e in all the spa ngth .
be removed the supports .
sta ment of tr standard co nts of falsewo lsework footin ts over num mm s between g e to the girders n solid rock or d if approved ported on a co under mudsi earing pressu determined b l be uniformly aring capacity vide verificati a timber pile falsework is ven force aga f temporary s nner and und oved until the bridge deck nuous or rigid ans of the con uniformly and andard s ransport onditions ork and forms ng settlement m will not be a irders shall s. supported on in writing by ompacted foun lls shall not e ure value supp by field testing y distributed ov as submitted ion of the ca shall not exce used by the ainst mudsills a supports brac der no circums e compressiv k reaches num frame struct ntinuous unit h d gradually b specifica tation an s shall be ind and joint take allowed unless be construct n driven timbe y the engineer ndation grade exceed num k ported by eng g methods su ver the entire in the falsew apacity to the eed num kn .
contractor t and ledger be cing tempora stances will a ve strength o of the spe ture shall not has reached num beginning at t ations nd infras icated by the eup .
s otherwise p ted with no er or steel piles r. e. kpa however gineering analy ubject to the a mudsill area .
work design .
e engineer .
the base plat eams .
ary members a sudden rele f the last pla ecified numda be removed num of the sp the centre of tructur item num january num e contractor o ermitted by th allowance fo s. the contracto ysis and base approval of th the maximu tes on all jac and guys mu ease of suppo aced concret y compressiv from any spa pecified numda f the span an re num num on he or or ed he m ck st ort e ve an ay nd depa false janua num num artment ework ary num .num falsew prestres .num falsew .num fal mm falsewor .num the co certifica in writin that the .num in a and .num of stan of trans ork for castin ssing steel ha ork piling sha sework piling m below the su rk certific ontractor shall ation by either ng and bearing e falsework ha accordance w d sound materia ndard sp portatio sta nplace prestr as been tensio ll be removed for the suppo urface of the o cation provide prio r a profession g the seal and as been const with the falsew als consistent ecificati on and inf andard condi ressed portion oned .
d. ort of structure original groun or to the place nal engineer o d signature of ructed work design s t with the desi ions frastruc itions ns of structure es over land s d or the finish ement of conc or a person de f a profession submitted in a ign parameter cture es shall not b shall be remo hed slopes w crete or the ap esignated by al engineer t accordance w rs .
be released un oved to a minim whichever is lo pplication of a a professiona to be compete with num a item num page num ntil after the mum of num ower .
any loading al engineer ent to certify and num depa form janua num artment mwork ary num general .num the co the wo .num the co of all fo .num the the .num the tec .num the co comple .num the co effects .num the we .num formwo .num the foll .num for all d .num bra clea .num flu pla the .num in n hea less .num for sur form .num .num .num on dist stan of trans ontractor shall rk in accordan ontractor shal ormwork requ e contractor s e work so as t e contractor hniques seq ontractor sha eted structure ontractor shal on the comple e contractor s bs of steel gir ork design sh lowing conditi rmwork shall dead and live acing required arly shown on id pressure a cing equipme concrete .
no case shall ad of concrete s than a num rms for expos rface of the co m stiffeners fo undulations form fastene should any concrete su modifications steel girder tribute the loa ndard sp portatio sta l be responsib nce with item ll furnish con ired for the er shall have tot to ensure it co shall be sole uences and all certify that result from th ll carry out th eted structure shall not weld rders .
all be in confo ons are the m be designed a loads .
d to maintain n the formwor s lateral thrus ent the plann wall forms o e and in no ca num mm head .
sed concrete oncrete does orm fasteners shall not exc ers form stiffe form or formin urface with s satisfactory structures tim ad to the top a ecificati on and inf andard condi ble for all form num. nstruct erect rection of the tal control of t onforms to th ely responsib procedures a t no perman he formwork d he work such e result from t d any form ha ormance with minimum requi and construct the rigidity of k drawings .
st on vertical f ned rate of pl over num mm ase shall colu surfaces sha not undulate s or wales .
eed num of eners or wales ng system ev excessive un y to the engin mber or steel and bottom fla ions frastruc itions mwork design maintain an work .
the work and e formwork re ble for the de and for coord ent stresses design .
h that no per the formwork .
angers chairs cancsa snum irement for al ted to provide f the formwork forms shall be acing concre m in height be umn forms ove all be designe excessively the centre to s or num mm wh ven though pr ndulations it eer have bee l posts shall b anges as deta cture n and constru nd subsequen d shall effectiv equirements .
esign constru dinating the va or other de manent stres s bar suppor num and as s l formwork de e the necessa k under all loa e correlated to te and the sl e designed for er num mm i d and constru in any directio centre distan hichever is sm reviously app ts use shall n made .
be used at ea iled on standa uction and sha ntly remove a vely direct an uction means arious parts o etrimental effe sses or other rts etc .
to the specified here esign and cons ary rigidity and ading conditio o the capacity ump and tem r less than num in height be d ucted so that on between s nce between s maller .
proved for use l be discont ach overhang ard drawing num item num page num all carry out and dispose d supervise s methods of the work .
ects on the detrimental e flanges or ein .
struction d to support ons shall be and type of mperature of num mm fluid designed for the formed studs joists studs joists e produce a tinued until g bracket to num .
fo pag num rmwork ge num num forms .num form stren .num mate bein .num surf mate .num form read .num .num plyw perm .num plyw .num .num .num .num form stru sand givin .num .num .num the appr .num .num form .num .num exp .num s ms shall be ngth to resist erials to be us ng used .
faces of and erials before c mwork shall b dy release of t the type of f and shall be a wood or steel mits the use o wood shall be plywood sha joists .
form panels horizontal joi ms for concret uctures expos ded face plac ng a true and plywood form placed vertica formed with n rectangular equal width p contractor m roval of the e edge contact ms shall be co column form osed sharp ed where wood straight grain departm smooth mor springing out sed for forms within forms concrete is pla be thoroughly the forms and form coating t applied in acc forms shall b of lumber in sm of a grade an all be placed shall be place nts shall be le te columns c ed to view sh ced against th high quality s ms for rectang ally .
all colum no vertical join columns with pieces of plyw may use boa ngineer .
t between boa onstructed so marks shall b dges shall be triangular fille lumber and s sta ment of tr standard co rtartight true of shape duri shall be thoro shall be cle aced .
coated with a d will not disco to be used sh cordance with be used for ex mall and intrica nd quality satis with the grai ed in a neat a evel and conti capbeams and hall be either he concrete o urface finish .
gular columns mns with the si nts within the f h the side dim ood .
ards to constr ards shall be s that form mar be symmetrica chamfered w ets or chamfe shall be plane andard s ransport onditions e to the requ ing placing of oughly cleaned aned of dirt a commercial olour the conc hall be submi the manufact xposed concr ate portions o sfactory to the n of the oute nd symmetric nuous and ve d all portions o faced with a or shall be a s shall be ma ide dimension face width .
mensions grea ruct the forms sufficient to m rks will confor ally spaced .
with num mm by er strips are e d on the side specifica tation an uired lines an f concrete .
d of all mortar chips sawdu quality form c crete .
itted to the e turers instruc rete surfaces of the work .
e engineer .
er plies perpe cal pattern .
ertical joints sh of abutments n exterior gra commercial g ade up of the ns equal to or ater than num s for concea make forms im rm to the gene y num mm triang employed the exposed to c ations nd infras nd grades an r and foreign ust nails and coating which engineer for w ctions .
except where endicular to th hall be stagge on overpass ade plywood grade steel fo e full num m less than num num mm shall b aled surfaces pervious to m eral lines of th gular fillets .
ey shall be mi concrete .
tructur item num january num nd of sufficie material befor d other foreig h will permit th written approv e the enginee he studding o ered .
and underpas gnums with th orm capable o mm long shee num mm shall b be formed wit subject to th mortar .
he structure .
lled from clea re num num nt re gn he val er or ss he of ts be th he ar depa form janua num num num num artment mwork ary num .num anchor support .num the be .num anchor .num spe .num re adj .num no form form ties .num internal .num rods b and so .num ties co .num forms form tie .num bracing corrosio .num tie wire specifie .num form ti below t deck for .num hanger minimu mm bel .num in the e cover o continu required .num if hang concret .num ho stan of trans r devices of a ting forms or f e use of drive permitted .
ring devices c ecified cover o movable anc acentsurroun ms shall be lef s and brac l form ties sha bolts or prefa arranged that nsisting of tw for outside su es shall extend g shall be capa on prevent es bolts hard ed cover minu es shall be o he finished su rmwork ha rs for deck fo m of num mm low the surfac event that the over the han ously from on d. ger removal le te mortar cons les less than ndard sp portatio sta a type approv for lifting prec en types of an castinplace o over embedde choring devi nding hardene ft in place .
cing all be metal an bricated units t the slack or isted wire loop urfaces shall d through and able of mainta tion dware and ot s num mm from f such a type urface of the c ngers ormwork shall below the su ce .
contractors ngers a con ne end of the eaves a hole sistent with th num mm may b ecificati on and inf andard condi ved by the e ast members chorages for or drilled shal ed metal anch ices shall b ed or partially nd of a type a s shall be cap spring in the f ps shall not be be constructe d fasten these aining the cor ther embedde m the concrete e that they ca concrete leavi be of a type urface .
galvan formwork des crete haunch e span to the e of num mm o e parent conc be filled with a ions frastruc itions engineer may .
fastening form ll be approved hors shall be m be removed hardened con approved by th pable of main form framing w e permitted .
ed with stiff w e wales .
rrect form align ed metal item e surface .
n be entirely ng no metal w e which can b nized hangers sign does not h extension m other .
no pa or more it sh crete and con an engineer ap cture y be cast into m or form sup d by the engin maintained .
without ca ncrete .
he engineer .
taining the co will be elimina wales at right nment and sta ms shall exten removed or c within num mm be completely s must be rem provide the a may be utiliz ayment will b hall be cleane taining latex .
pproved seala o the concrete pports to conc neer .
ausing dama orrect concret ated when tigh angles to the ability .
nd to within le cut back num m of the surface y removed or moved a min above indicate zed provided e made for th ed and patch ant such as v item num page num e for use in crete will not age to the te thickness htened .
e studs and ess than the mm or more e. removed a imum of num ed minimum it extends he concrete hed utilizing vulkem num .
fo pag num num num rmwork ge num num inspec .num tem facil .num .num .num whe conc or s prev .num num lines a .num form .num free align .num che requ .num num formw .num unle and .num mea doc ction openi mporary openi itate cleaning in restrictive debris .
openings sha ere deep sect crete is to be slope shall be vent upward b where top fo vent air or to and grades ms for girders ely suspende nment can be ecking and co uired before co all wedges sh work toler ess otherwise dimension sh asurement of c cuments will n departm ings ngs shall be p and inspectio areas openi all be closed w tions of concre placed contin e addressed bulge or flow .
orms are comp permit vibratin s and slabs sh ed check wir verified .
orrective wed oncrete is in p hall be hardwo rances required in th hall be as sho concrete in st not be affected sta ment of tr standard co provided at th on .
ngs shall be with patches ete are reduc nuously the e by providing plete or large ng of concrete all be camber es shall be ging or shori place .
ood .
he contract d wn in table num tructures calc d by the formw andard s ransport onditions he bottom of d located so t flush with the ced in cross se effect of fluid p partial form enough to tra e. red to achieve stretched at ng shall be c ocuments the num. culated on the work tolerance specifica tation an deep units su hat water ca e inside surfac ection as in s pressure on th tops that wi ap air slots o e the final line reasonable carried out ho e maximum d e dimensions es listed in ta ations nd infras uch as column n be used to ce of adjacent stepped footin he lower porti ll contain the or holes shall es and grades intervals fro orizontally an deviations from shown in the able num .
tructur item num january num ns and walls t o wash out th t panels .
ngs and wher ons of the ste e concrete an be provided t s. m which for nd vertically a m line grade contract re num num to he re ep nd to m as depa form janua num artment mwork ary num formwor .num the co certifica in writin that the .num in a and .num of stan of trans finished brid concrete bri columns pie va misplacemen cap beam an variation in s footings variation in s and wall ope rk certific ontractor shall ation by either ng and bearing e formwork ha accordance w d sound materia ndard sp portatio sta position in s dge deck v dge bearing b v ers walls bea v ariation in cros nt or eccentric nd bridge sea slab thickness mispl sizes and loca enings cation provide prio r a profession g the seal and as been constr with the formw als consistent ecificati on and inf andard condi tab formwork t structure variation from block or seat variation from ams and simil variations from ss sectional d city in piers ts s plan d acement or e ation of slab or to the place nal engineer o d signature of ructed work design s t with the desi ions frastruc itions ble num tolerance lim grades m tolerance grades m tolerance ar parts m true line imensions imensions eccentricity d ement of conc or a person de f a profession submitted in a ign parameter cture mits tole num num mm in an num num mm in num mm in a num mm num num mm num mm num num of footin direction of mi num mm num crete or the ap esignated by al engineer t accordance w rs .
erance num mm ny num m section num mm any direction ny numm section num mm num mm m num mm num mm g dimension i isplacement b num mm pplication of a a professiona to be compete with num a item num page num n n in but any loading al engineer ent to certify and num depa part janua num num artment nering ary num descript .num the co coopera method commu monitor partneri .num the ow supplie .num the par .num this pa achieve .num the ob within b .num this pa .num a repre develop the co worksho .num per per sup .num wh go dep invi .num the ma .num costs a semina shared .num eac wor .num follow by the c stan of trans tion oncept of pa ation among a dology for dev unication pro ring of team p ng wner encoura rs .
e owner antic rtnering and s artnership sha e reciprocal go bjectives are e budget on sch artnership shal esentative of pment semina ntract .
these op and the ag rsons required rsonnel the c pervisors as here appropria vernment d partment of f ited to attend .
e contractor anagers on the associated wit rteam buildin equally .
ch party shall rkshop sessio up workshops contractor and ndard sp portatio sta artnering is to all key players veloping a sp blem identific erformance .
ages partners cipates consid strongly recom all be structure oals .
effective and hedule and in ll be bilateral i the contracto arteam buildin e representat genda duratio d to be in atten contract desig well as key su ate represent elg works fisheries and o and the own e project team th partnering i ng workshop s be responsib ons .
s may be held d owner .
ecificati on and inf andard condi o develop a s in a contrac pirit of teamw cation and re ship with the derable mutua mmends enteri ed to draw on efficient con accordance w n makeup an or and a repr ng workshop ives shall ma on and location ndance shoul gn engineers ubcontractors tatives of majo safe nb de oceans dfo ner shall also m. ncluding the f shall be agree le for their ow d periodically t ions frastruc itions proactive ef ctual relations work and coo esolution con e contractor al benefit can ing into a volu n the strength ntract perform with plans and nd participatio resentative of which should ake arrangem n. d include but and the con .
or suppliers d epartment of o utilities and o be required facilitator and ed to by the o wn staffs wage throughout the cture ffort and spir ship .
it utilizes operation thro nflict escalati and its princ be achieved untary agreem hs of each org mance and co d specificatio n shall be tota f the owner s d be held befo ments to dete t are not limite ntractors ons department o natural res d municipal go d to have he facilities for a owner and the es and expen e duration of t rit of respect s a structured ugh shared g on procedure cipal subcont on the contr ment .
ganization to mpletion of th ns .
ally voluntary .
shall initiate a ore work com ermine attend ed to key nb site project m of environmen sources dnr overnments s ead office an a partnering d e contractor a nses during the the contract a item num page num t trust and d systematic goals open es and the ractors and ract through identify and he contract a partnering mmences on dees at the dti district manager and nt and local r canada shall also be dor district development and shall be e partnering as agreed to pa pag num num rtnering ge num num object .num in o com .num .num .num .num .num num statem .num the initia agre tives of th order for the mmitment to ho each shall fun each shall as each shall av each shall pro each shall co ment of int contractor is al work sched eement .
departm e partneri partnering pro onesty and int nction within t ssist in the oth void hindering oceed to fulfil ooperate in the tent s requested to dule under item sta ment of tr standard co ing proces ocess to suc tegrity agree t the laws and s ers performa the others pe its obligation e common end o indicate to t m num any in andard s ransport onditions ss ceed the co to the followin statutes applic nce .
erformance .
diligently .
deavour of the the owner no tentions rega specifica tation an ontractor and ng mutual obje cable to their d e contract .
o later than th rding entering ations nd infras the owner ectives duties and res he time of sub g into a volunt tructur item num january num with a positiv sponsibilities .
bmission of th tary partnersh re num num ve he ip depa valu janua num artment e engineer ary num descript .num the co modifyi reducin product proposa basis .
.num this ite which a howeve enginee .num the foll enginee .num a s .num a d val .num a s ow val .num sep val .num an eng .num a s the com .num the ow any oth .num the cha .num the eng attr .num unt term stan of trans ring tion ontractor may ng the plans g the total co t. if accepted al shall be sh em applies to a are identified er nothing h ering proposa lowing informa ering proposa statement that description of lue engineerin statement con wner together lue engineerin parate detaile lue engineerin itemization o gineering prop statement of th value engine mpletion date wner shall pro er proposal w e owner may ange order w e owner shal gineering pro ributable to an til a proposal ms and condit ndard sp portatio sta y submit to th s specificatio ost of constru d by the en hared by the c all value engi as such by t erein shall b al submitted he ation as a min al this proposal the difference ng proposal c ncerning the with an item ng proposal d cost estima ng proposal c of plan details posal is adopt he date by wh eering propos e. ocess the val which would ne y accept in w which shall iden ll not be liable oposal submit ny such propos is effected b tions of the ex ecificati on and inf andard condi e engineer i ons or other ction without gineer the n contractor and ineering propo the contracto be construed ereunder .
nimum shall b is submitted a e between the hange basis for the ization of the ates for both th hange design stan ted and hich approval sal during the ue engineerin ecessitate issu whole or in p ntify the value e to the cont tted pursuant sal .
by change o xisting contrac ions frastruc itions n writing a v requirements reducing des net savings r d the owner osals initiated or at the time as requiring be provided in as a value en e existing co e value engin e contract ite he existing co dards or spe must be issu remainder of ng proposal i uance of a co part any valu e engineering tractor for fai to this provi order the co ct. cture value enginee s of the con sign capacity resulting from on behalf of d and develop e of their subm g the engine n the written s ngineering pro ntract require neering propo ms and requ ontract require ecifications to ued to obtain t contract noti n the same m ontract chang e engineering g proposal on lure to accep ision nor for ntractor shall ering proposa tract for the or quality of m the value the crown o ped by the con mission to th eer to approv submission of oposal ements and th osal and ben irements affe ements and th be changed the total cost ng any effect manner as pre ge order .
g proposal b which it is bas pt or act upon any delays t remain oblig item num page num al vep for purpose of the finished engineering on a fiftyfifty ntractor and e engineer ve a value each value he proposed nefits to the ected by the he proposed if the value reduction of on contract escribed for by issuing a sed .
n any value o the work gated to the va pag num lue engine ge num num .num .num .num the subm adm .num the betw .num the for im .num the effec .num acce chan auth .num the con suita con .num prop diffe not n .num whe num alter effec .num the shal .num in a item final .num one appr shal cha unit eering when an ex contractors p the contracto terminated un the change net savings a savings be eq contractor s mission to the ministering a v cost of any ween the cont owner reserv mplementatio contractors cting all chang eptance of the nge the con horizing the va owner expre ntracts admini able for applic ntractor .
posed change erent rightof normally be co en a value en of article ii o rations of con cting the valu cost of the r ll be paid by th ddition to suc m one half of t cost of the re e half of the co roval of the v ll be paid upo ange order .
th or by the cha departm xecuted cha proposal spec or may subseq nless the cont order effectin agreed upon p qually divided shall absorb e owner .
cos value enginee redesign resu tractor and the ves the right t n of the propo fifty percent ges pursuant t e value engin ntract comple alue engineer essly reserves istered by the cation to othe es in the basi way limits or onsidered as ngineering pro of the articles ntract quantiti e engineering revised work he standard m ch payment t the difference evised work lis ontractors sha value enginee on completion he final payme ange order am sta ment of tr standard co nge order h cifies that a de quently have tractor further ng the necess provide for adj between the all costs incu sts incurred by ring proposal ulting from the e owner .
to include in t osal .
t share of th to the value e neering propo etion date un ring proposal .
s the right to a e owner wh er contracts w ic design of a r proposals in an acceptable oposal is acce of agreement ies shall not g proposal by as determin monthly progre the contracto net savings sted in the ch are of the esti ering proposal n of all items ent shall be d mount for the l andard s ransport onditions has not been ecision thereo specified in w r extends the a sary contract justment in th contractor an urred in prep y the owner shall be born e value engin the change o e net saving engineering p osal and perfo nless specific adopt a value en it determi without obliga a bridge or p nvolving work e value engin epted by the o t pertaining to apply to the change orde ed in the val ess estimates or shall be pa between the hange order .
imated net sav l change ord of work incl etermined by lump sum item specifica tation an n issued by on should be m writing evalua approval date modification s e contract pri nd the owner .
paring a valu in evaluating e by the own neering propo order any con gs shall cons roposal chan ormance of th cally provided e engineering ines the valu ation or comp pavement type k outside the neering propos owner the pro o adjustment o items adjuste er .
lue engineerin s. aid on a lum cost of the or vings shall be der .
the rema uded in the v the actual qu ms. ations nd infras j the date up made or such ation of the pro .
shall establish ices and indic e engineerin approving or ner .
osal shall be nditions it dee stitute full com nge order .
he work there d for in the g proposal for ue engineerin pensation of a e or changes scope of the sal .
ovisions of se of contract un ed or deleted ng proposal c mp sum basis riginal contrac e paid to the c ainder due to value engine uantities for ite tructur item num january num pon which th h other date a oposal shall b h the estimate cate that the n g proposal fo r rejecting an shared equal ms appropriat mpensation fo eunder shall n change orde general use ng proposal any kind to th s which requir contract sha ections num an nit price due t as a result change orde by a separat ct work and th contractor upo the contracto eering propos ems paid by th re num num he as be ed et or nd lly te or ot er in is he re all nd to of er te he on or sal he depa advis janua num num num artment sements ary num descript .num this ite work .
.num the fol familiar work s utilities .num utility p compan .num underg relocate .num delays basis o .num althoug concern either e no claim .num the co safegua .num the co relocate these in railways .num any rai be don level .
.num the co of the w be notif .num the co persons otherwi work w .num delays claim .
.num delays basis o .num notifica stan of trans tion em defines o lowing advise r with the con chedule or pr and instal poles lines a ny .
ground servic ed by others d due to work of claim .
gh the owne ning utility in expressed or m on that acc ontractor sha arding all exi ontractor sha ed utility inst nstallations .
s ilway crossing e by the appr ontractor shal work in the pr fied .
ontractor sha s whatsoever ise or indirec within the railw due to the a due to work of claim .
ation shall be ndard sp portatio sta other activitie ements may ditions of the rogression of llations ndor cables es including during the pe k performed b er makes eve nstallations th implied with count .
all assume fu sting and relo all be respon allations and g existing wit ropriate autho l notify the en roximity of the all be respons r and for any ctly results fro way row .
adjustment of k by the railw provided in th ecificati on and inf andard condi es and circum not apply to e contract in o work .
within the w but not limite eriod of the co by others rela ery reasonab he owner ma respect to an ll responsibil ocated utility nsible at his shall be resp thin the work ority and shal ngineer at lea e railway land sible at hish y damage to t om is caused the crossing way or sched he contract a ions frastruc itions mstances wh all contracts order to note work site shal ed to water s ontract .
ated to utility ble effort to c akes no gua ny such inform ity for determ installations d s own expen ponsible for a k site may re l be complete ast num days p ds so that the her own expe the property d by or is at by others s duling require at the time of t cture hich may inf s and the co what other a l be moved b sewer andor moves shall collect and p rantees repr mation and th mining exact during the pro nse for any any repairs re quire adjustm ed to conform prior to the co e appropriate ense for any of the railwa ttributable to shall not be c ements shall tender if app fluence the c ontractor shou ctivities may by the approp r drainage pip not be cons present comp resentations he contracto locations of ogress of the damage to esulting from ment and this m with the new onfirmed comm railways auth y injury or de ay having jur the performa considered as not be consi plicable .
item num page num contractors uld become limit hisher priate utility pes may be idered as a plete details warranties r shall have as well as work .
existing or damage to work shall w pavement mencement horities may eath to any isdiction or ance of the s a basis of dered as a ad pag num num num dvisements ge num num contr .num the acce .num .num .num noti prov num righto .num righ .num dela claim .num noti num other .num othe the shal .num wor work .num dela shal .num noti s rolled acc contractor s ess the follow in areas outs not be waive within the w the engineer fication as to vided in the c ofway htofway for ays resulting m. fication shall contract er contracts commencem ll have separa rk on this con k by others .
ays due to co ll not be a bas fication shall departm ess highwa should note th wing shall app side the work d to facilitate work site any r in order to en o the location contract at the the contract from the una be provided i ts andor the o ment of the co ate and distin ntract must be onflicts betwe sis for claim .
be provided i sta ment of tr standard co ay hat for highwa ply k site regula construction .
y access to th nsure the saf n and extent e time of tend may not be a availability of in the contrac owners forces ontract or ma ct completion e scheduled s een other co in the contrac andard s ransport onditions ays in the are tions pertaini .
he existing hig fe handling of t of controlled der if applica available befo rightofway ct at the time s may be con ay commence n dates .
so as not to in ntracts ando ct at the time specifica tation an ea of the con ng to a contr ghway shall b f traffic .
d access po able .
ore a specific y shall not be of tender if nducting work e during the nterfere with o or the owner of tender if ations nd infras ntract which h rolled access be only by pr rtions of hig date .
e considered applicable .
k that may be period of the or cause dela rs forces and applicable .
tructur item num january num have controlle highway sha rior approval o hway shall b d as a basis o e in progress a e contract an ays to any suc d this contra re num num ed all of be of at nd ch ct depa limite janua num num artment ed funds ary num descript .num the pro for the limited .num the typ determ .num under t the mea .num lim eng .num lim .num pr yea follo .num in carry limited equal to .num reques provision .num the fol and the .num the refe .num the wh fun .num the of t co .num the the .num in the e of the l the ow except funds .num the gre stand of trans tion ovisions unde provisions of d funds date .
pe of work is ine successfu this item and aning ascribe mited funds gineering and mited funds d resent fiscal ar in which th owing .
ying out the w d funds date o not less tha st for an exten ns lowing provis e payment the e value of th erence to pro e contractor ich work of a nds has been e owner shal the actual va ntract during e contractor e present fisc event the con limited funds wner at a pre sundays a date .
e penalty sha eater of the li dard spe portatio sta er this item a f the contract .
s not specifie ul performanc d as designate ed to them as means the d materials co date means year means he contract w work to be pe perform wo an num and n nsion to the lim sions apply to erefor he work perf gress claims shall cease w a value equal n completed .
ll not be oblig lue of the wo the present f shall not aga cal year once ntractor does s on or before escribed dail and statutory all continue to mited funds .
ecificatio on and inf andard condi re an amend t and provide ed rather the ce .
ed in the con follows e designated osts of the ow the specified s the fiscal ye was signed a erformed on th ork having a v not more than mited funds d o the work to formed in co approved by work on the c to not less th gated to pay t ork done or num fiscal year .
ain commence e the limited not perform w e the limited y rate as se y holidays th o be paid unti ons frastruc itions dment of sup for the comp e value of th ntract docume sum of mo wner d date year m ear of the ow and ending wi he contract value calcula n num of the date shall be o be done wit ompliance wit y the enginee contract in th han num an to the contra num of the l e work on th funds obliga work having funds date et out in the hat such sho il the value o cture pplementary to pletion of a po e work carri ents the follo ney which s month and da wner commen ith march num the contracto ated in accord e limited fund made as deta th respect to th this item er he present fis d not more th actor an amou limited fund he contract u ation has been a value equa the contract contract doc ortfall continu of work comp o and not in ortion of the w ed out shall owing phrases sum is exclus ay and ncing with ap of the year i or shall on or dance with th ds .
ailed in num. the limited f shall be det scal year on han num of unt exceeding s for work d until after the n completed .
al to or greate tor shall pay a cuments for ues beyond t pleted is equa item num page num substitution work by the be used to s shall have sive of the pril num of the mmediately r before the he contract funds date ermined by the day on the limited g the lesser done on the last day of er than num a penalty to each day the limited al to num or lim pag num num mited funds ge num num .num with fun agre num consid .num req con .num the thro .num .num .num s hout exceptio ds date sha eement of the derations f quests for con ntractor in acco owner may c ugh no fault o additional da that the extra additional da quantities tha work andor m an additional conditions ex .num the wo work time departm on nothing in ll alter the c e contract .
for adjust nsideration of ordance with g consider a req of the contract ays may be gr a work could n ays may be an those set f materials bea day may be xceeds num o ork time lost e lost due to w sta ment of tr standard co n these provis contract com tment f extension o general cond quest for adjus tor .
ranted for ext not be carried granted for in forth in the co rs to the initia granted for e of the contract t due to wea weather condit andard s ransport onditions sions with res mpletion date of the limited ditions b. stment to the l tra work perfo out without in ncreases in w ontract in the l work sched ach day that tors normal w ather form is tions .
specifica tation an spect to limi specified in d funds date limited funds ormed provid nterfering with work or mate same proport dule .
the number o working hours .
s considered a ations nd infras j ited funds a article i of e shall be su s date if the w ded the contra his work sch erial in great tion of time as of hours lost .
as official doc tructur item num january num nd the limite the articles o bmitted by th work is delaye actor can sho hedule .
ter amounts o s the addition due to weathe cumentation o re num num ed of he ed ow or al er of depa spec janua num num artment ified work ary num descript .num the pr describ the con .num under t the mea .num sp def .num sp co .num the co specifie owner .
.num in carry each s .num reques provision .num when m these p .num the no therefo .num the det .num in t wo out suc unt .num wit spe art stan of trans k tion rovisions und bed as specif ntract docum this item and aning ascribe pecified work finition of the pecified work ntract docum ontractor sha ed work dat .
ying out the pecified work st for an exten ns more than on provisions sha oted provision r. e specified termined by re the event the ork date the c t in the contra ch shortfall co til the specifie thout excepti ecified work icles of agree ndard sp portatio sta der this item fied work sha ents .
d as designate ed to them as k means a scope of the k date mean ments .
ll note that t te within the work to be p k date perfor nsion to the sp ne instance o all apply for ea ns following work perform eference to p contractor d contractor sh act document ontinues beyo ed work is co on nothing date shall alt ement of the c ecificati on and inf andard condi m specify tha all be comple ed in the con follows defined task work shall be ns the design here may be terms of the performed on rm the specif pecified work f specified w ach case exc shall apply t med and co rogress estim does not perfo hall pay a pen ts for each d ond the speci ompleted .
in these pro ter the contra contract .
ions frastruc itions at certain wo eted by the s ntract docume having a fin e fully describ nated date y e more than contract de n the contrac fied work in e date shall be work is identif clusively .
to specified ompleted in c mates approve orm the spec nalty to the ow day except s ified work da ovisions with act completio cture ork under th pecified work ents the follo nite and mea bed in the con year month d one instance epending on ct the contra each case .
e made as det fied in the co work to be compliance w ed by the eng cified work on wner at a pre sundays and ate and this s respect to s on date as sp he contract k date as de owing phrases asurable scop ntract docum day as spec e of specified the requirem actor shall o tailed in num ontract docum done and th with this item gineer .
n or before th escribed daily d statutory ho shall continue specified wo pecified in art item num page num hereinafter esignated in s shall have pe and the ments .
cified in the d work and ments of the n or before num ments then he payment m shall be he specified y rate as set olidays that e to be paid ork and the ticle i of the sp pag num ecified wo ge num num consid .num req con .num the dela .num .num .num ork derations f quests for con ntractor in acco owner may ayed through n additional da that the extra additional da quantities tha work andor m an additional conditions ex .num the wo work tim departm for adjust nsideration of ordance with g consider a r no fault of the ays may be gr a work could n ays may be an those set f materials bea day may be xceeds num o ork time lost e lost due to w sta ment of tr standard co tment f extension of general cond request for ad contractor .
ranted for ext not be carried granted for in forth in the co rs to the initia granted for e of the contract t due to wea weather condi andard s ransport onditions f the specifie ditions b. djustment to tra work perfo out without in ncreases in w ontract in the l work sched ach day that tors normal w ather form is itions .
specifica tation an ed work date the specified ormed provid nterfering with work or mate same proport dule .
the number o working hours .
s considered a ations nd infras j e shall be su d work date ded the contra hisher work erial in great tion of time as of hours lost .
as official doc tructur item num january num bmitted by th if the work actor can sho schedule .
ter amounts o s the addition due to weathe cumentation o re num num he is ow or al er of depa comp janua num num artment pletion dat ary num descript .num the co contrac .num in the specifie in the c shortfa the wo .num reques consider .num reques contrac .num the ow delayed .num add sho sch .num add qu wo .num an con .num stan of trans te tion ompletion dat ct documents event the co ed the contra contract doc ll continues b ork is complete st for an exten rations fo sts for consid ctor in accord wner may co d through no ditional days ow that the e hedule .
ditional days antities than t ork andor mat additional da nditions excee the work t work time los ndard sp portatio sta te shall be as s. ontractor doe actor shall pa uments for e beyond the sp ed .
nsion to the c r adjustm deration of e dance with ge onsider a req fault of the co s may be gra extra work c may be gra those set forth terials bears to ay may be gra eds num of th time lost du st due to weat ecificati on and inf andard condi s stated in the es not comple ay a penalty t each day ex pecified comp completion da ent extension of eneral condit quest for adj ontractor .
anted for extr could not be nted for incre h in the contr o the initial w anted for each he contractors ue to weathe ther condition ions frastruc itions e articles of a ete the work to the owner xcept sunday pletion date a ate shall be m the complet ions b. justment to t ra work perf carried out w eases in wo ract in the sam work schedule h day that the s normal work er form is co s. cture agreement a k on or befo at a prescrib s and statu and this shall made as deta tion date sha the completi formed provi without interf rk or materia me proportion .
e number of h king hours .
onsidered as ndor as spec re the comp bed daily rate utory holidays continue to b iled in num. all be submit on date if th ided the con fering with hi al in greater n of time as th ours lost due official docum item num page num cified in the pletion date e as set out s that such be paid until tted by the he work is ntractor can isher work amounts or he additional e to weather mentation of standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num staking for back of ditch and shoulder offsets at right of way as shoulder and bod staking is done reference stakes should be set next to the right of way .
as the shoulder and bod stakes are graded the reference stakes should also be graded .
this will enable the contractor the engineer andor others to check the grades without having to set up stake and grade .
the front face of the reference stake should indicate the offset distance to the shoulder as well as the grade .
the back face of the reference stake should indicate the offset distance to the back of ditch as well as the grade .
the edge of the reference stake can be used to reference the stationing .
standard stake markings january num standard conditions standard drawing num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num safety net support system abutments january num standard conditions standard drawing num file num details of support system for side elevation of abutment to be a max.of num mm larger than hp num x num holes for anchor bolt see note num see note num holes for anchor bolt see note num hp numxnum num num notes cable to be nummm cable numxnum seale improved plow steel preformed lang lay i.w.r.c .
anchor bolt anchor bolt see note num anchor bolt clevis allowable load hp num xnum front face of front face of breastwall bridge seat bridge seat a section a section b conforming to astm anum .
anchor assemblies bridge contractor .
anchor bolt assembly to be acrow richmond assembly drilled hole for pin num tonnes minimum at working stress is c drilled hole l assembly assembly see note num to be supplied by d.t.i .
and installed by b safety net lines at abutments cable breastwall l c l c cl l c num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num safety net support system piers january num standard conditions standard drawing num file num hp numxnum see note num section b clevis allowable load at working stress is num tonnes minimum bolt assembly holes for anchor bolt see note num hp num xnum anchor bolt top of capbeam at outside edge pier and anchor side elevation of pier num num notes anchor bolt assembly to be acrow anchor bolts conforming to astm anum .
anchor assemblies to be supplied by d.t.i .
and installed by bridge contractor .
cable to be nummm cable numxnum seale improved plow steel preformed lang lay i.w.r.c .
safety net lines at piers hp numxnum see note num top of capbeam section a c drilled hole for max .
of nummm larger holes for anchor bolt see note num assembly bolt assembly num num drilled hole pier and anchor cable see note num l num for pin details of support system for b a l c cl num num l c cl num num num num num num num num num num num standard specifications department of transportation and infrastructure standard drawings item num deck overhang bracket steel girder january num standard conditions standard drawing num appendix province of new brunswick short form contract crown construction contracts act short form contract province of new brunswick numenum this contract made in duplicate this day of num between her majesty the queen in right of the province of new brunswick represented herein by the minister of transportation and infrastructure herein after referred to as the owner of the first part andhereinafter referred to as the contractor of the second part .
witnesseth that in consideration of the mutual covenants and agreements herein contained and subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter set out the parties covenant and agree as follows num .
the owner shall a pay to the contractor in consideration of the work to be performed by the contractor the sum of which sum shall be subject to i a five percent holdback where a performance bond a labour and materials payment bond or a security deposit is applicable to the contract .
ii a fifteen percent holdback where no such bonds or security deposit is applicable and the contract value is greater than five thousand dollars or iii a fifteen percent holdback where no such bonds or security deposit is applicable the contract value is five thousand dollars or less and the owner has in section num elected to retain a holdback .
b pay the holdback monies to the contractor less any portion thereof or properly retain by the owner upon the expiration of sixty days from completion of the work and c make the payment set out in paragraph a less holdback upon completion of the work num .
the contractor shall a perform the work described in section num in accordance with the terms of this contract the tender documents and the specifications attached hereto if any b furnish all plant labour equipment tools and materials other than those supplied by the owner in accordance with section num necessary to complete the work and c complete the work to the satisfaction of the engineerarchitect on or before the day of num .
num .
this contract is subject to the following terms and conditions a time is of the essence b as far as practicable new brunswick labour and material shall be utilized by the contractor c the contractor shall not without the prior written consent of the owner assign or sublet all or any portion of this contract d no claim for extra work shall be recognized by the owner unless approved in writing by the engineerarchitect e the contractor shall allow officers of the owner free access to the work and f the engineerarchitect may in writing designate persons to act on his behalf .
num .
the owner will supply the following materials free on board the location indicated if none indicate na na or as per the department of transportation and infrastructure standard specifications and particular specifications num .
num this contract is a lump sum unit price num the contractor shall complete the following described work in accordance with the terms of this contract and if a unit price contract carry out that work at the prices set out herein .
the attached tender submission and marked f forms part of this contract the following attached articles of agreement form part of this contract num .
general conditions for building moves and marked b num .
addendum no .
and marked c num .
insurance schedule and marked e num .
tender submission and marked f num .
particular specifications and marked g num .
plans and specifications and marked g num .
affidavit and marked i all work shall be carried out according to the department of transportation and infrastructure standard specifications and under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the district transportation engineer or hisher representative .
all work shall be carried out under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the district transportation engineer n.b .
or hisher representative .
all work shall be carried out under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the department of transportation and infrastructure director of fredericton n.b .
or hisher representative .
num .
if this section is initialled by the owner it signifies that the owner has elected to retain a holdback and if not initialled that he has elected not to retain a holdback .
initials num .
the contractor certifies that he now has and will keep in force during the term of the contract liability insurance per the attached confirmation of coverage .
num .
the contractor hereby agrees to indemnify and save harmless the owner from and against all claims demands suits actions or proceedings which may now or hereafter be brought maintained or instituted against the owner by any person arising out of in relating to occasioned by or in any way attributable to the carrying out of the work hereunder by the contractor his subcontractors suppliers servants or agents or in any way relating to the infringement of any patent or copyright by any of them in relation to the work .
in witness whereof the respective parties have executed this contract on the day and year first above written owner signature minister of transportation and infrastructure witness contractor signature witness contract no project no file project name issued by the department of transportation and infrastructure issued to award of contract recommended deposit c. cheque no deposit deposit bonds province of new brunswick standard construction contract crown construction contracts act project index to standard construction contract i articles of agreement ii terms of payment t.p .
num total payment num detail of paragraph numa num detail of paragraph numb num progress payments num claim payment not acceptance num owners delay in payment num owners right of setoff num payment when contract terminated num interim release of holdback iii general conditions g.c .
num definition of terms references and interpreting documents num contract binding num assignment num subcontracting num scope of work num no implied obligation num time of the essence num indemnity by contractor num indemnity by owner num elected members num serving notices num adjustments due to soil conditions neglect or delay num owners title to plant etc .
num contractors liability for damage to owners plant num extension of time and penalty for delay in completion num default or removal of work from contractor num contractors continuing obligation num suspension of work num termination of contract num payment by owner of contracting obligations num access to work by owner num clean up num contractors superintendent num removal of contractors employees g.c .
num escalation labour materials num use of local labour and material num safety num protection of work num public ceremonies num insurance num fire loss num contractors responsibilities num interpretations of contract documents claims arising num defects and omissions num owners right to complete work num contractors rights on disputed decision num changes in the work num relations with other contractors num interim certificate of completion num conversion of security deposit num return of security deposit num permits and licences num determination of cost unit price num determination of cost agreement num determination of cost cost plus num definition or determination of cost num maintain records by contractor num work schedule num cost breakdown of lump sum work num contractors job office num record of imported plant num copy purchase orders num arbitration articles of agreement page num articles of agreement these articles of agreement made in duplicate this day of num between her majesty the queen in right of the province of new brunswick represented herein by the minister of transportation and infrastructure referred to in the documents forming the contract as the owner and_________________________ a duly incorporated company under the laws of the province of new brunswick referred to in the documents forming the contract as the contractor witness that the owner and the contractor covenant and agree as follows article i the contractor shall in a careful and workmanlike manner execute the following work within the time herein limited which work is more particularly described in the documents that are attached hereto entitled plans and specifications marked g referred to in the documents forming the contract as the plans and specifications at the place and in the manner therein set out .
article ii num the owner shall pay to the contractor as consideration for the execution of the portion of the work to which the fixed price arrangement is applicable the sum of subject to any additions or deductions provided for in these articles the general conditions the terms of payment or the labour conditions except any addition or deduction which is expressly stated to be applicable only to a unit price arrangement at the times and in the manner set out or referred to in the document that is attached hereto entitled terms of payment and marked a referred to in the documents forming the contract as the terms of payment .
num the owner shall pay to the contractor as consideration for the execution of the portion of the work to which the unit price arrangement is applicable a sum equal to the number of units of measurement of each class of labour plant or material actually performed used or supplied by the contractor in the execution of the work as measured by the engineerarchitect and set out in the engineerarchitects final certificate multiplied by the price of each such unit of measurement as set out in the unit price table as added to or amended in accordance with subsections num num and num such sum being subject to any additions or deductions provided for in the general conditions terms of payment labour conditions except any addition or deduction which is expressly stated to be applicable only to a fixed price arrangement at the times and in the manner set out or referred to in the document that is attached hereto entitled terms of payment and marked a referred to in the documents forming the contract as the terms of payment .
num the engineerarchitect and the contractor may by agreement in writing add to the unit price table as set out in the contract documents classes of labour plant or material together with units of measurement prices per unit and estimated quantities therefor where any labour plant or material which will be included in the engineerarchitects final certificate is not included in any class of labour plant or material set out in the unit price table .
articles of agreement page num num the engineerarchitect and the contractor may by agreement in writing amend the price per unit set out in the unit price table for any class of labour plant or material included therein where an estimated quantity is set out therein for that class of labour plant or material if the engineerarchitects final certificate shows or will show that the total quantity of that class of labour plant or material performed used or supplied by the contractor in executing the work is less than seventyfive percent of that estimated quantity and the price per unit agreed under this subsection shall apply to the number of units supplied .
num the engineerarchitect and the contractor may by agreement in writing amend the price per unit set out in the unit price table for any class of labour plant or material included therein where an estimated quantity is set out therein for that class of labour plant or material by establishing a price per unit for units of that class of labour plant or material performed used or supplied by the contractor in executing the work which are in excess of one hundred and twentyfive percent of that estimated quantity and the price per unit agreed to under this subsection shall be applicable only to those units which are in excess of one hundred and twentyfive percent of the estimated quantity .
num for the information and guidance of the contractor and the persons administering the contract on behalf of the owner but not so as to constitute a warranty representation or undertaking of any nature either by the owner to the contractor or by the contractor to the owner it is estimated that the total amount payable by the owner to the contractor for the portion of the work to which the unit price arrangement is applicable is. . num section num is not applicable where the unit price arrangement applies to the whole of the work .
num section num is not applicable where the fixed price arrangement applies to the whole of the work .
article iii num subject to sections num and num of this article bound documents a and b in addition to attached documents c d e f g and h hereto entitled a terms of payment and marked a b general conditions and marked b na c supplementary general conditions and marked c if none insert not applicable na d labour conditions and marked d e insurance schedule and marked e f tender submission and marked f g plans and specifications and marked g na h posttender documents and marked h and i affidavit and marked i all form part of the contract between the owner and the contractor .
num any provisions of these articles the terms of payment and the general conditions which are expressly stated to be applicable only to a unit price arrangement are not applicable to the whole or to the portion of the work to which the fixed price arrangement is applicable .
num any provisions of these articles the terms of payment and the general conditions which are expressly stated to be applicable only to a fixed price arrangement are not applicable to the whole or to the portion of the work to which the unit price arrangement is applicable .
articles of agreement page num article iv num with respect to the execution of the work by the contractor a the security deposit having a current market value of that has been deposited with the owner by the contractor for the due fulfilment of the contract shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions concerning security deposit in the general conditions or b a surety company has furnished or has undertaken to furnish a performance bond insert details name of company amount date etc .
and a labour and material payment bond insert details name of company amount date etc .
which bond or bonds shall operate according to their tenor .
num where bonds are provided under paragraph numb the contractor shall post on the site of the work a notice that a labour and material payment bond is in force together with the name and address of the surety company thereunder a definition of those persons protected thereunder and outline of the procedure for submitting a claim thereunder .
article v for all purposes of or incidental to the contract the contractors address shall be deemed to be article vi the unit price table is the unit price table contained in the tender .
signed sealed and delivered in the presence of witness the owner minister of transportation and infrastructure witness the contractor terms of payment page a num terms of payment a a total payment num subject to the provisions of sections num and num of the general conditions the owner shall pay to the contractor at the times and in the manner hereinafter set out the amount by which a the aggregate of the amounts described in section num exceeds b the aggregate of the amounts described in section num and the contractor shall accept the payment as full consideration for everything furnished and done by him in respect of the work .
detail of paragraph numa num the amounts referred to in paragraph numa are a the amount payable to the contractor pursuant to article ii of the articles of agreement b the amount if any payable to the contractor pursuant to section num of the general conditions relating to soil conditions neglect or delay c the amount if any payable to the contractor on account of a suspension of work pursuant to section num of the general conditions d the amount if any payable to the contractor pursuant to section num of the general conditions relating to work not required to be done under the contract but done by the contractor under a disputed decision or direction of the engineerarchitect and e the amount if any payable to the contractor by reason of an order or change pursuant to section num of the general conditions .
detail of paragraph numb num the amounts referred to in paragraph numb are a the amount if any payable to the owner pursuant to section num of the general conditions relating to soil conditions b the amount if any which the contractor is liable to pay to the owner pursuant to section num of the general conditions relating to damage to the owners material plant and real property c in the event of a delay in completing the work the amount payable to the owner pursuant to section num of the general conditions d the amount if any paid by the owner in satisfaction of obligations of the contractor or a subcontractor pursuant to section num of the general conditions or pursuant to the labour conditions page a num terms of payment e the amount if any payable by the contractor to the owner pursuant to section num of the general conditions relating to matters done by the owner which the contractor refused or failed to do and f the amount if any by which the cost of the work to the contractor was decreased by reason of dispensations or changes pursuant to section num of the general conditions .
progress payments num for the purposes of this section payment period means an interval of thirty days or such other interval as the contractor and engineerarchitect agree upon .
num the contractor and engineerarchitect shall either before or immediately after the signing of the articles of agreement agree on a schedule of provisional unit prices to be used in the preparation of progress claims .
num on or after the end of each payment period a progress claim in writing showing the amount of each class of work performed and materials furnished during such payment period with the value thereof computed in accordance with the schedule of provisional unit prices where applicable or the table of unit prices where applicable shall be prepared by the contractor and submitted in triplicate to the engineerarchitect for approval .
num the engineerarchitect shall within ten days endorse his approval or amended approval on the copies of the progress claim after making such alterations therein as he may deem proper and shall forward one copy to the owner return one copy to the contractor and retain one copy in his possession and the progress claim so approved shall be the basis of the payment by the owner under subsection num .
num in respect of each progress claim the contractor shall deliver to the owner a a statutory declaration deposing or b if required by the owner documentary proof verifying the fact that all his lawful obligations to subcontractors workmen and suppliers of material in respect of the work as at a date not greater than fortyfive days prior to the date of the progress claim have been fully discharged .
num the owner shall within twenty days after receipt of the approved progress claim from the engineerarchitect and receipt of the statutory declaration or proof of payment required under subsection num pay to the contractor an amount equal a when a labour and material payment bond was required of and furnished by him to ninetyfive percent of the amount of progress claim or b when a security deposit was required of and furnished by him to eightyfive percent of the amount of the progress claim .
num upon the expiration of sixty days from the date of issuance of an interim certificate of completion under subsection num of the general conditions or thirty days after the contractor has delivered to the owner an invoice approved by the engineerarchitect showing the method by which the amount claimed therein was calculated whichever is the later date and if the contractor has made and delivered to the owner his statutory declaration deposing or proof of payment if required by the owner verifying the fact that all his lawful obligations to subcontractors workmen and suppliers of material in respect of the work are fully discharged and that all other lawful claims against him in respect of the work including workers compensation assessments have been satisfied or provided for the amount described in section num as estimated by the engineerarchitect less the aggregate of a all payments made pursuant to subsection num terms of payment page a num b an amount equal to double the estimated cost to the owner of completing the items and doing the things described in the interim certificate of completion which in the opinion of the engineerarchitect are brought about by defects and faults in the work c an amount equal to double the cost to the owner of completing the items and doing the things described in the interim certificate of completion other than items or things to which paragraph b applies d all payments made pursuant to section num and e all amounts retained pursuant to a maintenance and guarantee provision if any contained in the contract shall become due and be payable by the owner to the contractor .
num upon the expiration of sixty days from the date of issuance of the final certificate of completion under subsection num of the general conditions or thirty days after the contractor has delivered to the owner an invoice approved by the engineerarchitect showing the method by which the amount claimed therein was calculated whichever is the later date and if the contractor has made and delivered to the owner his statutory declaration or proof of payment if required by the owner verifying the fact that all his lawful obligations and lawful claims against him arising out of the work have been discharged and satisfied the amounts described in section num less the aggregate of a all payments made pursuant to subsection num b all payments made pursuant to subsection num c all payments made pursuant to section num and d all amounts retained pursuant to a maintenance and guarantee provision if any contained in the contract shall become due and be payable by the owner to the contractor .
num where the contractor does not provide the owner with a statutory declaration or proof of payment required by subsection num num or num within the time limited therein the owner may withhold payment of the monies which would otherwise have become due until such time as the statutory declaration or proof of payment is provided by the contractor to the owner and the owner during this period of time shall not be required to pay interest as provided for in section num .
claim payment not acceptance num neither a progress claim nor a payment by the owner pursuant thereto shall be construed as evidence that the work material or any part thereof is complete is satisfactory or is in accordance with the contract .
owners delay in payment num delay by the owner in making a payment when it becomes due and is payable shall if the delay continues for more than fifteen days entitle the contractor to interest on the overdue payment and the owner shall pay to the contractor interest thereon from the said fifteenth day until paid at the rate being charged by the canadian chartered banks in fredericton on prime commercial accounts as of the date from which such interest was payable .
owners right of set off num without restricting any right of setoff given or implied by law the owner may setoff against any amount payable to the contractor under the contract any amount payable to the owner by the contractor under this contract or under any current contract and without restricting the page a num terms of payment generality of the foregoing the owner may when making payment pursuant to section num deduct from the amount payable any amount which is then payable to the owner or the province of new brunswick by the contractor under the contract or which by virtue of the right of setoff may be retained by the owner .
num for the purposes of this section current contract means a a contract between the owner and the contractor under which the contractor has an undischarged obligation to perform or supply work labour or materials or b a contract between the owner and the contractor in respect of which the owner has since the date on which this contract was entered into exercised the right to take the work the subject of that contract out of the contractors hands .
payment when contract terminated num in the event that the contract is terminated pursuant to section num of the general conditions the owner shall as soon as is practicable under the circumstances pay to the contractor the amount if any payable to the contractor pursuant to that section .
interim release of holdback num the owner may at any time but not more than twice during the term of the contract on the written application of the contractor and with the approval of the surety pay to the contractor all or a portion of the percentage amounts retained up to that time in respect of payments on progress claims under subsection num .
num subject to the approval of the surety the making of any such payment and the amount thereof are wholly in the discretion of the owner .
general conditions page b num general conditions b b definition of terms num in the documents forming the contract unless the context otherwise requires engineerarchitect means the of and includes a person authorized by him to perform on his behalf any function under the contract herein hereby hereof hereunder and similar expressions refer to the contract as a whole and not to any particular subdivision or part thereof material includes all materials commodities articles and things required to be furnished under the contract for incorporation in the work owner means that minister agency or corporation set forth in the articles of agreement as the owner plant includes all animals tools implements machinery vehicles buildings structures equipment articles and things required for the execution of the work security deposit means the security given by the contractor to the owner in accordance with the contract subcontractor means a person firm or corporation having a contract with the contractor a for the execution of a part or parts of the work included in this contract or b for the furnishing of material called for in this contract and worked to a special design according to the plans and specifications provided such contract is made pursuant to section num superintendent means the employee of the contractor who is designated by the contractor as being in full charge of the field operations of the contractor for the purposes of the contract work includes all labour material and services required as shown or described in the contract supplied and installed or erected complete at the place of building .
num the marginal notes if any in the contract documents form no part of the contract but shall be deemed to be inserted for the convenience of reference only .
references num unless the context otherwise requires where in a contract document reference is made to a section subsection or paragraph the reference is deemed to be a reference a in the case of section to a section in the contract document b in the case of a subsection to a subsection of the section and page b num general conditions c in the case of a paragraph to a paragraph in the section or subsection in which the reference appears .
interpreting documents num in interpreting the contract in the event of discrepancies or conflicts between anything in the plans and specifications and the general conditions the general conditions shall govern .
num in interpreting the plans and specifications a in the event of discrepancies or conflicts between the plans and specifications the specifications shall govern b in the event of discrepancies or conflicts between the plans the plans drawn with the largest scale shall govern and c in the event of discrepancies or conflicts between figured dimensions and scaled dimensions the figured dimensions shall govern .
contract binding num the contract shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the parties hereto and their heirs executors administrators successors and assigns .
assignment num the contract may not be assigned without the written consent of the owner and until sections num and num of the financial administration act chapter fnum of the revised statutes of new brunswick num have been complied with where applicable .
subcontracting num except for the subcontracting proposed by the contractor in his accepted tender neither the whole nor any part of the work may be subcontracted by the contractor without the consent of the engineerarchitect .
num every subcontract by the contractor whether as proposed in the approved tender or as approved by the engineerarchitect under subsection num shall provide that the subcontractor shall comply with all terms and conditions of this contract which can reasonably be applied to his undertaking including without limiting the generality of the foregoing the provisions of section num .
scope of work num the description of the work and material set out in the contract includes not only the particular kind of work and material mentioned but also all labour plant and material necessary for the full execution completion and delivery ready for use of the work and material .
num the contractor shall provide everything necessary for execution of the work except things in respect of which the contract expressly provides otherwise and except the site of work if the work when completed is to remain permanently affixed thereon .
no implied obligation num no implied obligation of any kind by or on behalf of the owner shall arise from anything in the contract and the express covenants and agreements herein contained and made by the owner are and shall be the only covenants and agreements upon which any right against the owner are to be founded and without limiting the generality of the foregoing the contract general conditions page b num supersedes all communications negotiations and agreements either written or oral relating to the work and made prior to the date of the contract .
time of the essence num time is of the essence of the contract .
indemnity by contractor num except as provided in section num the contractor shall indemnify and save harmless the owner from and against all claims demands losses costs damage actions suits or proceedings by whomsoever made brought or prosecuted in any manner based upon arising out of related to occasioned by or attributable to the activities of the contractor in executing the work under the contract or to an infringement or an alleged infringement by the contractor of a patent of invention .
num for the purposes of subsection num activities includes an act improperly carried out an omission to carry out an act and delay in carrying out an act .
indemnity by owner num the owner shall indemnify and save harmless the contractor from and against all claims demands losses costs damage actions suits or proceedings arising out of his activities under the contract which are directly attributable to a a lack of title a defect in title or an alleged lack of title or defect in title to the site of the work or b an infringement or an alleged infringement of any patent of invention in executing anything for the purposes of the contract the model plan or design of which was supplied by the owner to the contractor .
elected members num no member of the legislative assembly of the province of new brunswick shall be admitted to any share or part of the contract or to any benefit arising therefrom .
num no member of the house of commons of canada shall be admitted to any share or part of the contract or to any benefit arising therefrom if government of canada funds are involved whether directly or indirectly in the payment for or financing of such contract .
serving notices num notices for the purposes of paragraph numa section num and section num shall be in writing and shall a be delivered to the contractor in person or if the contractor is a corporation or partnership be delivered to the superintendent or to a senior administrative officer of the corporation or partnership or b be sent by mail to the contractor or his superintendent addressed to the address mentioned in the contract and if any question arises as to when any such notice was given to or received by the contractor it shall be deemed to have been sufficiently given to and received by him c if it was delivered pursuant to paragraph a on the day it was delivered or d if it was sent by mail pursuant to paragraph b on the day it was received by the contractor or on the sixth day after it was mailed whichever is the earlier .
page b num general conditions num any notice order direction decision or communication other than a notice to which subsection num refers which may be given to the contractor pursuant to the contract may be given in any manner but it shall be deemed to have been sufficiently given to the contractor if it was put in writing and the writing was a delivered to the contractor in person or if the contractor is a corporation or partnership was delivered to the superintendent or to a senior administrative officer of the corporation or partnership b left at the contractors office or if he has more than one office at one of them or c sent by mail to the contractor or his superintendent addressed to the address mentioned in the contract or to the contractors last known place of business or residence .
adjustments due to soil conditions neglect or delay num no payment in addition to the payment expressly promised by the contract shall be made by the owner to the contractor on account of any extra expense loss or damage incurred or sustained by the contractor including a misunderstanding on the part of the contractor as to any fact whether or not such misunderstanding is attributable directly or indirectly to the owner or any of the owners agents or servants and whether or not any negligence or fraud on the part of the owners agents or servants is involved unless in the opinion of the engineerarchitect the extra expense loss or damage is directly attributable to a a substantial difference between information relating to soil conditions at the site of the work or a reasonable assumption of fact based thereon in the plans and specifications or other documents or material communicated by the owner to the contractor for his use in preparing his tender and the real soil conditions encountered at the site of the work by the contractor when executing the work or b neglect or delay occurring after the date of the contract on the part of the owner in providing any information or in doing any act which the contract either expressly requires the owner to do or which would be done by an owner in accordance with the usage of the trade to enable his contractor to carry out an undertaking similar to the work being executed under the contract for the owner in which case if as a condition precedent the contractor has given to the engineerarchitect written notice of his claim before the expiration of thirty days from the encountering of the soil conditions giving rise to the claim or from the day on which the neglect occurs or the delay commences as the case may be the owner shall pay to the contractor in respect of the additional expense loss or damage incurred or sustained by reason of that difference neglect or delay an amount equal to the cost of the additional plant labour and material necessarily involved .
num if in the opinion of the engineerarchitect the contractor has effected a saving of expenditure by reason of the execution of the work by the contractor being rendered less difficult and less costly because the soil conditions actually encountered by the contractor at the site if the work when executing the work are substantially different from soil conditions indicated in information or a reasonable assumption of fact based thereon in the plans and specifications or other documents or material communicated by the owner to the contractor for his use in preparing his tender the amount set out in article ii of the articles of agreement shall be reduced by an amount equal to the saving effected by the contractor .
num paragraph numa and subsection num are applicable only to a fixed price arrangement .
num if information relating to soil conditions at the site of the work appeared in the plans and specifications or in other documents or material communicated by the owner to the contractor for his use in preparing his tender and if the real soil conditions encountered at the site of the work by the contractor when executing the work are substantially different from such information or a reasonable assumption of fact based thereon so that the cost to the general conditions page b num contractor of executing the work is directly and substantially increased or decreased by reason of such difference the engineerarchitect and the contractor may by agreement in writing amend the price per unit for any class of plant labour or material involved therein so that the benefit of a substantial decrease in cost shall accrue to the owner and the burden of a substantial increase in cost shall not be borne by the contractor .
num subsection num is applicable only to a unit price arrangement .
num no claim by the contractor shall be valid in situations where subsection num is applicable unless he has given written notice thereof to the owner within thirty days from the encountering of the soil conditions giving rise to such claim .
owners title to plant etc .
num all material and plant and the interest of the contractor in all real property licences powers and privileges acquired used or provided by the contractor for the work shall from the time of being so acquired used or provided become and they are the property of the owner for the purposes of the work and they shall continue to be the property of the owner a in the case of material until incorporated in the work or until the engineerarchitect certifies that he is satisfied that it will not be required for the work and b in the case of plant real property licences powers and privileges until the engineer architect certifies that he is satisfied that the interest vested in the owner therein is no longer required for the purposes of the work .
num material or plant that is the property of the owner by virtue of this section shall not be taken away from the site of the work or used or disposed of except for the purposes of the work without the consent in writing of the engineerarchitect .
num the owner is not liable for loss or damage to material or plant that is the property of the owner by virtue of this section and the contractor is liable for such loss or damage notwithstanding that the material or plant is the property of the owner .
contractors liability for damage to owners plant num the contractor is liable to the owner for loss of or damage to material plant or real property whether attributable to causes beyond his control or not supplied or made available by the owner to the contractor for use in connection with the work other than loss or damage resulting from and directly attributable to reasonable wear and tear .
num the contractor shall not use material plant or real property to which this section applies except for the purpose of carrying out this contract .
num when the contractor has failed to make good any loss or damage for which he is liable under this section within a reasonable time after being required by the engineerarchitect to do so the engineerarchitect may cause the loss of damage to be made good and the contractor shall thereupon be liable to the owner for the cost thereof and shall on demand pay to the owner an amount equal to such cost .
num the contractor shall keep such records of material plant and real property to which this section applies as the engineerarchitect from time to time requires and shall from time to time as the engineerarchitect requires satisfy the engineerarchitect that such material plant and real property are at the place and in the condition that they ought to be .
extension of time and penalty for delay in completion num the engineerarchitect may on the application of the contractor if made in accordance with the time limits in subsection num and made before the day fixed by article i of the articles of agreement for completion of the work or any specified portion thereof or before any new date page b num general conditions for completion previously fixed under this subsection if in his opinion it is in the public interest extend the time for completion of the work or any specified portion or portions thereof by fixing a new day for such completion .
num where the contractor does not complete the work or any specified portion thereof by the day fixed by article i of the articles of agreement for such completion or by such subsequent day if any to which the time for completion has been extended under subsection num but does complete the work or portion thereafter the contractor shall pay to the owner a where no statutory penalty is provided by subsection num i an amount equal to all salaries wages and travelling expenses paid by the owner to persons superintending the work during the period of delay which would not otherwise have been payable ii an amount equal to the value to the owner of the use of the completed work for the period of delay and iii an amount equal to all other expenses and damages incurred or sustained by the owner as a result of the work or specified portion thereof not being completed during the period of delay or b where a statutory penalty is provided for by subsection num the amount prescribed therein for each day the work or specified portion therefor was not complete during the period of delay .
num a the contractor shall pay to the owner i for each day of the period of delay during which the work in its entirety is not complete the sum of and ii for each day of the period of delay during which the following specified portions of the work are not complete the sum stated for such portion a b c b where no penalty is stipulated in paragraph a the contractor is not bound by this subsection .
num for the purposes of this section a the work is deemed to be completed on the day specified by the engineerarchitect in his interim certificate of completion and b period of delay means the period commencing on the day fixed by article i of the articles of agreement for completion of the work or any portion thereof or such subsequent day if any to which the time for completion has been extended under subsection num and ending on the day immediately preceding the day on which the work or portion thereof is completed .
num the engineerarchitect may waive the right of the owner to the whole or any part of a payment payable pursuant to subsection num .
general conditions page b num default or removal of work from contractor num in any of the following cases namely a where the contractor has made default or delayed in commencing or in diligently executing the work or any portion thereof to the satisfaction of the engineerarchitect and the engineerarchitect has given notice thereof to the contractor and has by such notice required the contractor to put an end to such default or delay and such default or delay continues for six days after such notice was given b where the contractor has made default in the completion of the work or any portion thereof within the time limited for such completion by the contract c where the contractor has become insolvent d where the contractor has committed an act of bankruptcy e where the contractor has abandoned the work f where the contractor has made an assignment of the contract without the required consent or g where the contractor has otherwise failed to observe or perform any of the provisions of the contract the owner may without any other authorization take all or any portion of the work out of the contractors hands and may employ such means as he may see fit to complete the work .
num where the work or any portion thereof has been taken out of the contractors hands under subsection num the contractor shall not except as provided in subsection num be entitled to any further payment in respect of the work so affected including payments then due and payable but not paid and the obligation of the owner to make payments in respect thereof as provided for in the terms of payment shall be at an end with respect to that portion of the work taken out of his hands and the contractor shall be liable to and upon demand therefor shall pay to the owner an amount equal to all loss and damage suffered by the owner by reason of the noncompletion of the work by the contractor .
num where the work or any portion thereof has been taken out of the contractors hands under subsection num and is subsequently completed by the owner the engineerarchitect shall thereafter determine the amount if any of holdback and progress claims of the contractor in respect thereof unpaid at the time of taking the work out of the contractors hands that in his opinion are not required by the owner for the purposes of the contract and the engineer architect shall if he is of the opinion that no financial prejudice to the owner will result authorise payment of the amount to the contractor .
contractors continuing obligation num the taking of the work or any portion thereof out of the contractors hands pursuant to section num does not relieve or discharge the contractor from any obligation under the contract or imposed upon him by law except the obligation under the contract to complete the physical execution of that portion of the work so taken out of his hands .
num if the work or any portion thereof is taken out of the contractors hands pursuant to section num all material and plant and the interest of the contractor in all real property licences powers and privileges acquired used or provided by the contractor for the purpose of the work shall notwithstanding subsection num be the property of the owner without compensation to the contractor .
page b num general conditions num if the engineerarchitect certifies that any property interest of the owner by virtue of subsection num is no longer required for the purposes of the work and that it is not in the interests of the owner to retain the interest it shall revert to the contractor subject to the provisions of subsection num .
suspension of work num the engineerarchitect may require the contractor to suspend execution of the work either for a specified or unspecified period by giving notice to that effect to the contractor .
num the contractor upon receiving notice of the owners requirement pursuant to subsection num shall suspend all operations except those which in the engineerarchitects opinion are necessary for the care and preservation of the work material and plant .
num during the period of suspension the contractor shall not remove from the site any part of the work any material or any plant without the consent of the engineerarchitect .
num if the period of suspension is thirty days or less the contractor upon the expiration of the period of suspension shall resume the execution of the work and except where the suspension order was due to the contractor not diligently prosecuting the work or failing to prosecute the work in a good and workmanlike manner he is entitled to be paid the cost of any plant labour and material necessary involved in complying with the suspension .
num if the period of suspension is more than thirty days and if upon the expiration of the period of suspension the engineerarchitect and the contractor agree that the execution of the work be completed by the contractor the contractor shall resume operations and complete the execution of the work in accordance with any terms and conditions agreed upon by the engineerarchitect and the contractor .
num if upon the expiration of a period of suspension of more than thirty days the engineer architect and the contractor do not agree that the work will be completed by the contractor or they are unable to agree upon the terms and conditions under which the contractor will complete the work the notice of suspension shall be deemed to be a notice of termination pursuant to section num .
termination of contract num the owner may at any time by giving notice to that effect terminate the contract .
num the contractor shall upon receipt of a notice pursuant to subsection num cease all operations forthwith .
num if the contract is terminated pursuant to subsection num the owner shall pay to the contractor an amount equal to the lesser of a the value as agreed upon by the contractor and the engineerarchitect of all work performed by the contractor as of the date of termination or if the contractor and the engineerarchitect can not agree as calculated in accordance with the formula set out in section num less all amounts already paid to the contractor by the owner and less all amounts which the contractor is liable to pay to the owner and b the amount calculated in accordance with the terms of payment which would have been payable to the contractor had he completed the work .
num if the contract is terminated pursuant to subsection num the owner shall pay to the contractor an amount equal to the value as agreed upon by the contractor and the engineerarchitect of all work performed by the contractor as of the date of termination or if the contractor and the engineerarchitect can not agree as calculated in accordance with the formula set out in section num less all amounts already paid to the contractor by the owner and less all the amounts which the contractor is liable to pay to the owner .
general conditions page b num num subsection num is applicable only to a fixed price arrangement and subsection num is applicable only to a unit price arrangement .
payment by owner of contracting obligations num the owner may in order to discharge lawful obligations of and satisfy lawful claims against the contractor or a subcontractor arising out of the execution of the work pay an amount which is due and payable to the contractor under any provision of the contract directly to the obligees of and the claimants against the contractor or the subcontractor .
num a payment made pursuant to subsection num is to the extent of the payment a discharge of the owners liability under the contract to the contractor .
num the contractor shall discharge all his lawful obligations and shall satisfy all lawful claims against him arising out of the execution of the work as the same become due .
num the contractor shall whenever so requested by the engineerarchitect make a statutory declaration deposing to the existence and condition of the obligations and claims referred to in subsection num .
access to work by owner num the contractor shall permit the engineerarchitect to have access to the work and to all areas where portions of the work are being fabricated or manufactured at all times during the execution of the work shall provide the engineerarchitect with full information concerning what is being done to execute the work and shall give the engineerarchitect every possible assistance in respect of the performance of his duty to see that the work is executed in accordance with the contract and also in respect of the performance and exercise of the duties and powers specially imposed or conferred on him by the contract .
clean up num the contractor shall upon completion of the work clear and clean the work and its site to the satisfaction of and in accordance with any directions of the engineerarchitect .
contractors superintendent num the contractor shall during working hours until the work has been completed keep on the site of the work a competent superintendent who has authority to receive on behalf of the contractor any order direction or other communication that may be given under the contract .
num the contractor shall upon the request of the engineerarchitect remove any superintendent who in the opinion of the engineerarchitect is incompetent or has been conducting himself improperly and shall replace a superintendent so removed with another superintendent as described in subsection num .
removal of contractors employees num the contractor shall at the request of the engineerarchitect remove from the work any person employed on the work who in the opinion of the engineerarchitect is incompetent or has been conducting himself improperly and the contractor shall not permit a person so removed to remain on the site of the work .
escalation labour material num except where the labour conditions contain an escalation clause the amount payable to the contractor under the contract shall not be increased or decreased by reason of any increase or decrease in the cost of the work brought about by an increase or decrease pursuant to the labour conditions .
page b num general conditions num notwithstanding section num and subsection num of this section the amount set out in article ii of the articles of agreement shall be adjusted in the manner provided in subsection num in the event of any change in any tax imposed under the social services and education tax act chapter snum of the revised statutes of new brunswick num or the excise tax act chapter enum of the revised statutes of canada num a after the date of the submission by the contractor of the tender for the contract and b that applies to the material incorporated or to be incorporated in the work and that affects the cost to the contractor of such material .
num in the event of any change after the date of submission of the tender for the contract by the contractor in any tax described in subsection num that applies to the material incorporated or to be incorporated in the work and that affects the cost to the contractor of such material the amount set out in article ii of the articles of agreement shall a be increased where the cost to the contractor of any material has been increased by virtue of the change or b be decreased where the cost to the contractor of any material has been decreased by virtue of the change .
by an amount equal to such amount as it is established upon examination of the relevant records of the contractor referred to in section num represents the increase or decrease as the case may be in the cost to the contractor of the material involved that is directly attributable to the change in the tax levied on or in respect of such material .
num for the purpose of determining the adjustment in the amount set out in article ii of the articles of agreement by virtue of any change in any tax described in subsection num where such tax is changed after the date of submission of the tender by the contractor but public notice of such change has been given by the minister of finance of the province or the federal government as the case may be before the date of submission of the tender the change of such tax shall for the purposes of this section be deemed to have occurred before the date of submission of the tender .
num the contractor is not entitled to any part of a rebate of taxes obtained by the owner .
use of local labour and material num the contractor shall use canadian labour and material in carrying out the work to the full extent to which they are procurable consistent with proper economy and the expeditious carrying out of the work .
num subject to subsection num the contractor shall employ labour and obtain material from the locality where the work is being executed to the extent to which it is available and shall use the offices of the canada employment centre in the recruitment of workmen wherever practicable .
num subject to subsections num and num the contractor shall employ a reasonable proportion of persons who have served on active service with the armed forces of canada and have been honourably discharged therefrom .
safety num if in the opinion of the engineerarchitect the contractor is not conducting construction of the work with proper safety precautions for workmen as prescribed by the occupational health and safety regulation occupational health and safety act the engineerarchitect may by giving notice in writing to the contractor stop the work .
general conditions page b num num where under subsection num the engineerarchitect has stopped the work the contractor shall immediately cease his operations until the provisions of the occupational health and safety regulation occupational health and safety act have been complied with to the satisfaction of the engineerarchitect .
num no extension of time or monetary allowances shall be made to the contractor for loss or delay arising from any stoppages in work under this section .
protection of work num the contractor shall guard or otherwise protect the work and shall protect the specifications plans drawings information material plant and real property provided by the owner to the contractor against loss or damage from any cause .
public ceremonies num the contractor shall not allow or permit any public ceremony in connection with the work without the permission of the owner .
num the contractor shall not erect or permit the erection of any sign or advertising on the work without the approval of the engineerarchitect .
insurance num the contractor shall at his own expense maintain such insurance policies if any as are required under this contract in a form and with companies approved by the owner and of the nature in the amounts for the periods and containing the terms and conditions if any set out in the insurance schedule .
num all insurance policies covering the work and maintained by the contractor pursuant to subsection num shall provide that the proceeds thereof are payable to the owner except where the insurance schedule otherwise provides .
num the contractor shall deposit with the engineerarchitect the originals of all policies of insurance maintained by the contractor pursuant to subsection num and the contractor shall when required by the engineerarchitect submit to him proof that such policies are in force .
num upon application by the contractor the engineerarchitect may waive compliance with subsections num and num .
fire loss num if the work or any portion thereof is lost or destroyed and monies are paid to the owner in respects of the loss or damage under a policy of insurance maintained by the contractor pursuant to section num the monies shall be held by the owner for the purposes of the contract .
num the owner may elect to retain absolutely the monies held under subsection num and in such event the monies belong absolutely to the owner and a the contractor is liable to the owner in an amount equal to the amount by which the insurance monies payable is less than the loss and damages suffered and sustained by the owner including costs associated with clearing and cleaning the site of the work and b there shall be a financial accounting between the owner and the contractor in respect of the portion of the work which was lost or damaged and respect of which monies have been retained absolutely by the owner and there shall be included in the financial accounting all amounts paid or payable by the owner under the contract to the contractor together with all amounts paid or payable by the contractor under the contract to the owner and the owner shall pay to the contractor any balance .
page b num general conditions num upon payment as required by subsection num by the owner or the contractor as the case may be the owner and the contractor are discharged from all rights and obligations under the contract in respect of the portion of the work which was lost or damaged and in respect of which monies have been retained absolutely by the owner as though such portion of the work had been fully completed and executed by the contractor in accordance with the contract .
num if an election is not made under subsection num the contractor shall restore and replace the portion of the work lost or damaged and the insurance monies shall be disbursed by the owner to the contractor in the manner and subject to the terms and conditions governing monies payable under the contract to the contractor by the owner except that for the purpose of this subsection one hundred percent shall be substituted in subsection num of the terms of payment for ninetyfive percent and eightyfive percent .
contractors responsibilities num the contractor shall at his own expense do whatever is necessary to ensure that a no person property right easement or privilege is injured damaged or infringed by reason of the contractors activities under this contract b pedestrian and other traffic on any public or private road or waterway is not unduly impeded interrupted or endangered by the execution or existence of the work and plant c fire hazards are eliminated and in the case of a fire in or about the work that it is promptly extinguished d the health of all persons employed on the work is not endangered e adequate medical supervision of all persons employed on the work is maintained f adequate sanitation measures in respect of the work are taken and g all stakes buoys lines levels and marks placed on or about the works by or under the authority of the engineerarchitect are protected and are not removed defaced or altered .
num the engineerarchitect may direct the contractor to do such things and to construct such works which the engineerarchitect considers reasonable and necessary to ensure compliance with or to remedy a breach of subsection num .
num the contractor shall at his own expense comply with a direction of the engineerarchitect made pursuant to subsection num .
interpretations of contract documents claims arising num if at any time before the work has been completed and the engineerarchitect has issued his final certificate of completion any question arises as to whether anything has been done as required by the contract or as to what the contractor is required by the contract to do and in particular and without limiting the generality of the foregoing as to a the meaning of anything in the plans and specifications b the meaning to be given to the plans and specifications in case of any error therein an omission therefrom or an obscurity or discrepancy in the wording or intention thereof c whether the quality or quantity of any material or workmanship meets the requirements of the contract d whether the plant material or workmen provided by the contractor for executing the work and carrying out the contract are adequate to ensure that the work will be executed in general conditions page b num accordance with the contract and that the contract will be carried out in accordance with its terms e what quantity of any kind of work has been completed by the contractor or f the timing and scheduling of the various phases of the execution of the work the question shall be decided by the engineerarchitect whose decision is final and binding .
num in matters arising other than under section num the contractor shall where he intends to submit a claim for additional time or money arising out of the construction of the work give written notice of his intention to claim a in the case of changes or alterations of the work ordered by the engineerarchitect within fourteen days of receipt of the notice of change and b in the case of a dispute arising out of interpretation of the contract within thirty days of the first occurrence of the circumstances giving rise to the dispute .
num in matters arising other than under section num the contractor may submit a claim for additional time or money only on those matters covered by the notice of intention to claim given under subsection num and such claim if not submitted within thirty days of the occurrence of the portion of the work out of which the claim arises shall be barred .
num the engineerarchitect shall within thirty days of receipt of a notice of claim under this section render his decision in writing to the contractor .
num the contractor shall construct the work in accordance with the decisions and directions of the engineerarchitect given under this section and in accordance with any consequential decisions and directions given by the engineerarchitect .
defects and omissions num without restricting any warranty or guarantee implied or stipulated by law the contractor shall at his own expense rectify and make good any defect or fault or omission that appears in the work within twelve months or within such additional period of time stipulated in the specifications concerning particular portions of the work from the date of the engineer architects final certificate of completion or where an interim certificate of completion has been issued under section num from the date of such interim certificate .
num if any defect fault or omission appears in the work and the engineerarchitect is of the opinion that it is one which the contractor either under subsection num or under a warranty or guarantee implied or stipulated by law is obliged to remedy and make good the engineer architect may direct the contractor to remedy and make good the defect fault or omission by giving notice to the contractor of the existence of the defect fault or omission and the notice shall specify the time within which the defect fault or omission is to be rectified and made good .
num the contractor shall rectify and make good the defect fault or omission described in a notice given pursuant to subsection num within the time specified in the notice .
owners right to complete work num where the contractor has failed to comply with any decision or direction given by the engineerarchitect under section num num num or num the engineerarchitect may employ such methods as he may deem expedient to do that which the contractor failed to do .
num the contractor shall on demand pay to the owner all costs expenses and damages incurred or sustained by the owner by reason of the contractors noncompliance with any decision or page b num general conditions direction given by the engineerarchitect under this section num num num or num and by the action taken by the engineerarchitect pursuant to subsection num .
contractors rights on disputed decision num if the contractor has within ten days of communication to him by the engineerarchitect of any decision or direction of the engineerarchitect under section num num num or num given notice to the engineerarchitect in writing disputing such decision or direction and stating the ground or grounds which form the basis of such dispute the owner shall pay to the contractor the cost of the additional labour material and plant necessarily involved in carrying out the decision or direction beyond what the contract correctly understood and interpreted would have required the contractor to do .
changes in the work num the engineerarchitect may at any time before he issues his final certificate of completion in writing a order work or material in addition to that provided for in the plans and specifications and b delete work or change the dimensions nature character quantity quality description location or position of the whole or any part of the work or material provided for in the plans and specifications or as ordered pursuant to paragraph a and the contractor shall execute the work in accordance with such orders deletions and changes as if the same had appeared in and been part of the plans and specifications .
num the engineerarchitect shall determine whether anything done or not done by the contractor pursuant to an order deletion or change made by the engineerarchitect pursuant to subsection num increased or decreased the cost of the work to the contractor .
num if the engineerarchitect determines under subsection num that the cost has been increased the owner shall pay to the contractor the cost of the additional labour material and plant necessarily involved .
num if the engineerarchitect determines under subsection num that the cost has been decreased the owner may reduce the amount payable to the contractor under the contract by the amount equal to the reduction in cost of the labour material and plant involved .
num where provision for the calculation of increased and decreased cost under subsections num and num is contained in the contract documents such cost shall be calculated in accordance therewith .
relations with other contractors num wherever work being done by the owners forces or by other contractors is contiguous to work covered by this contract the respective rights of the various interests involved shall be established by the engineerarchitect to secure the completion of the various portions of the work in general harmony .
num the owner reserves the right to let other contracts in connection with this project and the contractor shall afford other contractors reasonable opportunity for the introduction and storage of their material and the execution of their work and shall properly connect and co ordinate his work with theirs .
num if any part of the contractors work depends for proper execution or results upon the work of any other contractor the contractor shall inspect and promptly report to the engineer architect any defects in such work that render it unsuitable for such proper execution or results and his failure so to inspect and report shall constitute an acceptance of the other general conditions page b num contractors work as fit and proper for the reception of his work except as to defects which may develop in the other contractors work after the execution of this work .
num to insure the proper execution of his subsequent work the contractor shall measure work already in place and shall at once report to the engineerarchitect any discrepancy between the executed work and the drawings .
interim certificate of completion num if the engineerarchitect is satisfied that the work is substantially completed and is acceptable for use by the owner he may at any time before issuance of a final certificate of completion issue to the contractor an interim certificate of completion and shall describe therein the portions of the work not completed to his satisfaction state those quantities which require additional measurements and all things which must be done by the contractor before a final certificate of completion can be issued .
num as soon as reasonably possible after a the work has been completed and b the contractor has complied with the contract and all orders and directions made pursuant thereto to the satisfaction of the engineerarchitect he shall issue to the contractor a final certificate of completion .
num the engineerarchitect before issuing a final certificate of completion may in addition to the matter described in the interim certificate of completion require the contractor to rectify any other portions of the work not completed to the satisfaction of the engineerarchitect and to do any other things necessary for the completion of the work .
num the engineerarchitect shall measure and keep records of his measurements of the quantities of labour material and plant performed used and supplied by the contractor in executing the work and shall at the request of the contractor inform him of his measurements and the contractor shall assist and cooperate with the engineerarchitect in such measuring and is entitled to inspect the records of measurements kept by the engineer architect .
num on the day that the engineerarchitect issues his final certificate of completion under subsection num he shall issue a final certificate of measurement showing the quantity of labour plant and material performed used and supplied by the contractor in executing the work and all measurements included therein shall be binding upon the owner and the contractor and are exclusive between them as to the quantity of any labour plant or material performed used or supplied by the contractor in executing the work .
num subsections num and num are applicable only to a unit price arrangement .
conversion of security deposit num if the work is taken out of the contractors hands pursuant to section num or if the contract is terminated pursuant to section num or if the contractor is in breach of or in default under the contract the owner may negotiate the security deposit in the case of bonds or convert the security deposit to the owners own use in the case of money and the amount realized by the owner shall be deemed to be a debt by the owner to the contractor and the owner shall have the right of setoff and may setoff against the debt any sum or amount which the contractor may be liable to pay to the owner and the balance of the debt if any after the right of setoff has been exercised shall if such balance in the opinion of the engineer architect is not required for the purpose of the contract and subject always to the provisions of section num be paid by the owner to the contractor .
page b num general conditions num the owner may retain for the purpose of the contract any balance of moneys otherwise payable to the contractor under subsection num .
return of security deposit num upon the engineerarchitects interim certificate of completion being issued the owner shall if the contractor is not in breach of or in default under the contract return to the contractor that part of the security deposit covering performance of the work which in the opinion of the engineerarchitect is not required for the purposes of the contract .
num where the security deposit was converted to cash the owner shall pay to the contractor the interest accrued thereon to the date of payment to the contractor but in no case shall the interest payable by the owner exceed the amount paid to the owner thereon as a result of the owner complying with subsection num of the general regulation crown construction contracts act and in no case shall interest be paid by the owner to the contractor on that portion of the security deposit taken or used by the owner in accordance with the provisions of this agreement .
permits and licences num the owner shall furnish all surveys unless otherwise specified .
num permits and licences of a temporary nature normally required for the prosecution of the work shall be secured and paid for by the contractor .
num easements or other authorizations for permanent structures or permanent changes in existing facilities shall be secured and paid for by the owner unless otherwise specified .
num no extension of time for completion of the work shall be allowed due to delay for any cause in the obtaining by the contractor of the licences and permits described in subsection num num or num except where such delay is the direct result of actions of the owner .
determination of cost unit price num whenever it is necessary for the purposes of sections num num num and num to determine the cost of labour plant or material the unit price table shall be used that is the cost shall be equal to the product of the agreed quantity of such labour plant or material expressed in the appropriate unit of measurement multiplied by the price in respect of such unit .
determination of cost agreement num if the method of determination in section num can not be used because the labour plant or material involved is not included in the unit price table the cost of the labour plant or material for the purposes of sections num num num and num shall be the amount agreed upon from time to time by the contractor and the engineerarchitect .
determination of cost cost plus num where the method of determination provided for in section num can not be used and the engineerarchitect and contractor do not agree as provided in section num the owner and the contractor may by an agreement in writing agree to determine the cost of labour plant or material for the purposes of section num num num and num to be equal to the aggregate of a all reasonable and proper amounts actually expended by or legally payable by the contractor in respect of the labour plant or material which fall within any of the classes of expenditure described in subsection num being costs which are directly attributable to the execution of the work and are not costs in respect of which the allowance in paragraph b is made and general conditions page b num b fifteen percent of the total of the expenditures of the contractor that meet the test in paragraph a as an allowance for all other expenditures by the contractor and for profit and without limiting the generality of the foregoing being also an allowance for payments and charges relating to overhead head office expenses and general administration costs of the contractor including finance and interest charges or five percent of such expenditures where the contractor has the work done by a subcontractor provided that such allowance shall not be applied to any portion of the expenditures identified under paragraph numh in which the machine rental regulation crown construction contracts act is used to calculate such expenditure but where the cost determination arises solely out of a change order issued pursuant to section num and the value of that change order as estimated by the engineerarchitect at the time of its issue is num or less then twenty percent of the total of the expenditures of the contractor that meet the test in paragraph a as an allowance for all other expenditures by the contractor and for profit and without limiting the generality of the foregoing being also an allowance for payments and charges relating to overhead head office expenses and general administration costs of the contractor including finance and interest charges or ten percent of such expenditures where the contractor has the work done by a subcontractor provided that such allowance shall not be applied to any portion of the expenditures identified under paragraph numh in which the machine rental regulation crown construction contracts act is used to calculate such expenditure .
num classes of expenditure that are allowable are a payments to subcontractors agreed to by the owner b wages salaries and travelling expenses of employees of the contractor while they are actually and properly engaged on the work other than wages salaries bonuses living and travelling expenses of personnel of the contractor generally employed at the head office or at a general office of the contractor unless such personnel is engaged at the site of the work with the approval of the engineerarchitect c payments for material necessary for and incorporated in the work or necessary for and consumed in the execution of the work d payments for consumable tools other than tools customarily provided by tradesmen necessary for and used in the execution of the work e payments for preparation inspection delivery installation and removal of material necessary for the execution of the work f payments for renting erecting maintaining and removing temporary offices sheds and similar structures necessary for and used by the contractor in executing the work g assessments in respect to the work payable under any statutory requirement or other agreements relating to payroll burdens h payments for renting plant and allowances for plant owned by the contractor necessarily for the execution of the work providing that such payments or allowances are reasonable and do not exceed the equipment rental rate set out in the machine rental regulation crown construction contracts act i payments for inspection delivery installation and removal of plant necessary for the execution of the work and j other payments made with the approval of the engineerarchitect that are necessary for the execution of the work .
definition or determination of cost page b num general conditions num for the purposes of sections num and num and except as in those sections specifically provided plant does not include tools .
num for the purposes of sections num num and num unit price table means the table referred to in article vi of the articles of agreement .
maintain records by contractor num the contractor and each subcontractor shall maintain a the detail of the compilation of his estimate showing labour material plant overhead and all other elements entering into his unit or lump sum prices as prepared for the purpose of tender and b full records of the actual cost to him of the work together with all proper tender calls quotations contracts correspondence invoices receipts and vouchers relating thereto and shall make them available to audit and inspection by the owner the comptroller of the province of new brunswick or by persons acting on their behalf shall allow them to make copies thereof and to take extracts therefrom and shall furnish them with any information which they may require from time to time in connection with such records .
num the records maintained by the contractor and each subcontractor pursuant to this section shall be kept intact until the expiration of two years from the date of issuance of the final certificate of completion under subsection num or until the expiration of such other period as the owner may direct .
num the contractor shall require all subcontractors and all firms corporations and persons directly or indirectly controlled by or affiliated with the contractor and all firms corporations and persons directly or indirectly having control of the contractor to comply with subsections num and num as if they were the contractor .
work schedule num except as otherwise provided in the contract documents the contractor shall submit to the engineerarchitect within thirty days of the formal notice of award of contract a work schedule satisfactory to the engineerarchitect showing therein the time rate and order of construction he proposes for the various portions of the work .
num no progress claims shall be paid by the owner during the time while the contractor is in default under subsection num .
cost breakdown of lump sum work num the contractor shall on contracts which are wholly lump sum or partly lump sum and partly unit price submit a schedule to the owner showing the cost breakdown of the lump sum work to assist the engineerarchitect in assessing progress claims .
contractors job office num the contractor shall provide a temporary weather tight job office located in an area approved by the engineerarchitect for his own use complete with facilities for filing drawings specifications correspondence purchase orders and such other appurtenances as are necessary for the proper conduct of the work and shall remove same upon completion of the work .
num the contractor shall provide a telephone in the job office described in subsection num where practicable .
general conditions page b num num the contractor shall at all times during construction of the work maintain in the job office required by subsection num a complete and current set of plans specifications and change orders for this contract .
record of imported plant num the contractor shall deliver to the engineerarchitect each time a progress claim is submitted a statement signed by a responsible person on behalf of the contractor setting forth an accurate record of the serial number type and date of arrival in the province of all construction equipment brought into the province and used during the immediately preceding payment period in performance of the work the arrival of which had not been previously reported together with the date of departure from the province of any such equipment which had been so used .
copy purchase orders num where the accepted tender for the construction of the work exceeds fifty thousand dollars the contractor shall maintain on the construction site one copy of every purchase order used in acquiring services and material for incorporation into the work of this contract and allow the engineerarchitect or his authorized representative access thereto .
num a copy of each purchase order shall be made available to the engineerarchitect at the job site prior to incorporation of the material purchased thereby into the work .
arbitration num any claim or dispute involving the owner and the contractor may by mutual agreement of the parties be submitted to arbitration .
num should the owner in accordance with this section agree to enter into an agreement to arbitrate the agreement shall be limited to matters contained in the claim submitted by the contractor and shall stipulate that the arbitration is not binding on either party .
insurance page e num e this document is the document referred to as insurance schedule and marked e in the articles of agreement entered into on the day of num between the owner and the contractor .
department of transportation and infrastructure signed owner contractor insurance schedule general items num the contractor shall at his own expense procure and maintain insurance policies which shall include the endorsements and extensions as detailed below .
num the contractor shall provide the department with proof of coverage in the form of a certificate issued by worksafenb identifying the contractor as registered and in good standing with worksafenb .
such proof of coverage will be provided to the department in conjunction with the execution of the contract as well as is stipulated under the terms of payment a of the contract .
num the contractor shall provide to the department of transportation a confirmation of coverage as required by the department which shall be signed by an authorized representative of the insurer .
part a course of construction the insurance policy required under this part a shall include a a limit of coverage equal to num of the value of the structures b broad form coverage including flood and earthquake c a replacement cost basis of settlement d all designated parties as loss payees e a waiver of subrogation f coverage for bylaws g a num day notice provision h resultant damage coverage all as detailed on the departments confirmation of coverage form .
continued insurance page e num part b commercial general liability the insurance policy required under this part b shall include a an occurrence definition of accident b the province as an additional insured c owners and contractors protective liability d a cross liability clause e a waiver of subrogation f blanket contractual liability g productscompleted operations liability h broad form property damage i nonowned automobile liability j contingent employers liability k personal injury extension of bodily injury l coverage for machinery attached to vehicles m a num day notice provision n coverage for operations involving explosives pile driving support of any property xcu performed by subcontractors .
where the contractor performs such operations himself he shall obtain suitable coverage and shall provide the department with a confirmation of coverage signed by an authorized representative of the insurer signifying the validity of the coverage .
such confirmation shall be provided to the department prior to the commencement of any xcu work and shall include all schedule e requirements for liability insurance items a to o inclusive o liability limits of not less than num or as currently carried by the contractor whichever is greater and such policy shall not be on a claims made form .
all as detailed on the departments confirmation of coverage form part c automobile liability the insurance policy required under this part c shall include a coverage for the liability for all vehicles owned hired or leased in the performance of the project b limits of liability of not less than num or as currently carried by the contractor whichever is greater continued insurance page e num part d special items a the department reserves the right to require the contractor to insure his property plant and equipment for such amounts as the department deems adequate and to require the contractor to file with the department evidence of such insurance in a format acceptable to the department .
b the department further reserves the right to require the contractor to carry such other insurances as are deemed appropriate by the department having regard to the nature of the project undertaken .
c the insurance requirements as set out in this schedule e and supporting forms shall not in any way limit the contractors liability arising out of the project contract or otherwise .
d all insurances required to be provided and maintained by the contractor shall be negotiated for procured from and the premium paid to a resident agent of an insurance company licensed to do business in the province of new brunswick .
e the requirement of the contractor to provide confirmations of coverage to the department shall survive the completion of the project .
the department reserves the right to ask for and the contractor specifically agrees to provide evidence of insurance covering the period subsequent to the term of the project contract for such eventualities as warranty periods maintenance periods the completion of deficiency lists etc .
revised january num num insurance page e num contract no .
confirmation of coverage the insurance coverages procured and maintained by the contractor for this contract are understood and agreed to include the following course of construction builders risk broad form coverage ibc num or better including flood and earthquake in an amount equal to num of the value of the structures schedule e items a and b replacement cost basis item c policy written in the name of her majesty the queen in right of province of new brunswick represented by the minister of transportation and infrastructure owner the contractor and the sub contractors as their interests may appear item d insurers waiver of subrogation against her majesty the queen et al item e deletion of bylaws exclusion item f thirty days prior written notice to the department of transportation and infrastructure of any change to cancellation or lapse of the insurance coverage item g coverage for resultant damage of faulty or improper material workmanship andor design item h name of insurance company policy number date signature of authorized representative of insurance company revised january num num insurance page e num contract no .
confirmation of coverage the insurance coverages procured and maintained by the contractor for this contract are understood and agreed to include the following commercial general liability occurrence definition of accident schedule e item a her majesty the queen in right of the province of new brunswick represented by the minister of transportation and infrastructure included as additional insured the addition of the province as additional insured shall not prevent recovery in any situation in which recovery would have been available had the province not been so named item b owners and contractors protective liability item c cross liability clause respecting all insureds item d insurers waiver of subrogation against her majesty the queen et al item e blanket contractual liability item f productscompleted operations liability item g broad form property damage item h nonowned automobile liability item i contingent employers liability item j personal injury item k coverage extended to include machinery attached to automobiles item l thirty days prior written notice to the department of transportation and infrastructure of any change to cancellation or lapse of the insurance coverage item m coverage for a property damage arising out of operations involving explosives pile driving or removal or weakening of support of any property xcu where the work is performed by subcontractors and b for property damage arising out of the same perils xcu included within the products or completed operations coverage whether performed by the contractor or subcontractors .
item n limit of liability of not less than num or as currently carried by the contractor whichever is greater item o insurance page e num occurrence policy form not claims made name of insurance company policy number ______________________________________ date signature of authorized representative of insurance company revised january num num insurance page e num contract no .
confirmation of coverage the insurance coverages procured and maintained by the contractor for this contract are understood and agreed to include the following automobile liability covering all motor vehicles owned hired or leased in the performance of the project limit of liability of not less than num or as currently carried by the contractor whichever is greater name of insurance company policy number date signature of authorized representative of insurance company revised january num num insurance page e num contract no .
confirmation of coverage the insurance coverages procured and maintained by the contractor for this contract are understood and agreed to include the following general liability for blasting operations occurrence definition of accident schedule e item a her majesty the queen in right of the province of new brunswick represented by the minister of transportation and infrastructure included as additional insured the addition of the province as additional insured shall not prevent recovery in any situation in which recovery would have been available had the province not been so named item b owners and contractors protective liability item c cross liability clause respecting all insureds item d insurers waiver of subrogation against her majesty the queen et al item e blanket contractual liability item f productscompleted operations liability item g broad form property damage item h nonowned automobile liability item i contingent employers liability item j coverage extended to include machinery attached to automobiles item l thirty days prior written notice to the department of transportation and infrastructure of any change to cancellation or lapse of the insurance coverage item m insurance page e num limit of liability of not less than num or as currently carried by the contractor whichever is greater item o occurrence policy form not claims made name of insurance company policy number date signature of authorized representative of insurance company revised january num num form of tender page f num f province of new brunswick department of transportation and infrastructure form of tender for contract no .
form of tender page f num item item no .
unit price lump sum price fixed price as the case may be shall be either typewritten printed or written in ink in words in the space provided for each item in this column measure approximate quantities unit price in figs total dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents carried forward form of tender page f num brought forward page item item no .
unit price lump sum price fixed price as the case may be shall be either typewritten printed or written in ink in words in the space provided for each item in this column measure approximate quantities unit price in figs total dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents dollars and cents total bid total contract no .
total hst contract no .
form of tender page f num wei do hereby offer to furnish all and every kind of labour tools machinery implements and other plant services and materials whatsoever necessary to perform the undermentioned work within the limits of the time specified namely province of new brunswick department of transportation and infrastructure contract no .
name of project in accordance with the contract documents specifications plans profiles and drawings prepared or to be prepared for the purpose of such work and upon the terms and conditions set out in the printed form of contract to be furnished and in every respect to the satisfaction of the chief engineer all the work of the different kinds hereinafter mentioned in the said specifications so far as the same are applicable to the class of work hereby tendered for and required in the construction of the work tendered .
at and for the prices set opposite the different items .
form of tender page f num accompanying this tender is one of the following num a bid security deposit in the form of a certified cheque payable to the minister of finance in the amount of or num a bid bond with her majesty the queen in right of the province of new brunswick as represented by the minister of transportation and infrastructure as obligee in the amount of in accordance with the terms of the advertisement calling for this tender .
wei do hereby declare and agree that in the case of ourmy refusal to execute a formal contract with the department within num days after the notification of acceptance of this tender the said bid bond shall be forfeited in accordance with section num of regulation num under the crown construction contracts act to the department as liquidated damages for the said refusal .
wei the undersigned have examined the contract documents plans and specifications for including all revisions thereto and have visited and examined the location of the above described work and are fully informed as to the nature of the work and the condition relating to its performance and understand the quantities shown in the estimate are approximate only and are subject to either increase or decrease and hereby agree to conform to all respects to the terms and conditions of this tender and to sign a formal contract therefore upon demand .
dated at this day of num contractor signature of authorized representative address to the minister of transportation and infrastructure department of transportation and infrastructure province of new brunswick fredericton new brunswick standard specifications page g num g this document is the document referred to as plans and standard specifications and marked g in the articles of agreement entered into on the day of num between the owner and the contractor .
owner signed contractor province of new brunswick department of transportation and infrastructure standard specifications project affidavit page i num i this document is the document referred to as affidavit and marked i in the articles of agreement entered into on the day of num between the owner and the contractor .
signed owner contractor i of the in the county of and the province of make oath and say num .
that i am secretarytreasurer of a body corporate under and by virtue of the laws of the province of having its head office at in the county of and the province of and i have custody of the corporate seal of the said company .
num .
that the corporate seal affixed to the aforegoing indenture is the corporate seal of the said and was affixed thereto by me by authority of the board of directors thereof .
.num that the signature set and subscribed to the said indenture as president of is in true and proper handwriting of who is the president of the said company and the signature set and subscribed thereto as secretary treasurer of the said company is in true and proper handwriting of me this deponent .
sworn to me at the city of in the county of secretarytreasurer and the province of this day of num .
commissioner of oaths num subject index depa janua abbrev adjust adjust advise aggreg applic armou aspha aspha aspha aspha author back backfi backfi bitumi borrow bridge castin sign o chain chip s clearin cold m comm compa compl concre concre concre concre concre artment ary num viations ment of catch b ment for asphalt ements gate basesubba ation of water ur stone protectio alt concrete me alt concrete core lt concrete end alt sidewalk rity of the engine up alarms ll for structures lling around stru nous tack coat w e pot bearings nplace concrete or light base link fence seal single and ng milling asphalt c mon excavation action letion date ete encase road ete in structures ete pipe ete pipe large ete sidewalk stan of trans a asins and manho t binder price ase on thod specificatio e data d result specific eer b uctures c e barrier double concrete dbed duct ndard sp portatio oles on cation ers ecificati on and inf index subject inde num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ions frastruc ex construction dra construction ro construction tra culvert erosion curb and gutter definitions detours disposal areas ditching energyabsorbin engineered fill environmental r erosion control examination of s excavation with extra work falsework fertilizing filter screen fine grading finger joint ass fish rescue fixed rates force account formwork foundation exca frame with gra freedraining b full depth recy cture awings and calc oads affic control protection r d e ng guide rail te requirements structure soils information hin cofferdams f semblies avation ate or cover backfill ycling culations d e erminal n f page num of num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num depa janua gabion geotex geotec grave grubb guide guide guide haulag haulag heavy hiring hydros individ induce insura jute m light s limited lines a artment ary num ns xtile chnical instrume l for fish habitat ing posts rail rail system st ge asphalt conc ge soil rock an y equipment practices seeding dual rock placem ed trench nce schedule mats standard d funds and grades stan of trans g entation t tructures h crete nd aggregate i ment j l ndard sp portatio ecificati on and inf index subject inde num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ions frastruc ex maintenance of median flashing metal pipe metal pipe lar microsurfacing mobilization mulching overhaul com overhaul solid overhaul uncla overhead sign overhead sign s overhead sign s partial depth re partnering pavement mark paving catch ba payment adjust permits pipe zone mate pits and quarrie portland cemen posttensioning power point precast catch b precast concret precast prestres private trucks production of hi pulverizing cture m traffic flow g light rge o mmon excavation d rock excavatio assified excavat structure structure found p ecycling kings asin apron tments erial es nt concrete g system basin te box culvert ssed concrete b ighway aggregat m o on tion ation p beams tes page num of num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num depa janua rando reinfo reloca remov remov remov remov remov remov remov remov remov remov remov remov remov remov remov remov remov reloca remov remov remov roads rock w root w safety scales sched screw artment ary num om riprap orcing steel ation of catch ba val of asphalt co val of curb and g val of deck conc val of energyab val of erosion co val of fence val of guide pos val of guide rail val of isolated tr val of light stand val of median fla val of overhead val of overhead val of power poi val of roadside s val of screw bas val of sidewalk ation of sign or l val of sign post val of structures val of undergrou side sign weir wads y support system s and weighing p uling base stan of trans r asin oncrete structu gutter crete bsorbing guide r ontrol structure sts rees dard ashing light sign sign structure nt sign se light base und services s ms procedures ndard sp portatio res rail terminal ecificati on and inf index subject inde num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ions frastruc ex sealed expansio sediment contro service duct s shoring shoulder materi shoulder proces shoulder rumb shoulder subdra sign post signs sign or light ba sluice box soil reinforcem solid rock exca specified work standard drawin standard drawin standard drawin standard drawin standard drawin standard drawin standard drawin steel ballastwal steel h piles steel laminated steel pipe piles steel sheet pile steel superstruc storm sewer pi subcontractors subdrain subdrain outlet supply of mater cture on joint assemb ol fence structures ial ssing le strips ain ase ment avation ngs ngs ngs ngs ngs ngs ngs ll angle d bearings s e cofferdams cture pe rials blies page num of num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num depa janua table table table table table table table table table table tempo tempo tensio termin topso traffic trees unclas under underg underg value artment ary num of contents of contents of contents of contents of contents of contents of contents of contents of contents of contents orary water barr orary water cont on splices nology il control persons and shrubs ssified excavatio roadbed duct ground duct ground junction engineering stan of trans t rier trol works s u on box v ndard sp portatio ecificati on and inf index subject inde num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ions frastruc ex waterproofing work progressio work schedule working conditi cture w on ons w page num of num num num num num standard drawing index depa janua divisio divisio divisio divisio artment ary num on num none on num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num on num num num num num num num num num on num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num stan of trans shaping solid ro subdrain subdrain tension case num case num case num case num case num foundati foundati chain li chain li should should constr constr roadwa roadwa concret steel h steel h steel h steel h steel h steel pip steel pip prestres bridge p ballastw deck at ballast w waterpr free dra ndard sp portatio stan of overburde ock transition n n outlet rodbar ass num cross culv num cross culv num cross culv num cross culv num storm drai ion excavatio ion excavatio nk fence nk gate der rumble s der subdrain a ruction detail ruction details ay drain for s ay drain deta e limits for f piles pile c piles pile p piles splice piles seque piles seque pe piles pile pe piles spl ssed beam li pot bearings wall protection barrier wallc wall waterpro roofing requi aining backfil ecificati on and inf index dard drawin en at top of s s longitudina embly vert subgrad vert subgrad vert original vert original inage culvert on for footing on for footing trip installatio and outlet de of a transver s at a structu tructures ils foundation o ap details oint details e details ences for wel ences for wel e point detail lice details fting device d nomenclature n details curb waterpr oofing system rements on b l placement d ions frastruc g index solid rock ba al de above orig de above orig ground abov ground abov t longitudinal s solid roc s common on etails rse key joint re overexcavatio lds for horizo lds for flat po s details vert e roofing detail m details box culvert or details cture ackslope ginal ground ginal ground ve subgrade ve subgrade l to the centre k and commo over solid ro t on ontal position osition ical only ls r rigid frame trench num trench num .
trench num trench num. eline of road on cases ock case e page num of num .num m .num m num m .num m dway depa janua divisio divisio artment ary num on num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num on num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num stan of trans typical t precast c typical c typical s typical s typical s typical f typical f paving c curb and curb and curb and concrete joint lay joint and asphalt s guide po guide po beam gu guide ra guide ra castinp concrete under ro undergro undergro power po power po screw ba type e type f type g sign or l angulatio light sta light sta light sta light sta median f roadside roadside roadside roadside roadside roadside roadside overhead overhead ndard sp portatio stan trench cross catch basin d catch basin e sluice box and sluice box ins sluice box ins frame with g frame with co catch basin a d gutter detai d gutter detai d gutter detai e sidewalk de yout d isolation det sidewalk deta ost details ost and guide uide rail deta ail structure ail structure place concret e encased du oadbed duct ound duct de ound junction oint multiple oint single li ase detail sign or light sign or light sign or light light base de on of sign fou ndard detail ndard wiring ndard wiring ndard anchor flashing light e sign post a e sign details e sign strap s e sign strap s e sign strap s e sign strap s e sign strap s d sign structu d sign structu ecificati on and inf index dard drawin sections details excavation d pipe detail stallation behi stallation into rate square over round apron ils ils ils etails tails ails e rail details ails details details te barrier det uct bank syste details tails n box detail lights ight t base details base details t base details tail bedrock undations single and d details num details num r details t details anchor details s sequence sequence sequence sequence sequence ure foundatio ure foundatio ions frastruc g index ind the curb a the curb and e tails em s soil found s soil found s soil found k foundation double davit num v num v s on anchorag on base pla cture and gutter d gutter dation dation dation ge details ate and template details page num of num depa janua divisio divisio artment ary num on num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num on num num num num num num num num num stan of trans sedimen jute mat type a type a type b type b type c type c type d gabion b rock we armour s root wa tempora end trea end trea standard safety n safety n deck ov ndard sp portatio stan nt control fen t details spillway stru spillway stru erosion con erosion con erosion con erosion con erosion con backfilling de eir details stone protect ad detail in po ary working p atment for cu atment for cu d stake marki et support sy et support sy verhang brack ecificati on and inf index dard drawin nce ucture for sed ucture details trol structure trol structure ntrol structure ntrol structure ntrol structure etails tion system d ool pad ulverts num ulverts num ings ystem abutm ystem piers ket steel gir ions frastruc g index diment pond s e for ditches e details e for ditches e details e for ditches details nummm id roa nummm id roa ments rder cture adway foreslo adway foreslo ope num or ste ope flatter tha page num of num eeper an num
