manual revision record municipal and provincial common volume num general and construction specifications this record should remain in the manual at all times .
revisions are numbered sequentially .
this sheet should be filled in after each revision has been placed into the manual .
it will quickly indicate to users whether the contents of the manual are uptodate .
revision number revision date entered by revision number date entered by num april num included in new manuals num april num included in new manuals num nov num included in new manuals num nov num included in new manuals num april num included in new manuals num april num included in new manuals num nov num included in new manuals num nov num included in new manuals num april num included in new manuals num num nov num included in new manuals num num april num included in new manuals num num nov num included in new manuals num num april num included in new manuals num num nov num included in new manuals num num april num included in new manuals num num july num included in new manuals num num nov num included in new manuals num num april num included in new manuals num num nov num included in new manuals num num april num included in new manuals num num nov num included in new manuals num num april num included in new manuals num num nov num included in new manuals num num april num included in new manuals num num nov num included in new manuals num num april num included in new manuals num num nov num included in new manuals num num april num included in new manuals num num nov num included in new manuals num revision information sheet ontario provincial standards for roads and public works volume num municipal and provincial common general and construction specifications manual revision num november num updating ontario provincial standards for your use each roads and public works owner owner is responsible for determining implementation dates and directions for use of ontario provincial standards therefore manual holders are cautioned about immediately discarding superseded and cancelled standards .
accessing and obtaining ontario provincial standards the ontario provincial standards for roads and public works ops manuals and the latest published updates for each of the eight ops manuals are available as follows the eight ops manuals of standards are also available for free as well in a single pdf format on the website .
a link to the ontario provincial standards on the mto library website is available on the ops website www.ops.on.ca .
also on this site under news and activities are notices for updates and changes in ops .
questions should be directed by email to ontario.prov.standardsontario.ca waiting to hear from you if you have a suggestion to revise a standard or you have a standard that works in your ministry municipality or area send it to the head ops administration for review and possible inclusion into the ontario provincial standards .
ontario provincial standards unit num st. paul st. numnd floor north st. catharines on lnumr numrnum rev .
info sheet ops volume num rev .
number num date num page num this manual is revised as follows index pages volume num please remove the entire index and replace with the attached revised index .
standard specifications volume num supersededcancelled remove revisednew insert remarks opss dated opss dated num oct num num nov num notice to users of opss num general specification for weighing of materials superseded by opss.prov num in ops volume num and opss.muni num in ops volume num .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for restoring unpaved roadway surfaces superseded by opss.prov num in ops volume num and opss.muni num in ops volume num .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for double chip seal superseded by opss.muni num in ops volume num .
there is no prov version .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for asphalt sidewalk driveway and boulevard and for sidewalk resurfacing superseded by opss.muni num in ops volume num .
there is no prov version .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for extruded expanded polystyrene frost heave treatment superseded by opss.prov num in ops volume num and opss.muni num in ops volume num .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for microsurfacing superseded by opss.prov num in ops volume num and opss.muni num in ops volume num .
rev .
info sheet ops volume num rev .
number num date num page num supersededcancelled remove revisednew insert remarks opss dated opss dated num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for pervious concrete pavement for lowvolume traffic applications superseded by opss.muni num in ops volume num .
there is no prov version .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for sealing or resealing of joints and cracks in concrete pavement and concrete base superseded by opss.muni num in ops volume num .
there is no prov version .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for forcemain installation in open cut superseded by opss.muni num in ops volume num .
there is no prov version .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for pipeline installation by tunnelling superseded by opss.muni num in ops volume num .
there is no prov version .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for pipeline and utility installation by jacking and boring superseded by opss.muni num in ops volume num .
there is no prov version .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for pipeline and utility installation in soil by horizontal superseded by opss.muni num in ops volume num .
there is no prov version .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for gravity pipe and sewer rehabilitation by curedin place pipe superseded by opss.muni num in ops volume num .
there is no prov version .
rev .
info sheet ops volume num rev .
number num date num page num supersededcancelled remove revisednew insert remarks opss dated opss dated num apr num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for site preparation for pipelines utilities and associated structures superseded by opss.prov num in ops volume num and opss.muni num in ops volume num .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for site restoration following installation of pipelines utilities and associated structures superseded by opss.prov num in ops volume num and opss.muni num in ops volume num .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for riprap rock protection and granular sheeting superseded by opss.prov num in ops volume num and opss.muni num in ops volume num .
num nov num num nov num notice to users of opss num construction specification for tempoary erosion control and sediment control measures superseded by opss.prov num in ops volume num and opss.muni num in ops volume num .
rev .
info sheet ops volume num rev .
number num date num page num ontario provincial standard specification volume num index municipal and provincial common general and construction specifications date spec .
no .
opss title division num general specifications apr num num notice to users of opss num general conditions of contract nov num num notice to users of opss num weighing of materials apr num num notice to users of opss num electrical work nov num num notice to users of opss num the use of explosives nov num num notice to users of opss num schedule of rental rates for construction equipment including model and specification reference apr num num supply of prequalified material and products nov num num notice to users of opss num management of excess materials nov num num notice to users of opss num environmental protection for construction in waterbodies and on waterbody banks reissued num division num general grading nov num num clearing close cut clearing grubbing and removal of surface and piled boulders nov num num notice to users of opss num grading nov num num notice to users of opss num embankments over swamps and compressible soils nov num num notice to users opss num earth borrow nov num num notice to users of opss num wick drain installation division num pavement flexible and rigid nov num num notice to users of opss num restoring unpaved roadway surface revision num november num page num ontario provincial standard specification volume num index municipal and provincial common general and construction specifications date spec .
no .
opss title nov num num notice to users of opss num priming granular base nov num num notice to users of opss num double chip seal nov num num notice to users opss num single and double surface treatment nov num num notice to users of opss num granular sealing nov num num notice to users of opss num stockpiling of patching materials and patching of asphalt pavement nov num num cold mixed cold laid open and dense graded bituminous mix nov num num notice to users of opss num hot mix asphalt nov num num notice to users of opss num asphalt sidewalk driveway and boulevard and for sidewalk resurfacing apr num num notice to users of opss num asphalt curb and gutter systems apr num num notice to users of opss num hot mix asphalt end result nov num num notice to users of opss num untreated subbase base surface shoulder selected subgrade and stockpiling nov num num notice to users of opss num extruded expanded polystyrene frost heave treatment nov num num notice to users of opss num open graded drainage layer nov num num notice to users of opss num inplace full depth reclamation of bituminous pavement and underlying granular nov num num notice to users of opss num full depth reclamation with expanded asphalt stabilization revision num november num page num ontario provincial standard specification volume num index municipal and provincial common general and construction specifications date spec .
no .
opss title nov num num notice to users of opss num hot inplace recycling and hot inplace recycling with integral overlay nov num num notice to users of opss num cold inplace recycling nov num num notice to users of opss num cold recycled mix nov num num notice to users of opss num cold inplace recycling with expanded asphalt nov num num notice to users of opss num microsurfacing nov num num notice to users of opss num slurry seal apr num num notice to users of opss num routing and sealing cracks in hot mix asphalt pavement mar num num concrete pavement and concrete base nov num num concrete sidewalk nov num num notice to users of opss num concrete curb and gutter systems nov num num notice to users of opss num installation of interlocking concrete pavers nov num num notice to users of opss num pervious concrete pavement for lowvolume traffic applications apr num num notice to users of opss num full depth repair of concrete pavement or concrete base nov num num rubblizing concrete pavement and concrete base apr num num notice to users of opss num fast track full depth repairs to concrete pavement nov num num notice to users of opss num repairing rigid pavement with precast concrete slabs apr num num notice to users of opss num partial depth repairs in concrete pavement revision num november num page num ontario provincial standard specification volume num index municipal and provincial common general and construction specifications date spec .
no .
opss title nov num num notice to users of opss num crossstitching longitudinal cracks in concrete pavement and concrete base nov num num notice to users of opss num sealing or resealing of joints and cracks in concrete pavement and concrete base division num drainage watermains and utility nov num num notice to users of opss num trenching backfilling and compacting nov num num notice to users of opss num excavating backfilling and compacting for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers formerly opss num nov num num notice to users of opss num rock excavation for pipelines utilities and associated structures in open cut formerly opss num nov num num notice to users of opss num support systems formerly opss num nov num num notice to users of opss num pipe subdrains nov num num maintenance hole catch basin ditch inlet and valve chamber installation nov num num adjusting or rebuilding maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers nov num num notice to users of opss num closedcircuit television cctv inspection of pipelines nov num num notice to users of opss num pipe sewer installation in open cut nov num num cleaning and flushing of pipe sewers catch basins maintenance holes ditch inlets and oilgrit separators nov num num notice to users of opss num sewage forcemain installation in open cut revision num november num page num ontario provincial standard specification volume num index municipal and provincial common general and construction specifications date spec .
no .
opss title nov num num manure pipeline installation in open cut nov num num notice to users of opss num pipeline and utility installation by tunnelling nov num num notice to users of opss num pipeline and utility installation by jacking and boring nov num num notice to users of opss num pipe culvert installation in open cut nov num num precast reinforced concrete box culverts in open cut nov num num notice to users of opss num watermain installation in open cut formerly opss num nov num num notice to users of opss num corrosion protection of new and existing watermains nov num num notice to users of opss num pipeline and utility installation in soil by horizontal directional drilling nov num num notice to users of opss num pipeline rehabilitation by curedinplace pipe nov num num cement mortar lining of watermains nov num num pipeline and conduit installation by pipe bursting nov num num notice to users of opss num site preparation for pipelines utilities and associated structures formerly opss num nov num num notice to users of opss num preservation protection and reconstruction of existing facilities formerly opss num nov num nov num num num notice to users of opss num site restoration following installation of pipelines utilities and associated structures temporary potable water supply services reissued num revision num november num page num ontario provincial standard specification volume num index municipal and provincial common general and construction specifications date spec .
no .
opss title division num miscellaneous nov num num notice to users of opss num compacting nov num num site preparation for pipelines utilities and associated structures relocated now opss num nov num num preservation protection and reconstruction of existing facilities relocated now opss num nov num num notice to users of opss num dust suppressants nov num num site restoration following installation of pipelines utilities and associated structures relocated now opss num nov num num notice to users of opss num removal nov num num riprap rock protection and granular sheeting nov num num notice to users of opss num installation of gabions nov num num trenching backfilling and compacting relocated now opss num nov num num rock excavation for pipelines utilities and associated structures in open cut relocated now opss num nov num num excavating backfilling and compacting for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers relocated now opss num nov num num dewatering of pipeline utility and associated structure excavation nov num num notice to users of opss num control of water from dewatering operations june num num pavement marking relocated now opss num nov num num support systems relocated now opss num nov num num notice to users of opss num temporary protection systems revision num november num page num ontario provincial standard specification volume num index municipal and provincial common general and construction specifications date spec .
no .
opss title apr num num standard highway fence relocated now opss num nov num num chainlink fence relocated now opss num nov num num expanded metal antiglare screen relocated now opss num dec num num traffic control signing relocated now opss num nov num num steel beam guide rail and cable guide rail relocated now opss num feb num num concrete barriers relocated now opss num nov num num guide rail end treatment eccentric loader terminal system relocated now opss num nov num num connecticut impact attenuation system relocated now opss num nov num num guide rail end treatment crashcushion attenuating terminal system relocated now opss num apr num num guide rail end treatment steel beam energy attenuating terminal systems relocated now opss num nov num num the protection of trees relocated now opss num nov num num topsoil relocated now opss num nov num num sodding relocated now opss num nov num num seed and cover relocated now opss num nov num num temporary erosion and sediment control measures relocated now opss num revision num november num page num ontario provincial standard specification volume num index municipal and provincial common general and construction specifications date spec .
no .
opss title division num electrical nov num num notice to users of opss num installation of electrical chambers nov num num notice to users of opss num installation of ducts nov num num notice to users of opss num installation of cable nov num num grounding nov num num notice to users of opss num removal of electrical equipment and materials reissued num nov num num installation of underpass luminaires nov num num installation of power supply equipment apr num num notice to users of opss num erection of poles apr num num notice to users of opss num footings and pads for electrical equipment nov num num installation of roadway luminaires apr num num notice to users of opss num traffic signal equipment nov num num notice to users of opss num installation of sectional steel high mast lighting poles nov num num concrete footings and maintenance platforms for high mast lighting poles division num traffic safety nov num num watermain installation in open cut relocated now opss num nov num num cathodic protection of new and existing watermains relocated now opss num nov num num permanent small signs and support systems nov num num post mounted delineators revision num november num page num ontario provincial standard specification volume num index municipal and provincial common general and construction specifications date spec .
no .
opss title nov num num flexible delineator posts nov num num notice to users of opss num traffic control signing formerly opss num nov num num modified overhead signboards nov num num pavement marking formerly opss num nov num num notice to users of opss num steel beam guide rail and cable guide rail apr num num notice to users of opss num energy attenuators nov num num notice to users of opss num guide rail end treatment steel beam energy attenuating terminal systems nov num num concrete barriers formerly opss num nov num num temporary concrete barriers nov num num connecticut impact attenuation system nov num num noise barrier systems nov num num notice to users of opss num standard highway fence formerly opss num nov num num notice to users of opss num chainlink fence nov num num expanded metal antiglare screen division num environmental and landscape apr num num notice to users of opss num the protection of trees nov num num topsoil formerly opss num revision num november num page num ontario provincial standard specification volume num index municipal and provincial common general and construction specifications date spec .
no .
opss title apr num num notice to users of opss num sodding nov num num notice to users of opss num seed and cover nov num num notice to users of opss num temporary erosion and sediment control measures apr num num notice to users of opss num rootwad structures for waterbody banks apr num num notice to users of opss num large woody debris for waterbody banks apr num num notice to users of opss num lunkers apr num num notice to users of opss num riffles of streambeds apr num num notice to users of opss num pools in streambeds apr num num notice to users of opss num rocky ramps on streambeds apr num num notice to users of opss num low flow channels apr num num notice to users of opss num baffles in a culvert apr num num notice to users of opss num local seed bank division num structural nov num num excavating and backfilling structures apr num num notice to users of opss num deep foundations apr num num notice to users of opss num concrete structures nov num num notice to users of opss num steel reinforcement for concrete revision num november num page num ontario provincial standard specification volume num index municipal and provincial common general and construction specifications date spec .
no .
opss title nov num num structural steel for bridges apr num num structural wood systems nov num num notice to users of opss num metal traffic barriers and metal railings for structures nov num num notice to users of opss num prestressed concrete precast members apr num num notice to users of opss num stressing systems for posttensioning nov num num notice to users of opss num coating structural steel systems nov num num notice to users of opss num embedded work in structures for electrical systems nov num num notice to users of opss num waterproofing bridge decks with hot applied asphalt membrane nov num num notice to users of opss num sign support structures apr num num notice to users of opss num modular bridge structures for temporary installations nov num num formwork and falsework nov num num notice to users of opss num deck joint assemblies preformed seals joint fillers joint seals joint sealing compounds and waterstops structures nov num num notice to users of opss num installation of bearings apr num num notice to users of opss num structure rehabilitation concrete removal nov num num notice to users of opss num abrasive blast cleaning concrete construction nov num num notice to users of opss num structure rehabilitation concrete patches and overlays nov num num structure rehabilitation shotcrete nov num num crack repair concrete nov num num prestressed soil and rock anchors revision num november num page num notice to users of opss num general conditions of contract general conditions of contract has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of the general conditions is now in ops volume num provincialoriented mto general conditions of contract and general construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of the general conditions is now in ops volume num municipaloriented ops general conditions of contract and general construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents general conditions of contract moved as part of revision number num volume num num notice to users of opss num general specification for weighing of materials opss num has been removed from this ops volume the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num there is no prov version .
use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num general specification for electrical work opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num general specification for the use of explosives opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents notice to users of opss num schedule of rental rates for construction equipment including model and specification reference opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num there is no longer be a municipal version of opss num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num april num general specification for supply of prequalified material and products table of contents num scope num references num definitions num prequalified material and products information num supply of material and products num quality assurance appendices numa commentary num scope this specification identifies the material and products that shall be obtained from sources identified in the owners approved material or product listings and used in the work of the following owners a ontario ministry of transportation ministry b ontario municipalities and local authorities municipality c agencies in the transportation and related business agency this specification also describes the process that a manufacturer or supplier must follow to register with the road authority tra and the procedures for classification of a material or product shown on the tra website .
num significance and use of appendices appendices are not a mandatory part of this speciation unless invoked by the owner .
appendix numa is a commentary appendix to provide designers with actions and considerations for the use of this specification in a contract .
page num rev .
date num opss num num references this specification refers to the following standards specifications publications listings and information resource for material and products ministry publication designated sources for materials dsm municipality listing municipal product listing mpl agency listing agency product listing apl information resource the road authority tra num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply prequalified material and products means material and products included on a dsm mpl or apl .
product means the same as material .
product listing means a dsm mpl or apl that is appropriate to an owner .
num prequalified material and products information num submission manufacturers or suppliers desiring inclusion of their material and products in the product listing of a particular owner shall register their material and product with tra .
application for registration on tra and inclusion on a dsm mpl or apl shall be made online the ops website at www.ops.on.ca tra product registration .
the ops products management committee pmc shall process applications following receipt of the completed application for the material or product .
contractors manufacturers and suppliers are cautioned that the pmc ministry municipality or agency accepts no obligation to process applications within any fixed period of time .
num prequalified material and products inclusion of a material or product in a product listing shall be granted by the ministry municipality or agency subject to compliance with this specification the particular standards for the material or product and the classification granted by the pmc .
for continuous listing the manufacturer shall not change material or product type or sources production methods or design without the prior written authorization of the owner .
submission of changes shall be according to the submission subsection .
page num rev .
date num opss num num material and product endorsement inclusion of a material or product in a product listing does not constitute a general endorsement of the material or product for all owners and shall not be used by the recipient to promote the sale of the prequalified material or product in any way .
the owner tests and evaluates material and products in the context of its specific needs only .
any violation of this restriction may result in the withdrawal of any listing granted .
listing of material and products classified by the ops products management committee on tra does not constitute approval of the material or product .
companies wishing to publicize their classification may only refer to the decision of the pmc as this product has received a fill in correct classification type classification from the ontario provincial standards products management committee .
the product profile may be reviewed on the road authority tra website .
num supply of material and products num general any material or products required for an owners contract and included in their product listing shall be supplied by the contractor from sources designated in the product listing when the contractor is responsible for such supply .
a source shall only be considered as listed if it appears in the product listing that is in effect at the time of supply of the material or product .
the ministry is responsible for maintenance of the dsm .
the individual municipality or agency is responsible for maintaining its own mpl or apl .
although registration of material and products is through tra inclusion of the material or product on a product listing is the responsibility of and at the discretion of each owner .
any prequalified material or products shown on a product listing is applicable only to the specific sponsoring owner of the product listing .
any material or products required for an owners contract that is not listed in their product listing shall be supplied from sources specified in the contract documents .
num queries queries regarding the content on a mpl or apl shall be directed to the municipality or agency that has responsibility for the mpl or apl .
queries during the bidding tendering or construction of the work regarding the dsm content shall be directed to head contracts construction office ministry of transportation garden city tower numnd floor num st. paul street st. catharines on lnumr numrnum telephone num fax num page num rev .
date num opss num num product listings the complete dsm and several mpls are available online on the tra website doing business .
the hardcopy version of the dsm is available from publications ontario .
any mpl or apl not shown on the tra website is available from the municipality or agency that has responsibility for the respective mpl or apl .
num quality assurance num material and product quality and quantity sources in a product listing have demonstrated their ability to produce material or products according to the relevant material and product specifications .
however the owner does not warrant that these sources will produce acceptable or sufficient material or product for any contract .
contractors shall make independent investigation and examination as they deem necessary to satisfy themselves as to the quality and quantity of the material or product that is available from these sources .
the contractor is responsible for ensuring that all material and products supplied by the sources satisfy contractual requirements .
page num rev .
date num opss num page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa commentary for opss num april num note this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
it is intended to provide designers with actions and considerations for the use of this specification in a contract .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify sources of materials and products in the contract documents if there is a particular material or product source required that is not included in an owners dsm mpl or apl .
num the designer should ensure that the ontario provincial standards general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standards drawings none .
notice to users of opss num general specification for the management of excess materials opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num general specification for environmental protection for construction in waterbodies and on waterbody banks opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for clearing close cut clearing grubbing and removal of surface and piled boulders table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials not used num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the removal of trees brush bushes stumps windfalls surface boulders and piled boulders .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num grading ontario government publications crown forest sustainability act num s.o .
num c. num num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply clearing means the cutting of all standing trees brush bushes and other vegetation to a maximum height of num mm above original ground level and the removal of felled materials and windfalls .
close cut clearing means the cutting of all standing trees stumps brush bushes and other vegetation at original ground level and the removal of felled materials and windfalls .
page num rev .
date num opss num grubbing means the removal of all stumps roots embedded logs debris and secondary growth .
piled boulders means any cobbles boulders or rock fragments that have been placed in fencerows or piles .
rock means rock as defined in opss num .
surface boulder means any boulder or rock fragment that measures num mm or greater in any one dimension extends a minimum of num mm above original ground and can be removed without excavation .
num design and submission requirements num submission requirements num crown forest crown forest as defined by the crown forest sustainability act shall not be cut until a permit has been obtained from the ministry of natural resources mnr .
num construction num general trees measuring num mm or more in diameter measured num m above ground shall be cut limbed and stacked for collection by others .
cut trees shall not be stacked in or transported through areas identified as being environmentally sensitive in the contract documents or elsewhere by an authority .
when specified in the contract documents cut trees shall be stacked outside and adjacent to the right ofway for the property owner adjacent to and between the stations listed .
within crown land areas specified in the contract documents for clearing and close cut clearing marketable timber shall be made available for purchase from the contractor to the holder of the sustainable forest licence .
all cut and stacked trees shall be cut into lengths agreed to by the contractor and the sustainable forest licence holder but in no case exceeding num m. all timber not purchased by others or stacked for adjacent landowners is excess material .
the work shall not damage or disturb the area outside the areas specified in the contract documents .
when work is done in or near waterbodies or waterbody banks the work shall be according to the contract documents .
num clearing the work shall consist of clearing all areas of earth excavation earth surfaces to be covered by embankments up to and including num m in height and any other areas specified in the contract documents .
num close cut clearing the work shall consist of close cut clearing all earth surfaces to be covered by embankments greater than num m in height and any other areas specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num grubbing the work shall consist of grubbing all areas of earth excavation earth surfaces to be covered by embankments up to and including num m in height and any other areas specified in the contract documents .
grubbing is not required in swamps .
mechanical stump cutters are permitted provided the entire root structure is removed .
depressions remaining after grubbing shall be backfilled with suitable earth material and compacted to avoid settlement .
when clearing has been previously completed by others all secondary growth brush and debris shall be removed .
piled boulders and surface boulders that are not specified in the contract documents for removal and lie within areas to be grubbed shall be removed .
num removal of surface boulders and removal of piled boulders the work shall consist of the removal of surface boulders and removal of piled boulders within the areas specified in the contract documents .
depressions remaining after removal shall be backfilled with suitable earth material and compacted to avoid settlement .
num mechanical stump cutting the work shall consist of mechanical cutting of stumps to a depth of num mm below original grade as specified in the contract documents .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement measurement shall be by area or by each as specified in the contract documents .
num clearing close cut clearing and grubbing measurement of clearing close cut clearing and grubbing shall be by area or by each as specified in the contract documents .
num by area removal shall be measured by area in a horizontal plane in hectares or square metres .
num by each for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the trees or stumps removed .
page num rev .
date num opss num num removal of surface boulders and removal of piled boulders removal shall be measured by area in a horizontal plane in hectares or square metres .
num mechanical stump cutting for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the stumps removed by mechanical cutting .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num clearing item close cut clearing item grubbing item removal of surface boulders item removal of piled boulders item mechanical stump cutting item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
areas designated for removal of piled boulders that lie within areas specified in the contract documents for either grubbing or removal of surface boulders shall be paid separately with no deduction from the grubbing or surface boulder removal item .
removal of individual boulders that are num mnum and greater in volume shall be paid as rock excavation according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents areas identified for clearing close cut clearing grubbing removal of surface boulders and removal of piled boulders and mechanical stump cutting in addition to those areas required by this specification .
num areas identified as being environmentally sensitive .
num areas for clearing and close cut clearing within crown land .
num areas where cut trees are to be stacked .
num the areas where work is to be done in or near waterbodies or waterbody banks .
num review crown land clearing with ministry of natural resources mnr to determine volume of marketable timber available .
num identify holders of sustainable forest licences and their addresses from the mnr and make them available to the contractor .
num method of measurement for clearing close cut clearing and grubbing .
num when surface boulders and piled boulders are to be removed that are outside the general grading limits the removal of surface boulders and removal of piled boulders items should be used .
swamp excavation areas do not require grubbing therefore designers should not include a grubbing quantity in the contract documents for these areas .
the designer should include an additional quantity for individual boulders over num mnum in the rock excavation quantity .
num mechanical stump cutting should be considered to avoid damage to adjacent structures that may result from grubbing .
piled boulders greater than num mnum should be designated for removal and be included for payment in the tender item for removal of piled boulders regardless of where they are located .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
page num rev .
date num opss num notice to users of opss num constructions specification for grading opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for embankments over swamps and compressible soils opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents notice to users of opss num constructions specification for borrow opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for wick drain installation opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents notice to users of opss num construction specification for restoring unpaved roadway surfaces opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for priming granular base opss num has been removed from this ops volume the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for double chip seal opss num has been removed from this ops volume the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num there is no prov version .
use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for single and double surface treatment opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for granular sealing opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for stockpiling of patching materials and patching of asphalt pavement opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for cold mixed cold laid open and dense graded bituminous mix table of contents num scope num references num definitions num submission and design requirements num materials num equipment num construction num quality assurance num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for production and placement of cold mixed cold laid open and dense graded bituminous mix and cover aggregate .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications shall be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincialoriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications shall be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipaloriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num single and double surface treatment opss num hot mix asphalt ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num aggregates hot mix asphalt opss num aggregates surface treatment opss num emulsified asphalt ministry of transportation publications mto laboratory testing manual lsnum resistance to plastic flow of bituminous mixtures using marshall apparatus lsnum percent air voids in compacted dense bituminous pavement mixtures lsnum v.m.a .
in compacted bituminous mixtures lsnum percent compaction of compacted bituminous pavement mixtures lsnum quantitative extraction of asphalt cement and analysis of extracted aggregate from bituminous paving mixtures lsnum mix design for cold mixed dense graded bituminous mixtures lsnum coating dense graded aggregates page num rev .
date num opss num lsnum percent moisture pickup in compacted dense graded bituminous mixtures lsnum coating open graded aggregates lsnum run off for open graded mixtures lsnum sieve analysis of aggregates num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply cl mix means cold mixed cold laid open or dense graded bituminous mix .
fat spot means an area of pavement substantially blacker than the surrounding pavement .
segregation means a condition of the pavement characterized by areas with comparatively coarser or finer texture than that of the surrounding pavement .
num submission and design requirements num mix design the cl mix design shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the proposed mix proportions corroborated by submission of the design proposed by the contractor as determined by the supplier of the asphalt emulsion shall be forwarded to the contract administrator num business days before the start of production .
mix proportions shall be determined using mto test methods lsnum lsnum lsnum and lsnum .
aggregate samples shall be representative of the materials to be used and have proven compatibility workability and acceptable curing time with the emulsified asphalt selected .
num materials num emulsified asphalt the emulsified asphalt shall be according to opss num .
the emulsified asphalt content shall be determined by laboratory testing and shall be within the limits set out in table num .
num aggregates aggregates shall meet the requirements of opss num except that the gradations of open graded aggregates shall be according to table num and dense graded aggregates shall be according to table num .
sufficient aggregate to complete the work shall be stockpiled at least one week prior to use .
the cover aggregate shall be class num aggregate according to opss num .
num cold mixed cold laid open and dense graded bituminous mix num general the cl mix shall show good asphalt dispersion uniform coating and cohesion .
num open graded mix the cure time for open graded mix shall be such that the asphalt cement residue in the emulsion will not wash off the aggregate if water is applied one hour after compaction of the mix .
page num rev .
date num opss num num dense graded mix dense graded mix shall be according to table num .
num equipment num production and placement mobile or stationary mixing plants shall be capable of producing a uniform thoroughly blended cl mix consisting of aggregate and emulsified asphalt .
the aggregate feed system to the mixing unit shall be equipped with a means of determining the mass of material being deposited into the mixing unit prior to the addition of the emulsified asphalt .
the mixing unit shall be capable of continuously maintaining the amount of emulsified asphalt added within num of the aggregate by weight .
all measuring devices shall be calibrated according to the manufacturers specifications at the start of the contract and whenever deemed necessary by the contract administrator .
the emulsified asphalt supply system shall be equipped with a flow meter and a total delivery meter .
a midland mix paver or a central mixing plant according to the cold mix plants subsection will be considered acceptable equivalents for the production of cl mixes .
production equipment shall be properly equipped and adjusted to provide a cl mix according to this specification .
mechanical pavers may be used to place cl mixes produced in a central mix plant and shall be according to the paving equipment clause of opss num .
num cold mix plants num general requirements the equipment shall be such that the cl mix produced meets this specification and shall demonstrate adequate control and documentation of the cl mix materials for monitoring and production purposes .
num emulsified asphalt storage a suitable holding tank which has been thoroughly cleaned of any other material shall be used .
num aggregate feed system a separate tapered cold feed bin with a minimum capacity of num mnum shall be provided for each size type or gradation of aggregate .
partitions of sufficient height to eliminate intermingling of the aggregate shall be provided between adjoining bins .
bins shall be a minimum of num m wider than the width of the loading buckets .
a permanent scalping screen shall cover the top of each bin to remove any oversize aggregate .
vibratory pan feeders shall not be acceptable for proportioning aggregates .
a calibrated and manually adjustable feed gate shall regulate the flow of aggregate from each bin to a conveyor feeding the pugmill .
the conveyor shall be equipped with a scale indicating tonnes per minute of production and total tonnes .
num pugmill the pugmill shall be an approved twin shaft type with a minimum capacity of num mnum and capable of producing a uniform mix .
the clearance of the blades from the inner surfaces of the pugmill shall not exceed num mm .
page num rev .
date num opss num page num rev .
date num opss num the paddles shall be of a type adjustable for angular position and reversible to retard the flow of the mix if required .
the mixing time or cycle shall be adjustable .
num emulsified asphalt pump the pump shall be a variable speed positive displacement pump that feeds an adjustable spray bar located at the charging end of the pugmill .
the pump may also be a positive displacement pump mechanically interlocked to the aggregate feed rate mechanism in which case the pump must be equipped with a variable speed control .
the pump shall be equipped with a totalizing type meter with manual reset and shall indicate the flow of emulsion being pumped in litres per minute .
there shall be a satisfactory means of positive control between the flow of aggregate from the hopper and emulsion from the pump .
the pump shall be interlocked either mechanically electrically or hydraulically to the aggregate feed rate control mechanism so that a constant volumetric ratio of emulsion to aggregate is fed to the pugmill .
the system shall be interlocked through a master control switch .
num discharge holding hopper the plant shall be equipped with a discharge holding hopper with a minimum capacity of num tonne .
it shall be operated by a control switch on the control station panel .
num rollers rollers shall be according to opss num except that three wheel rollers will not be allowed .
num cover aggregate spreaders spreaders shall be according to opss num or shall be an acceptable tailgate type spreader capable of uniform application without displacement of the cl mix .
spinner type spreaders are not allowed .
num construction num emulsified asphalt emulsified asphalt shall be thoroughly mixed with the aggregate .
num cold mixed cold laid open and dense graded bituminous mixes num operational constraints traffic shall not be permitted on the cl mix until final rolling is completed and the mix can support traffic loading without deformation .
cl mixes shall not be produced prior to may numth or when rain is imminent .
except by special permission from the contract administrator dense graded mix shall not be produced after september numth and open graded mix shall not be produced after september numth .
in no case shall cl mixes be produced unless the ambient temperature is at least num c and rising .
num preparation of the foundation num granular base the granular base on which the cl mix is to be placed shall be smooth true to grade and free of surface float .
num pavement paved surfaces on which the cl mix is to be placed shall be free of dirt sand foreign matter and loose material .
num production and placement cl mix of the type specified in the contract documents shall be produced and placed in accordance with the requirements of this specification .
when a second course is specified in the contract documents any loose cover aggregate shall be swept from the surface .
the previously laid course shall be adequately cured prior to placing the second or surface course .
num compaction num general initial rolling shall commence once initial breaking of the asphalt emulsion has occurred and the mix can support the roller without shoving .
final rolling shall be done using a steel tandem roller after the cover aggregate has been applied .
num open graded mix each completed course of open graded mix shall have the following percent air voids in the compacted cl mix as determined by lsnum clnum and clnum num air voids clnum and clnum num air voids num dense graded mix each completed course of dense graded mix shall be compacted to at least num of laboratory density as determined lsnum .
num trial application at the start of the contract a trial area num m in length and one traffic lane wide shall be constructed to demonstrate that equipment personnel and methods of operation to be used are capable of producing an acceptable cl mix .
if deficiencies are evident during construction of the trial area work shall be stopped until the deficiencies are corrected .
num surface tolerance each course after final compaction shall be smooth and true to the established crown and grade and the surface of each course shall be free from deviations exceeding num mm as measured in any direction with a num m straight edge .
page num rev .
date num opss num num surface appearance each course after final compaction shall be of uniform texture and shall be free of segregation fat spots oil spills or any other defect .
defective areas shall be removed and replaced with acceptable mix of the same type and compacted to the satisfaction of the contract administrator .
num sampling samples of the actual cl mix shall be taken by the contractor at least twice a day and provided to the contract administrator .
each sample shall fill a fourlitre pail .
additional samples shall be provided when requested by the contract administrator .
num tolerances the mix samples shall be according to the following tolerances residual asphalt content num aggregate retained on the num mm sieve for open graded mix num for dense graded mix num num cover aggregate after the initial rolling has taken place cover aggregate shall be spread uniformly at a rate of num num kgmnum over the surface of all open graded mixes and then rolled into the cl mix .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num quality assurance num testing the owner may test any samples required by this specification for conformance to specified requirements .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num emulsified asphalt measurement shall be by mass in kilograms according to the requirements of the contract documents except that portable and conveyor scales will not be acceptable for use .
num open graded cl num open graded cl num open graded cl num open graded cl num dense graded cl cover aggregate measurement shall be by mass in tonnes according to the requirements of the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num basis of payment num emulsified asphalt item open graded cl num item open graded cl num item open graded cl num item open graded cl num item dense graded cl item cover aggregate item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
defective areas shall be removed replaced with acceptable mix of the same type and compacted to the satisfaction of the contract administrator at no extra cost to the owner .
page num rev .
date num opss num table num emulsified asphalt and residual asphalt content type of mix emulsified asphalt content kgt residual asphalt content by mass note num cl num open graded surface or levelling course num num num clnum open graded surface or levelling course num num num clnum open graded binder or levelling course num num num clnum open graded binder or levelling course num num num dense graded num num num note num .
as determined by test lsnum .
table num gradation requirements for open graded aggregates lsnum passing sieve designation cl num cl num cl num cl num num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num m note num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note num .
open graded mix aggregates with more than num passing the num m sieve will be rejected .
page num rev .
date num opss num table num gradation requirements for dense graded aggregates lsnum sieve designation passing num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num m num m num m note num num num num num num num num num note num .
dense graded mix aggregates can have a maximum variability of num for material passing the num m sieve .
table num physical requirements for cold mixed dense graded bituminous mix property of laboratory compacted mixtures air cured water cured mto test method marshall stability n marshall flow units of num mm air voids vma pass num mm by mass num num num by mass moisture pickup num min .
num min .
num num num num num min .
num min .
num max .
lsnum lsnum lsnum lsnum lsnum page num rev .
date num opss num page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents type of cl mix .
num the designer should determine if the following is required and if so specify it in the contract documents second course of cl mix .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
notice to users of opss num construction specification for hot mix asphalt opss num has been removed from this ops volume there is no provincial version of opss num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for asphalt sidewalk driveway and boulevard and for sidewalk resurfacing opss num has been removed from this ops volume the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num there is no prov version .
use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for asphalt curb and gutter and gutter systems and asphalt surfacing of gutters opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for hot mix asphalt end result opss num has been removed from this ops volume and placed in ops volume num provincialoriented mto general conditions of contract and general construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num use of the specification is as specified in the contract documents there is not an opss.muni num opss num moved as part of revision number num volume num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for untreated subbase base surface shoulder selected subgrade and stockpiling opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num moved in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for extruded expanded polystyrene frost heave treatment opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for open graded drainage layer opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for inplace full depth reclamation of bituminous pavement and underlying granular opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for full depth reclamation with expanded asphalt stabilization opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num moved in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for hot inplace and hot inplace recycling with integral overlay opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for cold inplace recycling opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num moved in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for cold recycled mix opss num has been removed from this ops volume the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for cold inplace recycling with expanded asphalt opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num moved in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for microsurfacing opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for slurry seal opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for routing and sealing cracks in asphalt pavement opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num march num construction specification for concrete pavement and concrete base table of contents num scope num references num definitions num submission and design requirements num materials num concrete .num burlap .num moisture vapour barrier for curing .num curing compound .num water for curing .num tie bars and load transfer devices .num joint materials num equipment num compacting .num hot poured rubberized asphalt joint sealing .num forms .num automatic dowel bar inserter .num diamond grinder num construction num preparation work num general num joints num general .num load transfer devices .num transverse construction joints .num position and alignment tolerances num dowel bars .num joints page num rev .
date num opss num num tie bars .num dowel bars at transverse joints .num protection of tie bars and dowel bars num concreting num consolidating .num finishing .num texturing of surface .num surface tolerance num curing num general num joint sealing .num miscellaneous protection num rain .num traffic .num shoulders .num cold weather num insulation removal for sawcutting num concrete base num general .num joints .num texturing of surface .num joint sealing .num surface tolerance num sampling and testing num slump and air content .num coring .num filling of core holes .num identification .num transportation of cores num quality assurance num acceptance criteria for strength and thickness num general .num core compressive strength and slab thickness num compressive strength and thickness num removal of unacceptable concrete .num cracking in concrete pavement page num rev .
date num opss num num measurement for payment num actual measurement num concrete pavement concrete base num plan quantity measurement num concrete pavement concrete base num basis of payment num concrete pavement item concrete base item num compressive strength and slab thickness .num additional coring and testing num scope this specification covers the requirements for the construction of concrete pavement and concrete base .
num references this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num untreated granular subbase base surface shoulder and stockpiling opss num full depth repair of concrete pavement and concrete base opss num partial depth repairs in concrete pavement opss num sealing or resealing of joints and cracks in concrete pavement opss num concrete structures opss num steel reinforcement for concrete opss num waterproofing bridge decks with hot applied asphalt membrane opss num formwork and falsework ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num aggregates concrete opss num water opss num moisture vapour barriers opss num burlap opss num joint filler concrete opss num white pigmented curing compounds for concrete opss num concrete materials and production opss num load transfer assemblies opss num epoxy coated steel reinforcement for concrete page num rev .
date num opss num canadian standards association csa anumanum concrete materials and methods of concrete constructionmethods of test for concrete ministry of transportation publication mto laboratory testing manual lsnum procedures for calculating percent within limits num definitions for the purposes of this specification the following definitions shall apply concrete pavement means a rigid pavement structure with an exposed concrete surface which may include concrete shoulders .
concrete base means a rigid pavement structure which is overlaid with asphaltic concrete on the same contract and may include concrete shoulders .
percent within limits pwl means an estimate of the percentage of the lot population that is within specification limits determined by using the mean and standard deviation of the lot .
standard deviation means the square root of the value found by summing the squares of the difference between each test result and the mean of the test results divided by the number of test results minus one .
num submission and design requirements where concrete pavement or concrete base is to be placed from october num to april num the contractor must submit a plan detailing curing and protection plans .
the plan shall describe the method by which inplace minimum concrete temperatures shall be maintained .
no concrete shall be placed unless the plan is approved by the contract administrator .
num materials num concrete concrete and concrete materials shall be according to opss num with the following amendments a .
the coarse aggregate for concrete pavement and concrete base shall have a combined gradation of nominal maximum size num mm and num mm aggregate and shall be according to the requirements of opss num. b .
the class of concrete shall be num mpa according to opss num .
the cementing materials content subsection and the strength tests and requirements subsection of opss num do not apply .
c. for all concrete pavement and concrete base the air content shall be num num. d. if the concrete is formed the slump shall be num mm num mm .
e. concrete shall be placed with a mix temperature within the range of numc and numc .
page num rev .
date num opss num num burlap burlap shall be according to opss num .
num moisture vapour barrier for curing moisture vapour barrier for curing shall be according to opss num .
num curing compound white pigmented membrane curing compound for concrete shall be according to opss num .
num water for curing water for curing shall be according to opss num .
num tie bars and load transfer devices tie bars shall be according to opss num and load transfer devices shall be according to opss num .
num joint materials expansion joint filler shall be according to opss num .
joint sealant material shall be according to opss num .
num equipment num compacting concrete shall be consolidated by means of surface vibrators internal vibrators or a combination of both that provide full depth consolidation without segregation .
num hot poured rubberized asphalt joint sealing hot poured rubberized asphalt joint sealing equipment shall be according to opss num .
num forms forms shall be according to opss num .
num automatic dowel bar inserter where an automatic dowel bar inserter is used it must be capable of placing dowel bars as specified .
the dowel bars shall be inserted to middepth of the slab and centred on the transverse joint locations and spaced as shown on the plans .
the equipment shall be capable of consolidating the concrete around the dowel bars .
num diamond grinder where a diamond grinder is used it shall be powerdriven selfpropelled equipment specifically designed to grind and texture concrete pavement and concrete base .
it shall be equipped with a grinding head with at least num diamond blades per num mm of shaft .
the grinding head shall be at least num m wide .
the grinder shall be equipped with the capability to adjust the depth slope and crossfall to ensure that concrete is removed to the desired dimensions and uniformly feathered and textured across the width and length of the required area .
the equipment shall also include a slurry pickup system .
page num rev .
date num opss num num construction num preparation work num general before placing concrete on granular base the granular immediately ahead of the concrete placing operation shall be wetted down thoroughly .
the wetting down shall be carried out without leaving standing water .
num joints num general joints shall be of the type and at the location shown in the contract .
the initial sawcut for longitudinal and transverse contraction joints shall be sawn as soon as possible normally within num hours of paving operations .
sawcutting operations shall not result in ravelling or other damage to the concrete .
the initial cut shall be for one third the depth of the concrete slab .
the joints shall be cleaned and sealed according to opss num .
dowel bars at the transverse contraction joints shall be placed using load transfer devices or an automatic dowel bar inserter .
num load transfer devices load transfer devices shall be as shown in the contract .
num transverse construction joints transverse construction joints shall be made at the end of each days run or when interruptions occur in the concreting operation .
transverse construction joints shall be formed at a contraction or expansion joint except in exceptional cases of plant breakdown or adverse weather conditions .
in these exceptional cases a construction joint may be formed in the mid slab area subject to the provision that the portion of the slab placed and the portion of the slab to be placed is not less than num m in length .
construction joints in adjacent lanes of pavement shall align with joints in the previously placed lane .
num position and alignment tolerances num dowel bars the dowel bars shall be placed within a tolerance of num mm in the vertical and horizontal planes of the pavement .
num joints all joints shall be placed within a tolerance of num mm from the position and alignment of the centre of the dowel bars .
num tie bars at longitudinal joints epoxy coated tie bars shall be installed where specified and as detailed in the contract .
tie bars shall be inserted so that voids are not created around the bar .
tie bars shall not be placed within num mm of a transverse joint .
page num rev .
date num opss num num dowel bars at transverse joints at all expansion and contraction joints dowel bars shall be installed according to the details in the contract .
the location of dowel bars shall be marked to permit precise joint forming or cutting operations directly over the centre of the dowel bars .
when an automatic dowel bar inserter is used the contractor shall be required to remove a num m x full paver width section of concrete pavement or concrete base within the first days paving .
additional sections will be required until the contractors operations conform to the specification .
the joint to be removed will be selected by the contract administrator .
the section will be inspected by the contract administrator to ensure that the placement and alignment of the dowel bars meet requirements .
the section removed shall be repaired according to opss num .
num protection of tie bars and dowel bars protection of dowel bars shall be according to opss num .
bars with coating damage greater than num of the surface area of each bar shall not be used .
for bars with coating damage of num or less of their surface area all damaged areas of the bar coating shall be repaired .
num concreting concrete shall be placed at or near its permanent location in such a manner so as to avoid segregation of the materials .
any excess concrete beyond the pavement edge shall be removed immediately .
transverse joint load transfer devices shall be placed a minimum of num m in advance of the paving operations .
when an interruption in placing concrete of more than num minutes occurs a transverse construction joint shall be formed .
concrete shall not be placed against any material which is at a temperature above numc or against any material whose temperature is below numc .
the maximum ambient air temperature for placing concrete is numc .
num consolidating concrete shall be thoroughly consolidated against and along the face of all forms and into the face of previously placed concrete .
for fixedform placement handheld vibrators shall be used to supplement consolidation adjacent and along the full length of the form .
they shall also be inserted at regularly spaced intervals along both sides of dowel assemblies .
vibrators shall never be operated longer than num seconds in any one location .
for slipform pavers the concrete shall be consolidated by vibrators of sufficient number spacing and frequency to provide uniform consolidation to the entire pavement width and depth .
the vibrators shall not operate while the paver is stopped .
the vibrators shall not come in contact with the subgrade subbase forms tie bars or dowel assemblies .
num finishing no water or other chemical agents shall be applied to the concrete surface for finishing purposes .
page num rev .
date num opss num for concrete pavements where fixed forms are being used or where concrete is being placed against an existing pavement and before surface texturing the edge of the pavement shall be finished with an edging tool having a radius of not more than num mm .
the finished pavement edge shall be left smooth true to line and grade .
num texturing of surface after all finishing operations are completed on concrete pavements and before initial curing and protection of the concrete the plastic surface of the concrete shall receive an initial and final texturing .
initial texturing shall be performed with a longitudinal burlap drag to produce a uniform textured surface .
burlap shall be kept in a clean and damp condition free from encrusted mortar .
final texturing shall be achieved using equipment manufactured to produce transverse grooves num mm num mm wide on num mm num mm centres with a groove depth of num mm num mm .
grooving shall extend to within num mm num mm of the pavement edge .
grooving for small or irregular areas may be done by hand methods .
the surface shall be free in all cases from displaced aggregate particles and local projections .
num surface tolerance the surface of the concrete is to be such that when tested with a num m long straightedge placed in any location and direction including the edge of pavement except across the crown or drainage gutters there shall not be a gap greater than num mm between the bottom of the straightedge and the surface of the pavement .
diamond grinding will be required to ensure the concrete surface meets these requirements .
num curing num general curing shall be according to opss num with the following exceptions curing shall be applied to all exposed surfaces as soon after the texturizing operation as can be achieved without damaging the surface .
as soon as forms are removed the sides of the exposed concrete faces shall be sprayed with the white pigmented curing compound at the specified rate of application .
curing compound shall not be applied to joint faces receiving sealant or to concrete surfaces to which concrete or mortar is to be bonded .
num joint sealing joint sealing shall be according to opss num .
num miscellaneous protection num rain concrete shall not be placed in the rain .
the contractor shall take all necessary precautions to protect plastic concrete from rain .
num traffic traffic other than foot traffic rubbertired sawing equipment and rubbertired side wheels of form mounted placing and finishing equipment necessary to construct adjacent lanes shall not be permitted on the concrete until it has attained num mpa .
page num rev .
date num opss num samples required for early strength determination shall be taken and tested by the contractor .
a minimum of num set of two cylinders per num m length of paving shall be required for early opening determination .
samples shall remain on site as specified until time of testing .
the concrete pavement shall be protected from damage to the surface at all times when steeltracked equipment is used .
num shoulders shouldering operations may commence once the adjacent concrete has attained num mpa .
completion of the shoulders shall be according to opss num .
num cold weather concrete shall not be placed when the ambient air temperature is below numc and shall not be placed against any material whose temperature is below numc .
the contractor shall provide protection to ensure the minimum inplace temperature of the concrete pavement or concrete base is numc for the first three days of curing and at numc for the subsequent num days .
num insulation removal for sawcutting when the concrete pavement or concrete base requires protection by insulation no more than num linear metres of concrete pavement or concrete base shall be exposed for sawcutting operations at any one time .
in no case shall any concrete pavement or concrete base be exposed for more than one hour during sawcutting .
num concrete base num general the work required for concrete base includes the work required for concrete pavement except as modified by this subsection .
num joints a final reservoir cut is not required at the joints .
num texturing of surface texturing of the surface is not required .
num joint sealing the sealing of joints in concrete base is not required .
num surface tolerance the provisions of subsection num apply except that the tolerance is increased to num mm .
num sampling and testing num slump and air content field sampling and testing of plastic concrete for conformance to slump and air content requirements shall be the contractors responsibility as detailed below .
page num rev .
date num opss num slump and air content shall be tested according to opss num with the following exceptions the frequency of slump and air content testing shall be according to table num .
table num sampling and testing minimum frequencies tests frequency air content each load until satisfactory control is established .
then num random test per num truck loads slump for fixed form paving each load until satisfactory control is established .
then num random test per num truck loads notes test procedures shall be according to csa anum .
satisfactory control is considered to have been established when tests on five consecutive truck loads or batches of concrete are within specification requirements .
num coring coring shall be carried out when the concrete is num to num days old .
the contractor may elect to core for compressive strength testing prior to num days provided the strength testing is performed within two days of coring .
the location of the core in each sublot will be selected by the owner using a table of random numbers .
no core shall be taken within num mm of any joint or edge of slab .
the contractor shall cut one core in each sublot .
the cores shall be num mm in diameter and shall be drilled through the complete depth of concrete pavement or concrete base perpendicular to the surface of the slab .
num filling of core holes each core hole shall be filled immediately after coring with an approved nonshrink grout .
the patch shall be finished flush with the surface of the concrete slab .
immediately before filling the vertical surface of each core hole shall be cleaned of the paste left from the coring operation by wire brushing and all free water shall be removed .
after filling each hole all excess material shall be removed from the surface of the slab .
num identification of cores each core shall be legibly marked with durable ink immediately after its removal from the core hole .
the core identification numbers will be specified by the owner .
num transportation of cores the concrete cores shall be delivered to a laboratory designated by the owner .
the cores shall be delivered on the same day they were obtained .
the contractor is responsible for transporting these cores in a safe manner to avoid damage to the cores .
page num rev .
date num opss num num quality assurance num acceptance criteria for strength and thickness num general acceptance of the concrete pavement or concrete base for each lot will be based on the mean and standard deviation of the lot measurements for core compressive strength and slab thickness .
the contract administrator will calculate the percent within limits for each criteria as described in lsnum .
num core compressive strength and slab thickness the slab thickness will be determined based on core length for each sublot each core shall be measured for length prior to trimming .
four measurements rounded to the nearest millimetre shall be made around the perimeter of the core to determine the actual concrete thickness .
these measurements shall be taken at the ends of two perpendicular diameters .
cores will be tested for compressive strength when the concrete is num to num days old .
if the contractor elects to core prior to num days the compressive strength tests will be performed within two days of coring .
the cores shall be stored in the laboratory at an ambient air temperature of numc and numc and moisture conditioned for num num hours prior to testing .
the testing shall be according to csa anumc .
if the lot pwl is greater than or equal to num the lot is acceptable for the criteria .
if the lot pwl is greater than num the lot will be accepted with a bonus for the criteria .
if the lot pwl is less than num and greater than or equal to num the lot is accepted for the criteria with a price adjustment .
if the lot pwl is less than num the lot is rejectable and shall be subject to repair and reassessment .
notwithstanding the overall pwl if any individual core compressive strength or if any individual length is less than num of the specified compressive strength or specified slab thickness the contractor shall repair the sublot .
for calculation of pwl the lower limit is num mpa for compressive strength .
the lower limit for thickness shall be specified as the design thickness minus num mm .
num lot size num compressive strength and thickness a lot shall consist of the total quantity of concrete pavement or concrete base on the contract of the same specified thickness .
each lot will be divided into num mnum sublots or a minimum of three sublots for compressive strength and thickness .
the owner will test one core from each sublot to determine the core compressive strength and slab thickness .
num retesting num compressive strength and thickness the contractor or the contract administrator may question an individual test result within three working days of receiving the test result for that sublot .
the contractor shall notify the owner of his intention to recore .
a new core shall be obtained from locations adjacent to the location of the original set of cores .
the new core shall be obtained at a maximum age of num days and tested not later than num days after the coring .
the lot will be reevaluated as specified under basis of payment .
page num rev .
date num opss num num removal of unacceptable concrete if individual sublot results for core compressive strength or thickness of concrete pavement or concrete base dictates removal and replacement of a sublot additional cores shall be taken by the contractor to establish the extent of the deficient area .
the cores shall be taken at num m intervals along the length of the pavement in both directions starting num m from the location of the original core .
the area to be removed shall be bounded by the nearest contraction joint and longitudinal joint or concrete pavement or concrete base edge outside the deficient area so that there shall be no additional joints .
where the overall sublot results dictate removal and replacement the contractor shall remove and replace the entire sublot .
num cracking in concrete pavement all cracking in excess of one third the depth of the slab thickness shall be repaired as a full depth repair according to opss num .
cracks less than onethird the thickness of the slab shall be repaired according to opss num .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num concrete pavement concrete base measurement will be the surface area of concrete pavement or concrete base placed in square metres .
num plan quantity measurement num concrete pavement concrete base when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement will be based on the units shown in the clause under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num concrete pavement item concrete base item payment at the contract price for the above items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material required to do the work except that where work does not conform to the quality requirements adjustment for each lot will be made according to the following .
the price adjustment will be based on the average of the pay factors pf for strength and thickness .
when retesting is completed the test results used to determine the price adjustment shall be as detailed in table num .
payment for retesting will be made only when the retest results in an increased payment .
page num rev .
date num opss num page num rev .
date num opss num num compressive strength and slab thickness adjustment of the contract price for compressive strength and slab thickness shall be based on the following formulae and table num .
for concrete pavement and concrete base pf strength num num pwl pf thickness num num pwl table num criteria for payment when retesting difference between new and old core test core used for payment adjustment num mm original core thickness num mm new core num original core strength num new core num additional coring and testing payment will not be made for additional coring and testing to determine the limits of slab removal .
the owner will pay for reboring and testing for strength and thickness only when the retests result in an increase in payment .
page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification construction specification for concrete sidewalk table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the construction of concrete sidewalks .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be as specified in the contract documents .
metric opss num november num page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialorinum ented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num grading opss num untreated granular subbase base surface shoulder and stockpiling opss num adjusting or rebuilding maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers opss num compacting opss num concrete structures opss num formwork and falsework ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num aggregates base subbase select subgrade and backfill material opss num hot poured rubberized asphalt joint sealing compound opss num joint filler in concrete opss num white pigmented curing compounds for concrete opss num concrete materials and production page num rev .
date num opss num astm international c num sheet materials for curing concrete a nummnum gray iron castings c num static coefficient of friction of ceramic tile and other like surfaces by the horizontal dynamometer pullmeter method num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply cold weather means as defined in opss num .
sidewalk bay means the area between two transverse joints regardless of the type of joint .
num design and submission requirements num tactile walking surface indicator plate submission requirements one copy of the manufacturers installation instructions and working drawings for each type of tactile walking surface indicator plates shall be submitted to the contract administrator prior to the installation of the plates .
when requested a certificate from the manufacturer for the tactile walking surface indicator plates that confirms the product was manufactured and met the test requirements according to the contract documents shall be submitted to the contract administrator .
the certificate shall include test results from an independent testing laboratory currently accredited by the standards council of canada .
num materials num concrete concrete shall be according to opss num with a minimum specified numday compressive strength of num mpa .
coarse aggregate for the concrete shall have a nominal maximum size of num mm .
num expansion joint material expansion joint filler material shall be asphalt impregnated fibreboard having a minimum of num mm thickness and shall be according to opss num type a .
hot poured rubberized asphalt joint sealing compound shall be according to opss num .
num subgrade moisture vapour barrier subgrade moisture vapour barrier shall be according to astm c num .
num granular granular base shall be according to opss num .
num curing compound curing compound shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num tactile walking surface indicator plates gray cast iron tactile walking surface indicator plates shall be as specified in the contract documents .
castings shall be according to astm a numm class numb and shall be bare and not coated with paint or other coatings or substances .
castings shall be sound free from pouring faults cracks blowholes and other defects .
the surface of each new cast iron plate on both the tops of the truncated domes and the field between the truncated domes shall have a minimum wet and dry static coefficient of friction of num according to astm c num .
the initials or trademark of the manufacturer year of manufacture and country of manufacture shall be distinctly cast and legible in raised letters on the top side of each plate .
num equipment num forms forms shall be according to opss num .
num slip forming the equipment used for slip forming shall have automatic horizontal and vertical alignment controls shall be used in conjunction with at least one stringline .
num construction num general the work required for concrete sidewalk shall include earthwork granular base compaction preparation work formwork utility adjustment and isolation concrete placing and finishing jointing curing and protection .
concrete sidewalk shall be constructed at the locations and to the widths and thicknesses specified in the contract documents .
excavation and embankment construction shall be according to opss num .
num grading tolerances num subgrade when the subgrade is prepared for a granular base the finished subgrade surface shall be within a num mm deviation measured at any point on a num m long straight edge .
b sidewalk the finished subgrade surface shall be within a num mm deviation from the specified grade and crosssection with the surface being within a num mm deviation measured at any point on a num m long straight edge .
page num rev .
date num opss num num granular base placement of granular base material shall be according to opss num .
when a granular base is prepared for sidewalk the finished granular surface shall be within a num mm deviation from the specified grade and crosssection with the surface being within a num mm deviation measured at any point on a num m long straight edge .
num compaction compaction shall be according to opss num .
num preparation work num general before placing concrete on a subgrade the subgrade shall be wetted down except where clays occur .
b granular base the granular immediately ahead of the concrete placing operation shall be wetted down thoroughly .
the wetting down shall be carried out without leaving standing water .
alternatively a subgrade moisture vapour barrier may be placed to completely cover the subgrade under the sidewalk .
adjacent strips shall be lapped num mm minimum and ends shall be lapped num mm minimum .
num form setting throughout their entire length forms shall be set true to the lines grades and thickness specified in the contract documents and in direct contact with the subgrade or granular base .
num utility adjustment work done on adjustment of maintenance holes valve chambers and catch basins shall be according to opss num .
utility appurtenances shall be adjusted flush with the surface of the new sidewalk .
appurtenances maintained by utility companies other than the owner shall be adjusted by the utility company concerned under arrangement by the contract administrator .
the contractor shall excavate to the edge of the appurtenance and indicate the required grade of the new sidewalk .
num utility isolation in sidewalk the required utility isolations shall be constructed in the concrete sidewalk to the details and at the locations specified in the contract documents .
num placing concrete concrete shall be placed consolidated and finished in a manner that ensures uniform consistency .
any excess concrete beyond the sidewalk edge shall be removed .
concrete shall be placed by a continuous pour method .
where concrete placing is interrupted for more than num minutes a num mm thick asphalt impregnated fibreboard joint filler shall be installed vertically across the sidewalk width before resuming concrete placing .
page num rev .
date num opss num concrete shall not be placed against any material which is at a temperature above num c or against any material whose temperature is below num c. num tactile walking surface indicator plate installation a set of two cast iron tactile walking surface indicator plates shall be set into wet prepared concrete at each concrete sidewalk ramp as specified in the contract documents and according to the plate manufacturers installation instructions .
plates shall be cleaned after installation .
num concrete finishing finishing of the concrete surface shall take place while the concrete is sufficiently plastic to achieve the desired grades elevations and texture .
the surface of the sidewalk shall be uniform dense free from undulations and projections struck off true to grade and crosssection and finished with a float .
excessive fines and water shall not be drawn to the surface .
surface evaporation retardants shall not be used as an aid for finishing concrete .
the application of water cement or combination of both to the concrete surface shall not be permitted as a finishing aid .
localized defects shall be repaired using concrete .
the sidewalk shall be given a broomed texture after finishing with a float .
the presence of footprints or other marks in the completed sidewalk shall require sawcutting removal and replacement of the complete sidewalk bay .
num joints num general longitudinal and transverse joints shall be constructed of the type and at the locations specified in the contract documents .
the concrete adjacent to all formwork and joints shall be finished with a tool that produces a num mm rounded edge and a smooth horizontal surface with a maximum width of num mm .
all tooling shall be uniform and straight and shall be depressed to a maximum of num mm below the adjacent surface .
any ridges along the tooled marks shall be removed .
num dummy joints dummy joints shall be hand formed using a num mm radius dummy joint tool .
num contraction joints contraction joints shall be placed at every third dummy joint and shall be sawcut or formed to a depth that is one quarter the thickness of the sidewalk .
when the sidewalk width is num m or greater a longitudinal contraction joint shall be sawn or formed at a maximum spacing interval of num m. page num rev .
date num opss num num expansion joints expansion joints shall be constructed to the full depth of the slab .
expansion joints shall be filled with expansion joint material and shall be clean and dry at the time of construction .
expansion joints shall be constructed where the sidewalk abuts a rigid object or changes direction .
num identification stamp at the request of the contract administrator the sidewalk shall be clearly and legibly marked with an approved stamp each end of the work and at other places as directed .
the stamp shall be centred on the sidewalk bay next to and parallel to a transverse joint .
the stamp shall identify the contractors name and the year of construction .
num concrete curing concrete shall be cured using a membranecuring compound applied according to opss num .
for the purpose of membranecuring compound application the application rate shall be num lmnum .
num cold weather concreting the placing and protection of concrete sidewalks in cold weather shall be according to opss num .
num protection of sidewalk vehicular traffic shall be restricted from crossing the sidewalk after the concrete has been placed for a minimum period of three days or until the concrete has reached num of the specified numday compressive strength .
num sidewalk tolerances the surface of the concrete after texturing shall be within a num mm deviation measured at any point on a num m long straight edge .
the minimum acceptable thickness of the sidewalk shall be the specified thickness minus num mm .
if the thickness deficiency exceeds num mm the sidewalk shall be removed and replaced .
core samples of the finished concrete may be taken to establish the actual thickness of the slab at locations determined by the contract administrator .
unacceptable areas of sidewalk identified by the contract administrator shall require the sawcutting removal and replacement of the complete sidewalk bay by the contractor .
num tactile walking surface tolerances tolerances for the tactile walking surface indicator plates shall be as specified in the contract documents .
if the tactile walking surface indicator plates are not within the specified tolerances the plates shall be rejected .
rejected plates shall be removed and replaced as directed by the contract administrator .
page num rev .
date num opss num num field sampling and testing of concrete field sampling and testing of concrete shall be according to opss num .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num concrete sidewalk measurement of concrete sidewalk shall be by area in square metres .
num tactile walking surface indicators for concrete sidewalk ramps for measurement purposes a count shall be made for each set of tactile walking surface indicator plates installed at each concrete sidewalk ramp .
a set shall consist of two tactile walking surface indicator plates .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clause under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num concrete sidewalk item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
repair or removal and replacement of an unacceptable sidewalk bay shall be completed at no extra cost to the owner .
num tactile walking surface indicators for concrete sidewalk ramps item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
num excavation payment for excavation shall be under the tender item earth excavation grading or rock excavation grading according to opss num .
num utility adjustment payment for the adjustment of utility appurtenances shall be paid under the appropriate items according to opss num .
no payment shall be made for appurtenances adjusted by the utility company .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents locations of sidewalks wider than numm in areas with higher pedestrian volumes see tac gdg section num and mto gdsoh section d.num num line grade and thickness requirements of concrete sidewalk num and num details and locations of required utility isolations num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num concrete sidewalk opsd num concrete sidewalk adjacent to curb and gutter opsd num concrete sidewalk ramps at intersections opsd num concrete sidewalk ramps at signalized intersections with intersecting crosswalks opsd num concrete sidewalk ramps at unsignalized intersections opsd num concrete sidewalk ramps tactile walking surface indicators component opsd num utility isolation in concrete sidewalks opsd num concrete sidewalk driveway entrance details opsd num joint detail for concrete pedestrian crosswalk at signalized intersection page num rev .
date num opss num notice to users of opss num construction specification for concrete curn and gutter systems opss num has been removed from this ops volume the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for the installation of interlocking concrete pavers opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents notice to users of opss num construction specification for pervious concrete pavement for lowvolume traffic applications opss num has been removed from this ops volume the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num there is no prov version .
use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for full depth repair of concrete pavement or concrete base opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for rubblizing concrete pavement and concrete base table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements not used num materials num equipment num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for inplace rubblizing of concrete pavement or concrete base and compaction of the rubblized concrete .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specification construction opss num compacting ontario provincial standard specification material opss num aggregates base subbase select subgrade and backfill material num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply concrete base means a rigid pavement structure that is overlaid with asphaltic concrete on the same contract and may include concrete shoulders .
concrete pavement means a rigid pavement structure with an exposed concrete surface that may include concrete shoulders .
page num rev .
date num opss num rubblizing means the thorough fracturing of plain or reinforced concrete slabs with or without dowels to produce an inplace material for use as a base or subbase .
num material num granular a granular a shall be according to opss num .
num equipment num rubblizing the rubblizing equipment shall be a selfcontained selfpropelled resonant frequency pavement breaking unit capable of producing high frequency low amplitude blows with a minimum impact energy of num newtons at a rate of not less than num impacts per second .
the equipment shall be capable of rubblizing concrete pavement and concrete base inplace .
the compactor shall be a selfpropelled vibratory single smooth steel drum grade roller with a minimum weight of num kg .
the equipment shall apply water for dust suppression as required .
num construction num operational constraints all new and existing pavement drainage systems shall be fully operational for two weeks prior to rubblizing .
prior to rubblizing adequate lateral support shall be provided against the existing concrete slab either by the existing or the new granular shoulders or base .
all overlying bituminous material shall be fully removed prior to rubblizing .
only construction traffic shall be permitted on the rubblized surface .
construction traffic shall be limited on the rubblized surface and the compacted condition of the rubblized pavement shall be maintained prior to placing the overlying material .
the rubblizing operation shall not damage exposed road appurtenances and fixtures .
a full depth saw cut shall be made along an existing joint at all ramps and mainline pavement where rubblized concrete abuts pavement that is to remain in place .
all dowels between the planned rubblizing and concrete pavement to remain in place shall be severed .
in areas where the roadway is to be overlaid with hot mix asphalt one lane at a time rubblizing shall extend a minimum of num cm beyond the edge of pavement to be overlaid num compaction of granular a compaction of granular a shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num gradation requirement for rubblized concrete the rubblized concrete shall meet the following gradation requirements a no particles shall exceed num mm in the largest dimension .
b a maximum of num by mass shall pass the num m sieve .
any pieces of rubblized concrete greater than num mm shall be removed or reduced to an acceptable size .
the resulting void shall be replaced with compacted granular a material .
num test section the proposed rubblizing operation shall be demonstrated by the contractor over a num m full width test section .
the test section location shall be subject to the approval of the contract administrator .
the resultant rubblized concrete shall meet the specified requirements .
when the rubblizing operation does not conform to the specification appropriate adjustments shall be made to the operation to ensure conformance to the specification and an additional test section shall be performed .
num compaction and proof rolling the rubblized concrete shall be compacted with a minimum of two passes each pass being up and back of the selfpropelled vibratory single smooth steel drum grade roller .
the roller shall be operated at a speed not exceeding num kmh .
where deflections and associated movement of the rubblized concrete surface are apparent remedial action shall be taken as directed by the contract administrator .
num sampling a minimum of one sample per day of production shall be taken on a random basis by the contractor at locations determined by the contract administrator .
the sample size shall be a minimum of one square metre for the full depth of the rubblized concrete including the embedded steel .
the sampling frequency may be reduced at the discretion of the contract administrator .
the removed rubblized material shall be visibly inspected by the contract administrator for conformance to the specification .
after sampling the sampled area shall be backfilled and compacted with granular a material .
num embedded steel all embedded steel reinforcement in the rubblized concrete shall be left in place .
where reinforcement is present the bond between the concrete and the reinforcement shall be broken .
any steel exposed or protruding above the surface shall be cut off flush with the surface and removed from the site .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num measurement for payment num actual measurement num rubblizing of concrete pavement rubblizing of concrete base measurement of rubblizing of concrete pavement and concrete base shall be by area in square metres .
num plan quantity payment when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clause under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num rubblizing of concrete pavement item rubblizing of concrete base item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
asphalt removal shall be paid for under a separate item .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations other concrete pavement rehabilitation treatments should be considered prior to specifying rubblizing .
for effective rubblizing the concrete slab shall be free of delamination and material deterioration .
this specification is written as a method specification identifying a unique process incorporating a resonant frequency pavement breaker .
gradation control of the final product is based on visual assessment of the rubblized material .
when greater gradation control is required of the final product full depth removal of the concrete pavement and offsite crushing is recommended .
all overlying bituminous material shall be fully removed prior to rubblizing .
payment for removal of bituminous material shall be under separate items .
the designer should ensure that areas previously repaired with full depth asphalt are removed to ensure uniform performance of the rubblized material .
proper subgrade support for the rubblizing operation shall be assessed during precontract engineering .
granular a material for backfill purposes may be substituted with an alternate crushed granular material .
when paving directly on the rubblized surface a hot mix asphalt levelling course is recommended .
if an alternate material is required this must be indicated in the contract documents .
the designer should identify the thickness of the concrete slab to be rubblized and identify the type of embedded steel in the concrete slab .
pavement drainage systems including ditch subdrains and outlets are to be staged so that they are installed and operational prior to rubblizing operations beginning .
operations should be staged so that the lateral pavement edge support remains in place until the rubblizing operations are completed .
this is to ensure that the maximum impact energy is transferred to the concrete slab .
since only construction traffic is permitted on the rubblized surface traffic staging should be shown in the contract documents .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
page num rev .
date num opss num notice to users of opss num construction specification for fast track full depth repairs to concrete pavement opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for repairing rigid pavement with precast concrete slabs opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents notice to users of opss num construction specification for partial depth repairs in concrete pavement opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for crossstitching longitudinal cracks in concrete pavement and concrete base opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents notice to users of opss num construction specification for sealing or resealing of joints and cracks in concrete pavement and concrete base opss num has been removed from this ops volume the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num there is no prov version .
use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for trenching backfilling and compacting opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num moved in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for excavating backfiling and compacting for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for rock excavation for pipelines utilities and associated structures in open cut opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for support systems opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for pipe subdrains opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification construction specification for new maintenance hole catch basin ditch inlet and valve chamber installation table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation of maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
metric opss num november num page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications shall be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications shall be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num concrete curb and gutter systems opss num excavating backfilling and compacting for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers opss num support systems opss num adjusting or rebuilding maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers opss num site preparation for pipelines utilities and associated structures opss num preservation protection and reconstruction of existing facilities opss num site restoration following installation of pipelines utilities and associated structures opss num removal opss num dewatering of pipeline utility and associated structure excavation opss num concrete structures opss num deck joint assemblies preformed seals joint fillers joint seals joint sealing compounds and waterstops structures page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num aggregates miscellaneous opss num cementing materials opss num water opss num concrete materials and production opss num precast reinforced concrete components for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers opss num steel reinforcement for concrete opss num frames grates covers and gratings opss num rubber adjustment units for maintenance holes catch basins and valve chambers opss num high density polyethylene hdpe and expanded polystyrene eps adjustment units for maintenance holes catch basins and valve chambers canadian general standards board cgsb num readymixed organic zincrich coating astm international c nummnum resilient connectors between reinforced concrete manhole structures pipes and laterals num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply adjustment units means circular and rectangular units used between the structure and the frame to adjust the elevation of the frame for grates and covers .
structure means castinplace and precast maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers .
num design and submission requirements num submission requirements the contract administrator shall be notified in writing a minimum of num days prior to precast components for structures being delivered to the site of the works giving the following information a name of the company that shall be supplying the materials .
b the schedule for the delivery of each component to the site of the works .
num materials num concrete concrete for castinplace structures shall be according to opss num with a nominal minimum numday compressive strength of num mpa .
page num rev .
date num opss num num steel reinforcement steel bar reinforcement bar mats and wire fabric for castinplace structures shall be according to opss num .
num precast concrete components for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers precast units shall be according to opss num and as specified in the contract documents .
num steps and ladders steps shall be according to opss num and as specified in the contract documents .
ladders shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num adjustment units precast concrete adjustment units shall be according to opss num .
rubber adjustment units shall be according to opss num .
high density polyethylene hdpe and expanded polystyrene eps adjustment units shall be according to opss num .
num mortar and grout mortar shall consist of a mixture of one part portland cement according to opss num and three parts mortar sand according to opss num wetted with sufficient water to make the mixture plastic .
water shall be according to opss num .
grout shall consist of a mixture of one part portland cement according to opss num and two parts mortar sand according to opss num wetted with sufficient water to make the mixture plastic .
water shall be according to opss num .
num frames with covers or grates frames with covers or grates shall be according to opss num and as specified in the contract documents .
num aluminum safety platforms aluminum safety platforms shall be according to opss num and as specified in the contract documents .
num joint seal systems joint seal systems for precast concrete structures shall be according to opss num .
num zinc rich paint zinc rich paint shall be according to cancgsb num .
num resilient connectors resilient connectors between pipes and structures shall be according to astm c numm .
page num rev .
date num opss num num construction num general structures of the type specified in the contract documents shall be installed on undisturbed and competent foundations at the locations and to the elevations specified in the contract documents and shall be constructed plumb and true to alignment .
the top of structures shall be installed below the final grade to allow for the placement of adjustment units to facilitate the placement of the top of the frame with grate or cover to the final grade .
num restrictions the following restrictions shall apply a precast concrete maintenance hole tees may be used only when the mainline pipe sewer is concrete .
b precast concrete maintenance hole tees may not be used when a change in pipe size longitudinal grade or direction is required .
num site preparation site preparation shall be according to opss num .
num preservation and protection of existing facilities preservation and protection of existing facilities shall be according to opss num .
num protection against floatation damage to the structure due to floatation shall be prevented during construction and until completion of the work .
num cold weather work all work shall be protected from freezing .
structures shall not be installed on frozen ground .
num transporting unloading storing and handling manufacturers recommendations for transporting unloading storing and handling shall be followed .
materials that are unsound or damaged shall be rejected .
num excavating backfilling and compacting excavating backfilling and compacting for the installation of structures shall be according to opss num .
num support systems support systems shall be according to opss num .
num dewatering dewatering shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num castinplace structures concrete placement shall be according to opss num .
all inside wall protuberances shall be removed once the forms are stripped .
num precast structures precast or mono bases shall be placed level .
subsequent sections complete with joint seal systems shall be installed according to the manufacturers recommendations .
joint seal systems for special site conditions infiltrationexfiltration shall be as specified in contract documents .
adjustment of the structure shall be carried out by lifting the affected sections free of the excavation re levelling the base if necessary and reinstalling the sections .
damaged sections and gaskets shall be replaced .
lift holes shall be plugged with mortar .
num installation of inlet and outlet pipes into concrete structures inlet and outlet pipes shall be securely set into the structures concrete base or walls using grout or approved pipe connectors so that the structure is watertight .
one of the following connections shall be provided where a pipe connects to a structure a a flexible pipe joint shall be provided within num mm of the outside face of the structure for flexible and rigid pipe .
b a concrete cradle to the first joint for rigid pipe .
c a resilient connector i.e .
a flexible watertight connector in the structure opening for flexible and rigid pipe .
d a special approved structure designed for pipe support .
installation of pipe connectors shall be according to the manufacturers recommendations .
all pipes except in valve chambers shall be flush with the inside walls of the structure .
when specified in the contract documents cast iron or medium density polyethylene goss traps shall be placed at the outlet pipe of the catch basin .
when a subdrain is specified in the contract documents the opening for the connection of the subdrain outlet shall be formed by coring .
the subdrain outlet pipe shall be sealed into place using nonshrink grout .
a num mm diameter weep hole shall be cored into the same wall as the subdrain connection and at the same invert elevation .
num benching and channelling when specified in the contract documents the inside concrete bottom of the structures shall be benched and channelled to accommodate the pipe .
where benching is hand finished it shall have a wood float finish and channelling shall have a steel trowel finish .
channelling shall be smooth and flush with adjacent pipe inverts .
page num rev .
date num opss num num installation of adjustment units installation of adjustment units shall be according to opss num .
num installation of frames with grates or covers when precast concrete adjustment units are used frames with grates or covers shall be set in a full bed of mortar on the precast concrete adjustment units .
when hdpe or eps adjustment units are used frames with grates or covers shall be installed and sealed according to the hdpe or eps adjustment unit manufacturers instructions .
when rubber adjustment units are used frames with grates or covers shall be set firmly in place on the rubber adjustment unit by laying a continuous strip of butyl tape on the top surface of the rubber adjustment units and on the bottom of the frame .
ditch inlet grates shall be installed as specified in the contract documents .
installation of frames with grates or covers which lie within the flow lines of a curb and gutter system shall be according to opss num .
num installation of aluminum safety platforms aluminum safety platforms shall be installed as specified in the contract documents .
num installation of extension stems and boxes for valve chambers extension stems and boxes shall be installed as specified in the contract documents .
caps for valve boxes shall be installed flush with the final grade .
guides for the valve extension stems shall be securely anchored to the valve chamber .
num installation of ladders and steps ladders shall be installed as specified in the contract documents .
steps shall be installed according to opss num .
steps shall be accurately set in the forms and supported to prevent their displacement if they are being castinplace during the placing of concrete for the structure .
num installation of frost straps frost straps shall be installed as specified in the contract documents .
num valve chamber insulation insulation for the roof wall or access way of the valve chamber shall be installed as specified in the contract documents .
num catch basin apron curb and gutter with concrete aprons on existing catch basins shall be constructed at the locations as specified in the contract documents .
the work shall include but not be limited to the following page num rev .
date num opss num a remove existing curb and gutter and existing pavement by saw cutting to the limits shown in the contract documents .
b disposal of all materials designated for removal shall be according to opss num. c construction of concrete curb and gutter shall be according to opss num. d adjustment of frame and grate to suit final pavement elevations shall be according to opss num. e placement of concrete for concrete apron shall be according to opss num. f concrete for curb and gutter and apron shall be poured in place as one structure .
g placement of hotpoured rubberized asphalt joint sealing compound and joint filler in construction joints shall be according to opss num. h the horizontal limits of the concrete apron to fit local conditions .
num clean out of structures during the progress of the work and until completion and acceptance of the work structures shall be kept clean and free of all foreign material .
num site restoration site restoration shall be according to opss num .
num leakage test sanitary sewer maintenance holes and storm sewer maintenance holes shall be tested for leakage when specified in the contract documents .
leakage shall not exceed a rate of num litres per hour per metre of head above the lowest pipe invert in the maintenance hole .
the test shall be performed by plugging all pipe openings in the maintenance hole and filling the maintenance hole with water .
after one hour has elapsed the distance the surface of the water has dropped shall be measured and the leakage determined by calculating the volume of that portion of the maintenance hole formerly occupied by the water .
maintenance holes failing the initial test shall have the leaks repaired and be retested until the leakage is below the allowable limit .
there shall be no visible infiltration .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num maintenance holes catch basins apron ditch inlets and valve chambers for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of structures installed and adjusted .
page num rev .
date num opss num num maintenance hole leakage testing for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of maintenance holes passing the leakage test .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num maintenance holes type size item catch basins type size item ditch inlets size item valve chambers size item maintenance hole leakage testing item catch basin apron item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
the horizontal limits of the concrete apron to fit local conditions shall be at no additional cost to the owner .
when the owner raises or lowers the depth of a maintenance hole by up to and including num mm it shall not constitute a change in the work and adjustment shall not be made to the payment .
where the depth of a maintenance hole is raised or lowered by more than num mm this shall then constitute a change in the work for the full extent of the change from the original grade .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer may consider including soil boring data a geotechnical report a subsurface report andor a soils report in the contract documents .
the designer should specify the following in the contract documents material requirements for precast units .
num steps and ladders .
num num frames with covers or grates .
num aluminum safety platforms .
num structure type location and elevation .
num type and location of goss traps .
num subdrains .
num benching .
num installation of ditch inlet grates .
num aluminum safety platforms .
num extension stems and boxes .
num ladders and steps .
num frost straps .
num valve chamber insulation .
num curb and gutter with concrete aprons .
num the contractor may use any of the connections shown in subsection num d. if a specific connection is required it shall be specified in the contract documents .
designer should determine if leakage testing for storm and sanitary sewer maintenance holes is required .
if it is required it shall be specified in the contract documents .
ground water conditions shall determine the type of test required and shall be specified in the contract documents .
alternative leakage test methods can be considered such as air or cctv inspection .
num the tender item description for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers should include reference to one or more of the attributes shown i.e .
type of structure or size of structure to be complete .
num page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa the tender item description for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers should include reference to one or more of the attributes shown i.e .
type of structure or size of structure to be complete .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num hoisting hook rib for cast iron frames for catch basins maintenance holes and valve chambers opsd num to num cast iron catch basin frames with grates opsd num to num cast iron maintenance hole frames with covers opsd num to num cast iron valve chamber frames with covers opsd num galvanized steel honey comb grating for ditch inlets opsd num to num aluminum safety platforms opsd num to num maintenance hole steps opsd num to num catch basin frame with grate installation opsd num to num precast concrete maintenance holes num to num mm in diameter opsd num maintenance hole benching and pipe opening details opsd num to num precast concrete maintenance hole components num to num mm in diameter opsd num frost strap installation opsd num to num precast concrete ditch inlet maintenance hole opsd num to num precast concrete single inlet flat cap num to num mm in diameter opsd num to num precast concrete twin inlet flat cap num to num mm in diameter opsd num to num maintenance hole catch basin and valve chamber adjustment units opsd num to num concrete catch basin apron opsd num to num precast concrete catch basins opsd num to num precast concrete ditch inlets opsd num to num precast concrete ditch inlets types a and b with num to num mm diameter flat cap opsd num precast maintenance hole manufactured tee opsd num support for pipe at catch basin or maintenance hole opsd num castinplace chamber for valves up to num mm diameter opsd num precast valve chamber num mm and num mm diameter opsd num valve operator page num rev .
date num opss num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification construction specification for adjusting or rebuilding maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements not used num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for adjusting or rebuilding maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers and the installation of safety platforms .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
metric opss num november num page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num excavating backfilling and compacting for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers opss num support systems opss num maintenance hole catch basis ditch inlet and valve chamber installation opss num site preparation for pipelines utilities and associated structures opss num preservation protection and reconstruction of existing facilities opss num site restoration following installation of pipelines utilities and associated structures opss num concrete structures ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num aggregates miscellaneous opss num cementing materials opss num water opss num concrete materials and production page num rev .
date num opss num opss num precast reinforced concrete components for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers opss num steel reinforcement for concrete opss num frames grates covers and gratings opss num rubber adjustment units for maintenance holes catch basins and valve chambers opss num high density polyethylene hdpe and expanded polystyrene eps adjustment units for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers canadian general standards board cgsb num readymixed organic zincrich coating num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply adjusting means changing the final grade of the frame with cover or grate on an existing structure a upwards by the addition of adjustment units or b downwards by removal of existing adjustment units or bricks and mortar regardless of the size or type of structure .
adjustment units means circular and rectangular units used between the structure and the frame to adjust the elevation of the frame for grates and covers .
lift rings means circular and rectangular prefabricated metal or high density polyethylene units used to adjust the elevation of the grates and covers only .
they are inserted between the frame and the grate or cover .
rebuilding means changing the final grade of the frame with grate or cover on an existing structure a upwards by the addition of precast concrete sections concrete and adjustment units or b downwards by the removal of precast concrete sections concrete and adjustment units or bricks and mortar regardless of the size or type of structure .
structure means castinplace and precast maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers .
num materials num concrete concrete for castinplace structures shall be according to opss num with a nominal minimum numday compressive strength of num mpa .
num steel reinforcement steel bar reinforcement bar mats and wire fabric for castinplace structures shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num precast concrete components for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers precast units shall be according to opss num and as specified in the contract documents .
num steps and ladders steps shall be according to opss num and as specified in the contract documents .
ladders shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num adjustment units precast concrete adjustment units shall be according to opss num .
rubber adjustment units shall be according to opss num .
high density polyethylene hdpe and expanded polystyrene eps adjustment units shall be according to opss num .
num mortar mortar shall consist of a mixture of one part portland cement according to opss num and three parts mortar sand according to opss num wetted with sufficient water to make the mixture plastic .
water shall be according to opss num .
num frames with covers or grates and lift rings frames with covers or grates and lift rings shall be according to opss num .
num aluminum safety platforms aluminum safety platforms shall be according to opss num and as specified in the contract documents .
num joint seal systems joint seal systems for precast concrete structures shall be according to opss num .
num zinc rich paint zinc rich paint shall be according to cancgsb num .
num construction num general the work of adjusting or rebuilding structures shall include the removal and subsequent replacement of the frame with grate or cover .
all structures shall be adjusted or rebuilt plumb true to alignment and grade and as specified in the contract documents .
during the progress of the work and until the final acceptance all structures in service shall be kept clean and free of all extraneous material .
page num rev .
date num opss num prior to adjusting or rebuilding a structure the existing frame with cover or grate shall be carefully removed and salvaged .
suitability of the salvaged frame with cover or grate for reuse shall be determined by the contract administrator .
the installation of adjustment units frames covers grates lift rings precast concrete components and castinplace aprons shall be according to opss num and of the type as specified in the contract documents .
additional steps or ladder extensions are required when the distance from the adjusted cover or grate reference elevation to the first step exceeds num mm .
additional steps shall be placed according to opss num .
alterations to ladders valve extension stems and boxes and frost straps shall be as specified in the contract documents .
after having been raised any structure that has a total height of num m or more shall have a safety platform installed in it .
the aluminum safety platforms shall be installed as specified in the contract documents .
after adjusting or rebuilding a valve chamber insulation shall be installed according to the manufacturers recommendations on the roof wall or access way of the valve chamber when specified in the contract documents .
num site preparation site preparation shall be according to opss num .
num preservation and protection of existing facilities preservation and protection of existing facilities shall be according to opss num .
num cold weather work all work shall be protected from freezing .
num transporting unloading and storing and handling transporting unloading storing and handling shall be according to manufacturers recommendations .
materials that are unsound or damaged shall be rejected .
num excavating backfilling and compacting excavating backfilling and compacting for the adjustment or rebuilding of structures shall be according to opss num .
num support systems support systems shall be according to opss num .
num adjusting all existing brickwork and mortar shall be removed from the top of the existing structure .
page num rev .
date num opss num when there are adjustment units on an existing structure adjustment units shall be added or removed as required so when the adjustment is completed there is a minimum of one to a maximum of three adjustment units on the top of the structure prior to placing the frame with grate or cover .
num precast concrete adjustment units precast concrete adjustment units shall be used to set the frame with grate or cover at the required position and elevation .
a minimum of one adjustment unit but not more than three adjustment units are required at each structure to a maximum height of num mm .
the first adjustment unit shall be laid in a full bed of mortar and aligned with the opening in the structure .
successive adjustment units shall be laid plumb to the first adjustment unit and sealed according to manufacturers recommendations .
num high density polyethylene hdpe and expanded polystyrene eps adjustment units when specified in the contract documents hdpe or eps adjustment units shall be used to set the frame with grate or cover at the required position and elevation .
a minimum of one adjustment unit is required at each structure up to a maximum height of num mm .
hdpe or eps adjustment units shall be installed and sealed according to manufacturers recommendations .
rubber adjustment units shall not be used in conjunction with hdpe or eps adjustment units .
num rubber adjustment units rubber adjustment units shall be used when specified in the contract documents .
one rubber adjustment unit is used to replace the top precast concrete adjustment unit per structure and shall be used in conjunction with one or two precast concrete adjustment units .
more than one rubber adjustment unit may be placed when wedge shaped rubber units are used to provide slope to the frame with grate or cover .
in either instance the total height of the rubber units shall be greater than num mm and less than num mm .
the rubber unit is to be placed on the precast concrete adjustment unit so it provides the surface on which the frame rests .
the rubber adjustment unit shall be bonded firmly in place on the precast concrete adjustment unit by laying a continuous strip of butyl tape on the top surface of the precast concrete unit .
if more than one rubber unit is used a continuous strip of butyl tape is to be laid between each rubber adjustment unit .
num rebuilding num general all existing brickwork and mortar or adjustment units shall be removed from the top of the existing structure .
the completed rebuilt structure shall have a minimum of one to a maximum of three adjustment units on the top of the structure prior to placing the frame with grate or cover .
page num rev .
date num opss num num castinplace structures when the top of the structure is to be lowered the concrete shall be carefully removed to the required elevation and exposed steel reinforcement shall be cut off as specified in the contract documents .
the upper section of the structure shall then be rebuilt to its original configuration using castinplace concrete and steel reinforcement as specified in the contract documents .
to raise the top of structures with a tapered upper section the concrete in the structure shall be removed for the entire depth of the taper .
the upper section including straight walls and taper shall then be rebuilt to the original configuration using castinplace concrete and steel reinforcement as specified in the contract documents .
to raise the top of straight walled structures the existing roof section if any shall be removed .
the existing walls shall then be extended upward and the roof section rebuilt to the original configuration using castinplace concrete and steel reinforcement as specified in the contract documents .
when castinplace units are to be raised or lowered with castinplace concrete the top surface of all existing walls shall be roughened and a bonding agent shall be applied to the joint before the walls are extended upwards .
concrete shall be placed according to opss num .
all inside wall protuberances shall be removed once the forms are stripped .
num precast concrete structures where precast concrete structures having either a tapered or flat slab top section are to be raised or lowered the top section shall be carefully removed and salvaged and riser sections of suitable height shall be carefully removed from substituted for or added to the existing riser sections .
the top section shall then be replaced .
all of the above work shall be performed according to opss num .
the procedure described for lowering a castinplace structure shall be followed as an alternative to the method described above for lowering a precast structure .
num restoration restoration shall be according to opss num .
num leakage test sanitary sewer maintenance holes and storm sewer maintenance holes shall be tested for leakage according to opss num .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num measurement for payment num actual measurement num adjusting or rebuilding maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of structures adjusted or rebuilt .
when more than one adjustment or rebuild is specified for a structure each adjustment or rebuild shall be counted separately .
num installation of safety platforms for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of safety grates installed .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num adjusting maintenance holes item rebuilding maintenance holes item adjusting catch basins item rebuilding catch basins item adjusting ditch inlets item rebuilding ditch inlets item installation of lift rings item adjusting valve chambers item rebuilding valve chambers item installation of safety platforms item rebuilding catch basin apron item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents material requirements for precast units .
num steps and ladders .
num aluminum safety platforms .
num adjustment and rebuilding requirements .
num use of hdpe or eps adjustment units .
num rubber adjustment units .
num alterations to ladders valve extension stems and boxes and frost straps .
num installation of aluminium safety platforms .
num valve chamber insulation .
num additional adjustments required .
num cutoff of exposed steel reinforcement .
num concrete and steel placement requirements .
num the designer should consider determining the number of salvageable frames with covers or grates .
if there are frames with covers or grates that are not suitable for salvage then an item should be added to the contract documents to ensure there are a sufficient number of new frames with covers or grates to fill the contract needs .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num hoisting hook rib for cast iron frames for catch basins maintenance holes and valve chambers opsd num to num cast iron catch basin frames with grates opsd num to num cast iron maintenance hole frames with covers opsd num to num cast iron valve chamber frames with covers opsd num galvanized steel honey comb grating for ditch inlets opsd num to num aluminum safety platforms opsd num to num maintenance hole steps opsd num aluminum ladder for maintenance holes opsd num to num catch basin frame with grate installation page num rev .
date num opss num opsd num to num precast concrete maintenance holes num to num mm in diameter opsd num to num precast concrete maintenance hole components num to num mm in diameter opsd num frost strap installation opsd num to num precast concrete ditch inlet maintenance hole opsd num to num precast concrete single inlet flat cap num to num mm in diameter opsd num to num precast concrete twin inlet flat cap num to num mm in diameter opsd num to num maintenance hole catch basin and valve chamber adjustment units opsd num to num concrete catch basin apron opsd num to num precast concrete catch basins opsd num to num precast concrete ditch inlets opsd num to num precast concrete ditch inlets types a and b with num to num mm diameter flat cap opsd num castinplace chamber for valves up to num mm diameter opsd num precast valve chamber num mm and num mm diameter opsd num valve operator notice to users of opss num construction specification for closedcircuit television cctv inspection of pipelines opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for pipe sewer installation in open cut opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num moved in revision number num num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification construction specification for the cleaning and flushing of pipe sewers catchbasins maintenance holes ditch inlets and oilgrit separators table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the cleaning and flushing of pipe sewers catchbasins maintenance holes ditch inlets and oilgrit separators .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
metric opss num november num page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num closedcircuit television inspection of sewers opss num pipe sewer installation in open cut num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply air gap method means a clear vertical separation between the pressurized potable water supply and a nonpressurized nonpotable water receiving vessel .
backflow prevention means a device used to protect potable water supplies from contamination or pollution due to backflow .
cleaning means suction and vacuuming removal of debris within pipe sewers catchbasins maintenance holes ditch inlets and oilgrit separators .
page num rev .
date num opss num combination hydrojet cleaner means a service vehicle or equipment capable of pressure washing suction vacuum cleaning of debris .
debris means sludge dirt sand gravel rocks bricks other solid and semisolid materials and roots grease and encrustations and other materials that may cause restriction to flow in pipe sewers catchbasins maintenance holes ditch inlets and oilgrit separators .
flushing means hydraulic pressure washing using various nozzles pressure and flow rates to flush debris within pipe sewer systems downstream .
oilgrit separator means a device designed to separate oil and suspended solids from water .
pipe sewer means as defined in opss num .
num design and submission requirements when equipment requiring an environmental compliance approval for a waste management system issued by the ontario ministry of environment and climate change will be used for the work a copy of the environmental compliance approval shall be submitted to the contract administrator a minimum of two weeks prior to commencement of the work .
num materials num water source water source shall be as specified in the contract documents .
when the source is not specified water shall be clean and free from oil acid alkali organic matter or other deleterious substances .
backflow prevention and air gap methods shall be used when water is taken from potable water systems .
num equipment num combination hydrojet cleaner a combination hydrojet cleaner specifically designed for the purpose of cleaning pipe sewers catch basins maintenance holes ditch inlets oilgrit separators and similar facilities using a selection of nozzles and attachments to permit reaming and root cutting as required shall be used for the work .
the equipment shall be sufficient to clear blockages and remove debris from pipe sewer systems with varied sizes and downstream constraints .
num construction num general the work shall commence at the upstream end of pipe sewer systems and progress to the downstream end .
the conditions of the site and the pipe sewer system shall be thoroughly assessed including the degree of pipe blockage and types of debris .
the equipment nozzles flow rates and pressures necessary to complete the work shall be determined .
any supplemental information regarding the sewer network and the assessment method shall be as specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num for post installation inspections sewers requiring cleaning and flushing shall be as specified in the contract documents .
the owner may request additional documentation of findings after cleaning and flushing operations as specified in the contract documents .
prior to using any mechanical equipment verify with cctv inspections if any utility clearance is required .
water flow volumes and pressures shall not cause damage to the pipe sewer system or flooding of property .
water flow volumes and pressures shall be appropriate for the age and condition of the pipe sewer system .
debris that can not be removed by flushing shall be loosened and broken up using reamers and root cutters as required .
no blockage to service connections shall occur as a result of the cleaning and flushing or cleanout operation .
protection of waterbodies and waterbody banks shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num pipe sewer cleaning and flushing flushing shall be used to transport debris from each section of pipe sewer to the downstream maintenance hole or catchbasin .
each section of pipe sewer between maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets shall be cleaned and flushed before cleaning and flushing the next downstream section .
debris shall be continuously cleaned from the downstream maintenance hole or catchbasin as flushing occurs .
the passage of debris from one section of pipe sewer to another shall not be permitted unless specified in the contract documents .
a weir or sediment trap shall be placed in the maintenance hole to prevent passage of debris from the upstream pipes .
when cleaning and flushing is completed for each section the weir or sediment trap shall be removed .
cleaning and flushing shall continue for each section of pipe sewer until no further debris is flushed from the pipe and the pipe sewer section is free of impediments to flow .
a minimum of num of the pipe sewer circumference shall be free of debris .
if cleanout can not be completed due to damaged or broken pipe sewer catchbasin maintenance hole or ditch inlet the contract administrator shall be immediately notified .
num catchbasin maintenance hole and ditch inlet cleanout a combination hydrojet cleaner shall remove debris from catchbasins maintenance holes and ditch inlets separately .
num oilgrit separator cleanout oilgrit separators shall be cleaned out by closing or blocking off the inlet and outlet pipes dewatering the system removal of debris by vacuum or other mechanical means and cleaning and flushing to remove sediment .
the inlet and outlet pipes shall not be reopened or unblocked until after the separator has been inspected by the contract administrator .
page num rev .
date num opss num num closedcircuit television inspection unless otherwise specified in the contract documents pipe sewers shall be inspected after cleaning by closedcircuit television cctv according to opss num .
the contract administrator shall be notified a minimum num hours prior to the inspection .
when specified in the contract documents water shall be added immediately prior to cctv inspection to the upstream end of the sewer system for minimum flow to the system low point by gravity .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
debris removed from pipe sewers catchbasins maintenance holes ditch inlets and oilgrit separators shall be managed as excess material according to the contract documents .
liquid shall be decanted or filtered and returned to the sewer of origin .
the decanted or filtered liquid shall comply with provincial water quality objectives and local municipal bylaws .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num pipe sewer cleaning and flushing measurement for pipe sewer cleaning and flushing shall be by length in metres by time in hours or by volume in cubic metres as specified in the contract documents .
num by length measurement shall be in metres and along the centreline of the pipe sewer from the centre of the maintenance hole catch basin or ditch inlet at each end of the pipe sewer system to be cleaned out .
when cleaning and flushing is incomplete due to a collapsed pipe or immovable blockage the length of collapsed pipe or blockage shall be deducted from the length measured for payment .
num by time measurement shall be by time in hours that the combination hydrojet cleaner is in effective operation .
num by volume measurement shall be by volume in cubic metres of decanted debris in predetermined truck box capacities .
num catchbasin maintenance hole ditch inlet and oilgrit separator cleanout for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of structures cleaned .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clause under actual measurement .
page num rev .
date num opss num num basis of payment num pipe sewer cleaning and flushing item catchbasin maintenance hole ditch inlet cleanout and oilgrit separator cleanout item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents the owner shall provide any available information on the condition of the sewer network e.g .
size age constraints material known defects vulnerable sections .
num the owner may choose to evaluate specify or approve the assessment method of pipe prior to work .
num for post installation inspections the owner shall identify sewers requiring flushing and cleaning num if access to the waterbody or a waterbody bank is required necessary protection measures shall be specified num the individual owners may request documentation of findings after flushing completion e.g .
presence of grease roots construction debris pipe defect and an estimate of the lightmediumheavy level of material removed where applicable and submission of inspection reports and maps num the owner shall identify if passing material between maintenance holes will be permitted num the owner shall designate if cctv inspection is not required num the owner shall designate if additional water for minimum flow is required prior to the camera inspection num the owner shall designate water source where applicable including any metering or tracking if required num the owner shall designate disposal sites where applicable designating as temporary or permanent as necessary including any additional environmental requirements num method of measurement for pipe sewer cleaning and flushing .
num related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
page num rev .
date num opss num notice to users of opss num construction specification for forcemain installation in open cut opss num has been removed from this ops volume the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num there is no prov version .
use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for manure pipeline installation in open cut table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements not used num materials num equipments not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for installing permanent manure pipelines in open cut .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be as specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications shall be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications shall be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num grading opss num trenching backfilling and compacting opss num support systems opss num site preparation for pipeline utilities and associated structures opss num preservation protection and reconstruction of existing facilities opss num site restoration following installation of pipelines utilities and associated structures opss num dewatering of pipeline utility and associated structure excavation opss num temporary protection systems ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num concrete materials and production opss num pressure polyethylene pipe products page num rev .
date num opss num csa standards bnum pvc injectionmoulded gasketed fittings for pressure applications part of cancsabnum thermoplastic pressure piping compendium bnum series bnum rigid polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe for pressure applications part of cancsabnum thermoplastic pressure piping compendium bnum series astm international a numa nummnum zinc coating hot dip on iron and steel hardware a numa stainless steel bars and shapes a num carbon steel bolts studs and threaded rods num psi tensile strength b num electrodeposited coatings of zinc on iron and steel b num num electrodeposited coatings of cadmium d num num joints for plastic pressure pipes using flexible elastomeric seals american water works association awwa cnumanum cement mortar lining for ductile iron pipe and fittings for water cnumanum ductileiron and grayiron fittings cnumanum rubbergasket joints for ductileiron pressure pipe and fittings cnumanum ductileiron compact fittings cnum resilientseated gate valves for watersupply service american society of mechanical engineers asme bnum square hex heavy hex and askew head bolts and hex heavy hex hex flange lobed head and lag screws inch series includes errata num num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply associated appurtenance means structures devices and appliances other than pipe and conduit that are used in connection with a manure pipeline system such as valves riser and thrust restraints .
backfilling means as defined in opss num .
excavation earth and rock means the excavation classified as earth and rock according to opss num .
fitting means connections appliances and adjuncts designed to be used in connection with pipes .
examples are elbows and bends to alter the direction of a pipe tees and crosses to connect a branch with a sewer main plugs and caps to close a pipe end and bushings diminishers or reducers to couple two pipes of different diameters .
manure pipeline means an installation designed for the conveyance of liquid manure under pressure using circular pipe .
num materials num general pipe size shall be according to the requirements specified in the contract documents .
pipe material and class shall be as specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num pipe smaller than num mm in diameter shall not be used .
fittings shall be suitable for and compatible with the pipe material and class with which they will be used .
num polyvinyl chloride pipe products polyvinyl chloride pipe and fittings shall be according to csa bnum and supplied from a plant approved by an organization accredited by the standards council of canada .
flexible elastomeric seals for bell and spigot joints shall be according to astm d num .
fittings shall be either a gray iron according to awwa cnumanum b ductile iron according to awwa cnumanum or awwa cnumanum and shall be cement lined according to awwa cnumanum c injection moulded polyvinyl chloride according to csa bnum or d prefabricated polyvinyl chloride pipe diameters num mm and larger according to csa bnum .
num polyethylene pipe products polyethylene pressure pipe shall be according to opss num .
fitting shall be either a flanged gray iron according to awwa cnumanum b flanged ductile iron according to awwa cnumanum or awwa cnumanum and shall be cement lined according to awwa cnumanum or c polyethylene according to opss num .
ductile iron pipe and fittings shall be cement lined according to awwa cnumanum .
num valves num general all valves shall open by operating in a counterclockwise direction .
valves shall be designed for a minimum cold water working pressure of num kpa .
valves shall be cast or ductile iron gate valves .
fasteners shall be made from material meeting the strength requirements of astm a num with dimensions according to ansi asme bnum .
bolts studs and nuts shall be cadmium plated according to astm b num or zinc coated according to astm a numm or astm b num .
fasteners for mechanical joints shall be ductile iron according to awwa cnumanum .
page num rev .
date num opss num num gate valves gate valves shall be according to awwa cnum .
stem sealing on nonrising stem valves shall utilize oring type seals that do not require adjustment .
the gate valve end configuration shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num air release and airvacuum valves air release and airvacuum valves shall be sewage type .
num risers riser type shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num concrete concrete for thrust blocks and fitting and appurtenance supports shall be according to opss num with a nominal minimum numday compressive strength of num mpa .
num straps tierods angles nuts and bolts stainless steel straps tierods angles nuts and bolts used with concrete thrust blocks shall be according to astm a num type num stainless steel .
num construction num site preparation site preparation shall be according to opss num .
num preservation and protection of existing facilities preservation and protection of existing facilities shall be according to opss num .
num protection against floatation damage to the pipeline due to floatation shall be prevented during construction and until completion of the work .
num cold weather work all work shall be protected from freezing .
pipe and bedding material shall not be installed on frozen ground .
num transporting unloading storing and handling materials all pipes fittings and gaskets that are unsound or damaged shall be rejected .
manufacturers recommendations for transporting unloading storing and handling of materials shall be followed .
page num rev .
date num opss num num excavation excavation for the placement of forcemains shall be according to opss num .
num support systems support systems shall be according to opss num .
num dewatering dewatering shall be according to opss num .
num temporary protection systems the construction of all temporary protection systems shall be according to opss num .
where the stability safety or function of an existing roadway railway other works or proposed works may be impaired due to the method of construction such protection as may be required shall be provided .
protection may include sheathing shoring and the driving of piles where necessary to prevent damage to such works or proposed works .
num installation of pipe pipe shall be laid in a dry trench .
ends of pipe shall be kept clean .
pipe shall be laid within the alignment and grade tolerances specified in the contract documents .
the barrel of each pipe shall be in contact with the shaped bed throughout its full length .
pipe shall be kept clean and dry as work progresses .
a removable watertight bulkhead shall be installed at the open end of the last pipe laid whenever work is suspended .
pipe shall not be laid until the preceding pipe joint has been completed and the pipe carefully embedded and secured in place .
num jointing num general joint surfaces shall be clean .
pipe ends shall be lubricated with material recommended by the pipe manufacturer .
manufacturers instructions for jointing of pipe shall be followed .
joints and all connections shall be made watertight .
all bolts nuts coupling rubber rings and connecting pieces shall be cleaned thoroughly prior to installation .
pipe shall be aligned on centreline to previously laid pipe .
pipe shall be pulled or pushed only by a handoperated winch .
a backhoe shall not be used for pushing pipe .
joints shall be prevented from opening after the pipe has been laid .
page num rev .
date num opss num num polyvinyl chloride pressure pipe joints shall be bell and spigot with rubber gaskets .
if gaskets are supplied separately they shall be inserted in the groove of the bell end of the pipe .
the spigot shall be lubricated .
the spigot end shall be inserted and pushed into the bell until the second reference mark is flush with the face of the bell .
num polyethylene pressure pipe polyethylene pipe num mm diameter and larger shall be joined by the thermal butt fusion process .
procedures recommended by the pipe manufacturer shall be followed .
connections to nonpolyethylene fittings and appurtenances shall be made with flanged joints according to the manufacturers recommendations .
bolts shall be tightened to the torque specified by the manufacturer for the particular size and type of stub end .
num cutting of pipe whenever cutting of pipe is required the pipe shall be cut according to the recommendations of the pipe manufacturer .
num change in line and grade num polyvinyl chloride pipe polyvinyl chloride pressure pipe joints may be deflected but shall not exceed manufacturers recommendations .
otherwise fabricated bends shall be used .
num polyethylene pipe use of pipe flexibility may be allowed but shall not exceed manufacturers recommendations .
num installation of valves num general the work of installing valves shall include the valves and couplings and when specified in the contract documents valve boxes .
valves shall be installed at locations and be of the type specified in the contract documents .
valves and connecting pipes shall be aligned accurately and supported as specified in the contract documents .
num air release and airvacuum valves air release and airvacuum valves shall be installed at locations specified in the contract documents .
each air release and airvacuum valve shall be provided with an isolating valve .
num installation of riser sets the work of installing riser sets shall include the placing of risers riser isolating valves riser tees restraining devices riser caps and safety and support devices .
riser sets shall be installed at locations specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num thrust restraints all connections caps and bends shall be restrained by concrete blocking or restrained joints as specified in the contract documents .
concrete for thrust blocks shall be placed against undisturbed ground .
joints and couplings shall remain free from concrete .
num backfilling and compacting backfilling and compacting shall be according to opss num .
num hydrostatic testing num general hydrostatic testing shall be conducted under the supervision of the contract administrator upon completion of the pipeline including backfilling .
a test section shall be either a section between valves or the completed pipeline .
test pressure shall be num kpa .
the test section shall be filled slowly with water and all air shall be removed from the pipeline .
a numhour absorption period may be allowed before starting the test .
the test section shall be subjected to the specified continuous test pressure for two hours .
num polyethylene pipe the test procedure shall consist of initial expansion and test phases .
during the initial expansion phase the test section shall be pressurized to the test pressure and sufficient makeup water added each hour for num hours to return to test pressure .
after the initial expansion phase the test phase shall begin .
the test phase shall be num hours after which a measured amount of makeup water is added to return the test pressure .
if the amount of makeup water added does not exceed the values shown in table num leakage is not indicated .
if the amount of makeup water exceeds the values shown in table num all leaks shall be located and repaired and the test section shall be retested until a satisfactory result is obtained .
the test duration should not exceed num hours .
if the pressure test is not completed the test section shall be depressurized and allowed to relax for num hours prior to bringing the test section up to pressure again .
num other pipe the test section shall be subject to the specified continuous test pressure for num hours .
the leakage is the amount of water added to the test section to maintain the specified test pressure for the test duration .
the measured leakage shall be compared with the allowable leakage as calculated for the test section .
the allowable leakage is num litres per millimetre of pipe diameter per kilometre of pipe for the numhour test period .
if the measured leakage exceeds the allowable leakage all leaks shall be located and repaired and the test section shall be retested until a satisfactory result is obtained .
page num rev .
date num opss num num cleaning and flushing pipe all pipe shall be cleaned and flushed .
num site restoration site restoration shall be according to opss num .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num pipeline measurement of pipeline shall be by length in metres along the horizontal centreline of the pipe from the point of connection to portable equipment or existing pipeline to a point vertically above the end of the new pipeline .
num valves for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of valves installed regardless of the type and size .
num riser sets for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of riser sets installed regardless of the type .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num pipeline item valves item riser sets item connections to existing pipelines item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
when the owner raises or lowers the invert of a pipeline by up to num mm it shall not constitute a change in the work and adjustment shall not be made to the payment .
where the invert of a pipeline is raised or lowered by more than num mm this shall then constitute a change in the work for the full extent of the change from the original grade .
page num rev .
date num opss num table num test phase makeup amount for pressure polyethylene pipe pipe diameter mm makeup water litrekm num num num num num num num num num num num num page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer may consider including soil boring data a geotechnical report a subsurface report or a soils report in the tender documents .
the designer should include the following in the contract documents pipe size material and class .
num gate valve end configuration .
num type of risers .
num alignment and grade tolerances for the pipe installation .
num valve type location and support .
num air release and airvacuum valve locations .
num locations of riser sets .
num type of thrust restraints .
num the pipe diameter should be adequate to develop a flow velocity of num to num ms in the pumping system .
corrosion protection system provisions should be specified if appropriate .
tracer wire or tracer tape should be specified if appropriate under conditions of high ground water external fluids may enter via air release and airvacuum release valves therefore appropriate measures should be taken .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num concrete thrust blocks for tees plugs and horizontal bends opsd num concrete thrust blocks for vertical bends notice to users of opss num construction specification for pipeline installation by tunnelling opss num has been removed from this ops volume the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num there is no prov version .
use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for pipeline and utility installation by jacking and boring opss num has been removed from this ops volume the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num there is no prov version .
use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for pipe culvert installation in open cut opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num moved in revision number num num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for precast reinforced concrete box culverts in open cut table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation of precast reinforced concrete box culverts and box in open cut and includes the requirements for excavation bedding backfilling and cover material .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincialoriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipaloriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications general opss num management and disposal of excess material ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num embankments over swamps opss num support systems opss num compacting opss num dewatering of pipeline utility and associated structure excavation opss num temporary protection systems opss num excavating and backfilling structures opss num concrete structures opss num steel reinforcement for concrete page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num aggregates concrete opss num aggregates miscellaneous opss num aggregates base subbase select subgrade and backfill material opss num clay seal opss num cementing materials opss num water opss num concrete materials and production opss num steel reinforcement for concrete opss num precast reinforced concrete box culverts opss num geotextiles mto laboratory testing manual lsnum moisture density relationship of soils using num kg rammer and a num mm drop astm international d num standard classification of soils for engineering purposes unified soil classification system d num standard practice for description and identification of soils visualmanual procedure d num standard test methods for density of soil and soilaggregate in place by nuclear methods shallow depth d num standard test method for water content of soil and rock in place by nuclear methods shallow depth num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply backfill means earth rock or granular material used as fill within the excavation placed beyond the limits of bedding and cover below the subgrade elevation including frost tapers .
bedding means the material used to support the bottom of the box unit .
box culvert means a culvert constructed of precast reinforced concrete box units rectangular in cross section .
box unit means a single precast reinforced concrete box unit of a box culvert .
concrete appurtenances means head walls cutoff walls aprons collars and any other concrete fixtures associated with the box culverts excluding concrete bedding or concrete structures covered elsewhere in the contract documents and specified as such .
cover means the material placed as a protective layer around the box unit to prevent damage to the box unit .
distribution slab means a reinforced concrete slab placed directly on the top slab of a box culvert to distribute loading .
excavation earth and rock means the excavation material classified as earth and rock according to opss num .
excavation swamp means swamp excavation as defined in opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num geotechnical engineer means a professional engineer licensed by the professional engineers of ontario to practice in the province of ontario who is responsible for the work related to earth and rock including site investigation foundation recommendations inspection and quality control with respect to the design and installation of box culverts .
native material means the original material removed to form an excavation and which is acceptable to the contract administrator for return to the same or other excavation as backfill or cover .
soil means soil as defined in opss num .
num design and submission requirements six copies of the fabrication and assembly drawings including handling details shall be submitted to the contract administrator two weeks prior to delivery of the box units .
num materials num concrete concrete for appurtenances and distribution slab shall be according to opss num .
num granulars granulars shall be according to opss num .
num fine aggregates for levelling course fine aggregate for levelling courses shall be according to opss num .
num precast reinforced concrete box units precast reinforced concrete box units for spans not greater than num metres shall be according to opss num .
box unit reinforcement shall be consistent throughout a culvert as specified in the contract documents .
num clay seal clay seal shall be according to opss num .
num steel reinforcement steel reinforcement for concrete appurtenances and concrete distribution slab shall be according to opss num .
num mortar mortar for joints shall be composed of one part portland cement type gu and two parts mortar sand wetted with only sufficient water to make the mixture plastic .
the portland cement type gu shall be according to opss num mortar sand shall be according to opss num and water shall be according to opss num .
num preformed gasket preformed gaskets shall be as specified by the manufacturer of the box units .
page num rev .
date num opss num num joint sealing compound joint sealing compound shall be butyl mastic as specified by the manufacturer of the box units .
num grout grout shall be nonshrink and nonstaining .
num geotextile geotextile type shall be as specified in the contract documents and according to opss num .
num native material native material shall be classified according to the unified soil classification system using the procedures prescribed in astm d num .
when precise classification of native material is required astm d num shall be used .
num bedding bedding shall be as specified in the contract documents .
earth bedding shall be classified as group i or group ii according to table num .
the maximum particle size for bedding shall not exceed num mm in diameter unless the bedding layer has a thickness of num mm or greater in which case the maximum particle size shall not exceed num mm in diameter .
num backfill backfill shall be as specified in the contract documents .
earth backfill shall be classified as group i group ii or group iii according to table num .
earth backfill shall be free of boulders over num mm in diameter topsoil frozen materials organic matter and other deleterious material .
num cover cover shall be as specified in the contract documents .
earth cover shall be classified as group i or group ii according to table num .
cover shall be free of boulders having a diameter greater than num mm debris organic matter or frozen materials .
num construction num selection of box units the box units shall be selected from table num in opss num based on the dimensions and height of fill specified in the contract documents .
num excavation the excavation for the installation of the box units shall be according to opss num including frost tapers and culvert end treatments .
page num rev .
date num opss num num support systems support systems shall be according to opss num .
num dewatering dewatering shall be according to opss num .
num temporary protection systems temporary protection systems shall be according to opss num .
num foundations the foundation shall be comprised of firm to hard in situ soil or compacted backfill .
when unsuitable or unstable material is encountered during the excavation for the foundation the unsuitable or unstable material shall be removed to firm to hard in situ soil and replaced to the foundation grade with compacted backfill meeting the requirements of group i or group ii according to table num .
the foundation on each side of the box unit for a minimum distance equal to the inside width of the box unit shall be at least as stable as the foundation below the box unit .
num bedding bedding shall be placed to the dimensions shown in the contract documents .
the bedding shall be placed as uniformly as possible .
bedding under the middle third of the box unit base shall be loosely placed and uncompacted .
bedding requiring compaction shall be placed in layers not exceeding num mm in thickness loose measurement and each layer shall be compacted according to opss num .
bedding shall not be placed on frozen earth grade .
num levelling the surface prepared to support the box units shall have a num mm minimum thickness top levelling course of uncompacted granular a or fine aggregates .
num installing box units num box units box units shall be installed to the alignment and grade specified in the contract documents .
box units shall not be installed on bedding containing frozen material .
end units to accommodate concrete appurtenances shall be as specified in the contract documents .
the box units shall be installed to make a continuous line forming a box culvert .
the gap at box unit joints shall not exceed num mm .
for box units placed in parallel for multiple cell installations a num mm num mm gap filled with grout between adjacent cells shall be provided .
page num rev .
date num opss num installation of the box units shall commence at the outlet end and proceed in the upstream direction with the bell ends of the box units facing upgrade .
the box units shall be placed with the base of each box unit in uniform contact with the prepared bedding throughout its full length .
the ends of the box units shall be joined so there is no unevenness along the inside .
the box units and joint surfaces shall be kept clean as work progresses .
water shall not be allowed to flow through the box units during installation .
the excavation shall be kept dry and the box units shall not be installed in water .
num geotextile at joints a num mm wide strip of geotextile shall be placed to form a continuous barrier centered around the exterior of all buried joints not covered by a distribution slab .
geotextile shall be free of folds tears and wrinkles .
the geotextile shall be joined so that the material laps a minimum of num mm and shall be pinned together .
alternatively the geotextile shall be joined according to the seam requirements of opss num .
geotextile shall not be placed between the top slab of box units and distribution slabs .
where a distribution slab is required the geotextile shall be held in place by cover and geotextile ends shall be secured to the box units .
num mortared joints when mortared joints are specified in the contract documents all joints shall be thoroughly cleaned and wetted .
mortar shall then be applied over the joint around the inner and outer perimeter .
after the mortar joint is complete the joint inside shall be wiped clean and smooth .
num preformed gasket when a preformed gasket is specified in the contract documents for sealing the joint between the box units it shall be placed according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num joint sealing compound when joint sealing compound is specified in the contract documents for sealing the joint between the box units it shall be applied according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num lift holes all lift holes shall be filled with mortar after installation of the box unit .
num concrete appurtenances and concrete distribution slab concrete placement sampling and testing shall be according to opss num .
reinforcing steel shall be placed according to opss num .
steel grating shall be provided as specified in the contract documents .
num backfill backfill shall be placed in layers not exceeding num mm in thickness loose measurement .
compaction shall be according to opss num .
backfilling on each side of the box units shall be completed simultaneously .
at no time shall the levels on each side differ by more than num mm .
page num rev .
date num opss num when native material is specified as backfill in the contract documents earth material may be substituted when approved by the contract administrator .
in areas within the roadway for a depth equal to the frost treatment earth backfill shall have frost susceptibility characteristics similar to the native material .
the contract administrator shall decide on the suitability of the earth backfill that the contractor proposes to substitute .
rock may be used as backfill provided the installed box units are protected by a minimum thickness of cover material as specified in the contract documents .
box unit installation and backfill shall be completed prior to the start of any subbase and base course construction over the box unit location .
shoring and bracing shall be withdrawn and removed as the excavation is being backfilled .
num cover cover shall be placed in layers not exceeding num mm in thickness loose measurement and each layer shall be compacted according to opss num .
cover in trenches and in other locations where pavements require controlled differential settlement shall be of a type and compaction level to control pavement differential settlement within acceptable limits for the specified type of pavement .
num clay seal when a clay seal is specified in the contract documents the clay seal shall be placed to the dimensions specified in the contract documents and compacted to a minimum of num of the maximum dry density mdd .
the mdd shall be determined from lsnum carried out on a single representative sample .
field density and field moisture determinations shall be made according to astm d num and astm d num .
num geotechnical testing when specified in the contract documents compliance of earth backfill material type and compaction with the requirements of this specification shall be verified by a geotechnical engineer approved by the contract administrator .
num management and disposal of excess material management and disposal of excess material shall be according to opss num .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num precast reinforced concrete box culverts measurement of the actual length of box culvert installed shall be made in metres along the centreline of the invert of the box culvert .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clause under actual measurement .
page num rev .
date num opss num num basis of payment num size precast concrete box culvert item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
num clay seal item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
num granular granular material used for bedding and levelling courses backfill cover and frost tapers shall be paid for under the appropriate granular items specified in the contract documents .
payment will not be made for granular used to fill any area excavated beyond the lines specified in the contract documents or used as cover when acceptable earth cover is available .
num steel reinforcement in concrete appurtenances payment for steel reinforcement in concrete appurtenances shall be according to opss num .
num concrete in appurtenances payment for concrete appurtenances shall be according to opss num .
num excavation for box culverts payment for earth and rock excavation shall be according to opss num .
num swamp excavation where swamp excavation is required to place precast concrete box culverts payment for the swamp excavation shall be under the tender item covering the swamp excavation for earth embankment construction .
page num rev .
date num opss num table num group classification for earth bedding backfill and cover materials group grain size description symbols i coarse wellgraded gravel gravelsand mixtures little or no fines gw poorlygraded gravel gravelsand mixtures little or no fines gp wellgraded sand gravelly sand little or no fines sw poorlygraded sand gravelly sand little or no fines sp ii medium clayey gravel or gravelsandclay mixtures gc clayey sand or sandclay mixtures sc silty sand or sandsilt mixtures sm silty gravels or gravelsandsilt mixtures gm inorganic silts and very fine sands silty or clayey fine sands clayey silts ml iii fine clayey gravel or gravelsandclay mixtures gc clayey sand or sandclay mixtures sc inorganic clay gravelly clay sandy clay silty clay lean clay cl inorganic silts micaceous or diatomaceous fine sandy or silty soil mh page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the design should specify the following in the contract documents geotextile type .
num bedding .
num backfill .
num cover .
num dimensions of box units and height of fill .
num bedding dimensions .
num alignment and grade of the box units .
num minimum cover material requirements for installation protection against rock backfill .
num clay seal .
num the designer should determine if the following is required and if so specify in the contract documents concrete appurtenances .
num mortared joints .
num preformed gasket .
num joint sealing compound .
num steel grating .
num native backfill .
num geotechnical testing .
num to be complete the tender item descriptions for precast concrete box culvert should include the size of the box unit .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num backfill and cover for concrete culverts opsd num precast reinforced concrete box culvert with height of fill numm opsd num precast reinforced concrete box culvert with height of fill numm opsd num culverts warning message layout details opsd num culverts warning message lettering details page num rev .
date num opss num notice to users of opss num construction specification for watermain installation in open cut opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for corrosion protection of new and existing watermains opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num has not been implemented by the mto the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for pipeline and utility installation in soil by horizontal directional drilling opss num has been removed from this ops volume the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num there is no prov version .
use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for gravity pipe and sewer rehabilitation by curedinplace pipe opss num has been removed from this ops volume the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num there is no prov version .
use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for cement mortar lining of watermains table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the rehabilitation of cast or ductile iron watermains by the installation of cement mortar lining .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications shall be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications shall be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num trenching backfilling and compacting opss num support systems opss num closedcircuit television cctv inspection of pipelines opss num watermain installation in open cut opss num corrosion protection of new and existing watermains opss num preservation protection and reconstruction of existing facilities opss num site restoration following installation of pipelines utilities and associated structures opss num temporary potable water supply services opss num dewatering of pipeline utility and associated structure excavation opss num temporary protection systems american water works association awwa cnum cementmortar lining for water pipelines in place num in .
num mm and larger page num rev .
date num opss num num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply associated appurtenance means as defined in opss num .
fitting means as defined in opss num .
num design and submission requirements num submission requirements the following information shall be submitted to the contract administrator num days prior to the commencement of cement mortar lining operations a if applicable premixed mortar mix design .
b location of access pits .
c pipe cleaning procedures .
d flushing disinfection and commissioning plan .
num materials num cement mortar lining materials shall be according to ansiawwa cnum except as noted below or alternatively a premixed mortar may be submitted for approval by the contract administrator .
chemicals or additives of any kind shall not be permitted unless prior written approval from the contract administrator has been obtained .
num service boxes service boxes shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num valves valves shall be according to opss num .
num fittings fittings shall be according to opss num .
num repair pipe repair pipe shall be polyvinyl chloride pipe or ductile iron pipe according to opss num .
num sacrificial anodes sacrificial anodes shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num equipment num cement mortarlining machine the cement mortarlining machine shall be provided with attachments for mechanically trowelling the mortar to produce a smooth surface so that the freshly placed and trowelled mortar is not touched until it has set .
the design of the attachment shall be so as to permit operations in pipes that may be out of round as well as to permit trowelling through bends that deflect up to and including num degrees .
num construction num general the contract administrator shall be notified at least num hours in advance of starting work .
all fittings and appurtenances removed to facilitate the lining process shall be replaced with new fittings and appurtenances .
all fittings and appurtenances removed shall be delivered to the location specified in the contract documents .
num preservation and protection of existing facilities preservation and protection of existing facilities shall be according to opss num .
num transporting unloading storing and handling materials manufacturers recommendations for transporting unloading storing and handling of materials shall be followed .
num trenching backfilling and compacting trenching backfilling and compacting for any access pits shall be according to opss num .
num support systems support systems shall be according to opss num .
num dewatering dewatering shall be according to opss num .
num temporary protection systems the construction of temporary protection systems shall be according to opss num .
where the stability safety or function of an existing roadway railway watercourse other works or proposed works may be impaired due to the method of operation protection shall be provided .
protection may include sheathing shoring and piling where necessary to prevent damage to such works or proposed works .
page num rev .
date num opss num num service boxes in advance of working on the street service boxes shall be located and inspected to ensure that the curb stop is functioning and marked .
service boxes to be adjusted to final grade and service boxes or curb stops to be replaced shall be identified to the contract administrator for approval .
after receiving approval the service boxes shall be adjusted or the service boxes or curb stops shall be replaced .
num temporary potable water supply services temporary potable water supply services shall be according to opss num .
num rehabilitation of watermains num access pits when possible existing valve and fitting locations shall be used as access pit locations .
access pit locations shall be approved by the contract administrator prior to the beginning of construction .
when an access pit is to be located in close proximity to a closed live watermain valve the active thrust force of the valve shall be addressed to prevent dislocation of the valve or adjacent piping and to ensure safe working conditions .
num replacement of valves all valves along the length of pipe to be cement mortar lined shall be removed and replaced with the type and size of valve specified in the contract documents .
in all cases a jumper wire shall be thermite welded to the existing cast or ductile iron pipe on both sides of the replaced valve .
num replacement of fittings all fittings along the length of pipe to be cement mortar lined shall be removed and replaced with the type and size of fitting specified in the contract documents .
in all cases a jumper wire shall be thermite welded to the existing cast or ductile iron pipe on both sides of the replaced fitting .
num cutting of pipe pipes shall be cut so that the ends are smooth and square to ensure proper reconnection .
num cleaning existing pipe all rust tubercles deposits loose or deteriorated remains of original coating and other foreign material shall be removed from the inside of the pipe without damaging the structural integrity of the existing pipe .
a cleaning device shall be passed through the pipe as many times as is necessary to obtain results satisfactory to the contract administrator .
to confirm satisfactory cleaning a closedcircuit television cctv inspection of the pipe section shall be undertaken .
solids removed during the cleaning flushing and pumping operations shall be captured before flowing into the drainage system and then disposed of as specified in the contract documents .
num bulkheads on open pipe ends all pipes shall be closed using a mechanical joint plug or cap anytime there is no work being performed on the pipe .
the bulkhead shall be capable of preventing water from entering or exiting the pipe and shall be equipped with a relief valve .
page num rev .
date num opss num num cement mortar lining num general the lining shall consist of a onecourse application of premixed cement mortar num mm num mm thick and shall be placed by a machine projecting the mortar against the wall of the pipe and long radius bends by centrifugal force without injurious rebound and with sufficient velocity to cause the mortar to be densely packed and to adhere in place .
the travel of the machine and the rate of discharge of mortar shall be controlled so as to produce a uniform thickness of lining around the interior and along the length of pipe .
mortar that has attained its initial set shall not be used .
mortar of improper consistency that does not provide a dense homogenous lining that holds itself firmly against the pipe surface and all waste materials spatter etc .
shall be removed from the pipe .
only mortar of suitable consistency and applied with sufficient velocity to adhere firmly to the surface of the pipe shall form the lining .
if any section of the lining fails or shows evidence of failure or unusual irregularity the faulty section of lining shall be removed to the extent indicated by the contract administrator and the pipe recleaned and the lining replaced .
num trowelling the interior surface of the pipe shall be mechanically trowelled to produce a smooth surface .
num hand work edges of linings at openings or ends of lined sections shall be neatly finished .
edges shall be rounded or beveled so as to avoid sharp angles or abrupt changes in sections .
surfaces of cement mortar lining to which additional mortar is to be placed shall be moistened just before the mortar is applied .
hand finishing work in a section of the pipe shall be completed within num hours following the machine application of the mortar lining .
num closing of pipe immediately upon completion of the cement mortar lining of a section of pipe all openings in the pipe shall be closed in accordance with the bulkheads on open pipe ends clause to prevent circulation of air .
num curing as soon as practical without damaging the cement mortar lining water shall be introduced into the section of pipe between bulkheads in order to maintain a moist environment .
num backflushing when the lining has achieved sufficient set all services shall be backflushed with water or another method approved by the contract administrator to remove any mortar deposited in them .
num obstruction in the water services should any water service be partially or fully obstructed the obstruction shall be removed in a manner approved by the contract administrator .
page num rev .
date num opss num num closedcircuit television cctv inspection cctv inspections shall be according to opss num .
equipment used for cctv inspections shall have been used exclusively for the inspection of potable watermain systems in the past .
cctv inspections shall be carried out on cleaned pipe sections and again on newly lined sections of pipe to ensure proper cleaning or cement mortar application .
all water shall be removed prior to the inspection of the watermain .
if the cleaning or cement mortar lining of any pipe section is unacceptable the deficiency with the cleaning or mortar lining shall be corrected and the pipe section shall be reinspected .
any valves main stops or other associated appurtenances that are found to have been damaged due to cleaning or lining operations shall be replaced .
num repair of pipe upon application of the cement mortar lining the openings in the pipe shall be closed as soon as possible using polyvinyl chloride pipe or ductile iron pipe and couplings approved by the contract administrator .
thrust restraints shall be installed according to opss num .
in all cases a jumper wire shall be thermite welded to the existing cast or ductile iron pipe on both sides of the repair .
num sacrificial anodes sacrificial anodes of the type and size specified in the contract documents shall be installed at each new valve and cast or ductile iron fitting and at each access pit according to opss num and the contract documents .
num hydrostatic testing when specified in the contract documents hydrostatic testing shall be carried out according to opss num .
num flushing and disinfecting flushing and disinfecting of the completed watermain shall be according to opss num .
num return of watermain to service and removal of temporary potable water supply system upon receipt of satisfactory test results on water samples the watermain shall be flushed and returned to service permanent water service connections restored excavations backfilled and temporary service lines removed without interruption of the water supply .
num site restoration site restoration shall be according to opss num .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num measurement for payment num actual measurement num locating inspecting and marking service boxes for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of service boxes located inspected and marked .
num adjusting service boxes for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of service boxes adjusted to final grade .
num replacing service boxes for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of service boxes excavated and replaced .
num replacing curb stops for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of curb stops excavated and replaced .
num access pits for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of approved access pits excavated backfilled compacted and restored .
num cement mortar lining measurement of cement mortar lining shall be by length in metres horizontally along the centreline of the pipe being lined .
num valves for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of valves installed along the cement mortar lined pipe .
num fittings for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of fittings installed along the cement mortar lined pipe .
num repair of pipe for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of sections of pipe repaired .
num sacrificial anodes for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of sacrificial anodes installed .
num plan quantity measurement when payment is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
page num rev .
date num opss num num basis of payment num locating inspecting and marking service boxes item adjusting of service boxes item replacing of service boxes item replacing of curb stops item access pits item type size repair of pipe item type size sacrificial anodes item flushing and disinfecting item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
num rehabilitation of watermains num cement mortar lining item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
removal and replacement of valves main stops curb stops service boxes and other associated appurtenances damaged due to cleaning or lining operations shall be at no additional cost to the owner .
reinspection of an unacceptably cleaned or cement lined pipe after correction of a deficiency shall be at no additional cost to the owner .
num type size valves item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work of replacing valves .
num type size fittings item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work of replacing fittings .
num obstructions in water services when excavation and repair of a water service is required and not caused by the negligence of the contractor payment shall be made as extra work .
when water services are partially or fully obstructed due to the ingress of loosened foreign materials from the cleaning or lining process the obstruction shall be removed at no additional cost to the owner .
num closedcircuit television inspection when the contract does not contain a separate tender item for cctv inspection the contract price for product installation shall include full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work of cctv inspection .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents service box requirements .
num location for delivery of removed fittings and appurtenances .
num type and size of replacement valves .
num type and size of replacement fittings .
num disposal of solids from the cleaning flushing and pumping operations .
num type and size of sacrificial anodes to be installed .
num the designer should determine if hydrostatic testing of the watermains is required and if so it should be specified in the contract documents .
num the tender item descriptions for repair of pipe should include reference to the attributes shown i.e .
type and size of pipe to be complete .
num the tender item description for sacrificial anodes should include reference to the attribute shown i.e .
type and size of anode to be complete .
num the tender item descriptions for valves should include reference to the attributes shown i.e .
type and size of valve to be complete .
num the tender item descriptions for fittings should include reference to the attributes shown i.e .
type and size of fitting to be complete .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num cathodic protection for metallic watermain systems opsd num cathodic protection for pvc watermain systems page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification construction specification for pipeline and conduit installation by pipe bursting table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment num construction num quality assurance num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers requirements for installation of pipelines and conduits using the trenchless technology known as pipe bursting .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
metric opss num november num page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num trenching backfilling and compacting opss num support systems opss num maintenance hole catch basin ditch inlet and valve chamber installation opss num closedcircuit television inspection of pipelines opss num watermain installation in open cut opss num site preparation for pipelines utilities and associated structures opss num preservation protection and reconstruction of existing facilities opss num site restoration following installation of pipelines utilities and associated structures opss num temporary potable water supply services opss num dewatering of pipeline utility and associated structure excavation opss num temporary protection systems page num rev .
date num opss num num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply fusion means connecting product lengths into a continuous length using elevated temperatures and pressure .
launch pit means an access excavation or existing access structure to an existing product for the insertion of the pipe bursting head and product .
pipe bursting means the application of a pipe bursting head into the interior of and along the length of an existing product to split or fracture the existing product so that the existing product and surrounding material is opened up to a sufficient size to accommodate the insertion of a product in the cavity created without leaving any significant voids around the product .
pipe bursting methods include static pneumatic and hydraulic .
pipe bursting is also known internationally as pipe cracking or pipe splitting .
product means the new pipelines or conduits .
pull means the installation of one continuous reach of product .
generally a pull shall commence at a launch pit and terminate at a pull pit .
pull pit means an access excavation or existing access structure to an existing product to receive the product or pipe bursting head or both .
structure means a maintenance hole valve chamber or other such facility to access the product .
num design and submission requirements num submission requirements the following information shall be submitted to the contract administrator num days prior to the commencement of pipe bursting operations a a work plan outlining the schedule procedures launch pit and pull pit locations and working drawings required to execute the work on the product service laterals and structures .
b a list of personnel including backup personnel and their qualifications and experience .
c a traffic control plan .
d safety plan including the contracting company safety manual and emergency procedures .
e when fusion joining is used written record of current training showing that the operator has been fully trained in the use of the fusion equipment by an authorized representative of the fusion equipment manufacturer and the product manufacturer or when applicable certified by the owner or utility for which the work is being completed .
f when applicable product bypass and temporary supply system plans including installation operation and testing procedures and a list of material and equipment to be used .
g manufacturers technical data containing complete information on product i .
material composition physical properties inside diameter and wall thickness .
ii .
maximum tensile strength and corresponding maximum allowable pulling force .
iii .
transporting unloading storing and handling recommendations .
page num rev .
date num opss num iv .
repair .
v. fusion times and temperatures .
vi .
minimum bend radius .
vii .
recommended restraint method in structure .
viii .
product recovery requirements .
ix .
relaxation requirements .
h contingency plans for the following potential conditions i .
unforeseen obstructions causing burst stoppage .
ii .
deviation from required alignment and grade .
iii .
extended service disruption .
iv .
damage to the existing service connections and the replacement of products structural integrity and methods of repair .
v. damage to other existing utilities .
vi .
soil heaving or settlement .
vii .
contaminated soil or water .
viii .
alignment passing through buried structures .
num materials num pipe materials pipe type class pressure rating and size shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num valves valve type class pressure rating and size shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num fittings fittings shall be suitable for and compatible with the type class pressure rating and size of pipe with which they are used .
num lubricant lubricant used to reduce friction to maintain the annular space created by the pipe bursting head and to allow the insertion of the product shall be nontoxic and biodegradable .
num equipment num pipe bursting head the pipe bursting head shall be according to the manufacturers specifications for head sizes recommended for various product diameters and types as well as parameters associated with maximum allowable upsize percentages .
num pipe bursting power source the pipe bursting power source shall generate sufficient force to burst and compact the existing product into the surrounding material .
page num rev .
date num opss num num fusion equipment fusion equipment when used shall be sized and rated for the product .
fusion clamps shall be sized to clamp the product properly .
num construction num general the product shall be installed following the alignment and grade of the existing pipe and to the ovality specified in the contract documents .
the contract administrator shall be notified at least num hours prior to commencement of work .
num site preparation site preparation shall be according to opss num and as specified herein .
the work site shall be graded or filled to provide a level working area for the pipe bursting equipment .
no alterations beyond what is required for the pipe bursting operations shall be made .
all activities shall be confined to designated work areas .
num preservation and protection of existing facilities preservation and protection of existing facilities shall be according to opss num .
when specified in the contract documents an existing facility shall be exposed to verify its horizontal and vertical location .
the number of exposures required to monitor work progress shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num transporting unloading storing and handling materials manufacturers recommendations for transporting unloading storing and handling of materials shall be followed .
num trenching backfilling and compacting trenching backfilling and compacting for launch pits pull pits and other excavation locations shall be according to opss num .
launch pits and pull pits shall be sized to allow the use of the pipe bursting equipment and to allow the product to be installed such that the product manufacturers recommendations for product bending radius are not exceeded .
num support systems support systems shall be according to opss num .
num dewatering dewatering shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num temporary protection systems the construction of temporary protection systems shall be according to opss num .
where the stability safety or function of an existing roadway railway watercourse other works or proposed works may be impaired due to the method of operation protection shall be provided .
protection may include sheathing shoring and piling where necessary to prevent damage to such works or proposed works .
num temporary potable water supply services when specified in the contract documents temporary potable water supply services shall be according to opss num .
num product bypass when specified in the contract documents during the execution of the work the flow within the existing product shall be bypassed around the product being replaced and the continuity of service to each facility connected to the affected section of product shall be maintained .
the pumps and bypass lines shall be of adequate capacity and size to handle all flows .
num preparation of existing product and structures all existing crosses tees valves and service connections shall be located exposed and disconnected prior to any pipe bursting operation .
prior to pipe bursting the inlets outlets and benching of existing structures shall be enlarged sufficiently for clearance of the pipe bursting head and the product .
enlargements shall be made neatly and be no greater than that required for their purpose .
size of the enlargements shall be sufficient to allow for restoration and sealing to the product .
existing product shall be cleared of obstructions e.g .
rocks and debris or mechanical obstructions e.g .
repair sleeves clamps couplings and intolerable deviations in grade or alignment prior to pipe bursting .
num product joining num general the product shall be joined according to the manufacturers recommendations .
the product shall be assembled and joined at the site to provide a leakproof joint .
when space and the contract documents permit the length of the product to be pulled shall be joined as one length prior to the commencement of the pulling operation .
when used fusion shall be performed by technicians trained in the use of the fusion equipment .
joints shall be capable of withstanding the loading of the installation process .
all joints shall be subject to acceptance by the contract administrator prior to insertion .
num connection to product or structures product shall be allowed to recover from any induced stresses and strains before connection to new or existing product or structures are made .
product recovery time shall be according to the manufacturers recommendations .
page num rev .
date num opss num the product connection to the structure or to an existing product shall be leakproof .
num service connections service connection work shall be as specified in the contract documents .
service connection work shall not commence until the product has fully recovered .
num product installation installation procedures shall be according to the product manufacturers guidelines .
the product shall be protected from damage during the installation process .
suitable guides shall be used to protect the product from damage at the insertion point and at any intermediate reentry points .
upon commencement of the bursting process product insertion shall be continuous from the launch pit to the pull pit except when approved by the contract administrator .
a pushing machine may be used to assist insertion from the rear .
when specified in the contract documents a weak link breakaway connector or load monitor shall be used to prevent excess pulling force from damaging the product .
num structures and valves when the product enters or exits an existing structure the structure wall shall be restored as specified in the contract documents .
restoration shall securely locate and anchor the product in the wall and shall produce a leakproof seal .
the existing structures benching shall be restored according to the requirements of the product any other incoming product and as specified in the contract documents .
when new structures or valves are specified they shall be installed according to opss num and opss num respectively .
num testing testing of the product joining and installation shall be as specified in the contract documents .
when specified in the contract documents closedcircuit television cctv inspection shall be completed on the product after installation .
num record keeping verification record requirements of the alignment and grade of the installed product shall be as specified in the contract documents .
a copy of the verification records shall be given to the contract administrator at the completion of the pipe bursting operations .
num closedcircuit television inspection cctv inspection shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num site restoration site restoration shall be according to opss num .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num quality assurance num acceptance criteria acceptance criteria for the product installation shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num product installation by pipe bursting measurement for a product installation by pipe bursting shall be by length in metres along the horizontal centreline of the product between connecting points or if there is no connecting point to the end of the product .
when the connecting point is a structure measurement for a product installation shall be by length in metres to the centre of the structure .
num service connections for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of existing services that are disconnected from the existing product and reconnected to the product .
num plan quantity measurements when payment is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num product installation by pipe bursting type of product diameter of product use of product item product bypass item service connections item closedcircuit television inspection item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
num closedcircuit television inspection when the contract does not contain a separate tender item for cctv inspection the contract price for the product installation by pipe bursting item shall include full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work of cctv inspection .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations this specification was written to encompass the majority of pipe bursting operations for small and medium sized projects .
however the basic design considerations should always include properly planned entry and exit points grade of existing host pipe adjacent utilities and connection requirements .
the international pipe bursting association ipba normally assigns pipe bursting work to one of three classifications .
these following classifications january num version are intended for use as general guidelines when considering replacement of existing pipe by pipe bursting techniques .
the classification should be determined based on the more stringent parameter in the table below .
ipba classification and degree of difficulty depth of pipe m existing pipe diameter mm new pipe diameter options burst length m original trench width soil type a minimal num num num size on size num num relatively wide trench compared to expander head outside diameter .
compressible soils outside trench loose sand gravel soft clay .
b moderate num to num num num single upsize num num trench width less than num wider than the expander head outside diameter .
moderately compressible soils outside trench medium dense to dense sand medium to stiff clay .
c comprehensive num num num double triple upsize num num incompressible soils outside trench .
constricted trench geometry width less than or equal to outside diameter of bursting head .
d developmental the designer may consider a prequalification process to ensure that the contractors possess the required capabilities and qualifications to undertake the work required under the contract .
the designer should include the following in the contract documents page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa pipe type class pressure rating and size .
num valve type class pressure rating and size .
num product ovality .
num service connection work .
num benching restoration .
num testing of product joining and installation .
num verification record requirements .
num acceptance criteria .
num the designer should determine if the following are required and if so they should be specified in the contract documents exposing existing facilities .
num use of temporary potable water supply services .
num product bypass .
num joining and pulling product as one length .
num use of a weak link breakway connector or load monitor .
num wall restoration .
num completion of a cctv inspection .
num the designer should give consideration in consultation with the pipe manufacturer to minimum allowable product bending radii commensurate with the pipelines strength .
the designer should give special consideration to the required grades at the entry and exit points .
the designer may undertake a cctv inspection and location analysis prior to pipe bursting to review the existing line and grade to determine if deviations are acceptable .
product upsizing by using a pipe bursting technique may induce stresses in the surrounding soil resulting in potential damage to nearby utilities and foundations .
the degree of distortion on the zone of influence is a function of the degree of upsizing the pipe material of a nearby utility the location of nearby utilities in relation to the pipe burst pipe and the soil conditions .
the designer may consider exposure of critical services by nondestructive methods to monitor the pipe bursting progress and impacts .
the designer should consider the need for product bypass temporary potable water supply services or temporary flow stoppage or blockage with inflatable plugs during the pipe bursting operation .
the designer may require that during the execution of the work the flow shall be bypassed around the product being replaced and the continuity of service to each facility connected to the affected section of product be maintained .
the designer should consider what should be done if there is an extended service disruption .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa for certain product installations the designer may consider the requirement of a weak link breakaway connector or load monitor to prevent excess pulling force from damaging the product .
the designer should consider the type of interface and the degree of continuity between the product and the existing structure to ensure appropriate anchoring and seals in order to prevent product retraction or inadvertent leaks to the new system .
the designer may specify the completion of a cctv inspection of the product after installation particularly when grade thresholds are critical .
in smaller diameter product installations when the designer elects to complete a cctv survey the designer may wish to specify a lighter interior colour of the product installation if available .
testing of product joining and installation may include hydrostatic air bactt etc .
verification record requirements may include such information as reporting information available from the pipe bursting machine daylighting installation of tracer wire with the product the use of acoustic or magnetic locating equipment etc .
acceptance criteria requirements may include such considerations as successful bursting operation from entry to pull back location cctv inspection removal of extra coupon pipe length from the pull back pit to view for stresses grade verification etc .
the designer may consider including a process regarding payment for failed pipe bursting attempts in the contract documents .
the tender item description for product installation by pipe bursting should include reference to one or more of the attributes shown i.e .
type of product diameter of product and use of product to be complete .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification construction specification for site preparation for pipelines utilities and associated structures table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements not used num materials not used num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment not used num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements of site preparation for the installation of sanitary and storm pipe sewers pipe culverts and end sections forcemains and associated appurtenances watermains and associated appurtenances and other underground utilities maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets or valve chambers and any other specified subsurface construction .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
metric opss num april num page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num clearing close cut clearing grubbing and removal of surface and piled boulders opss num grading opss num sewage forcemain installation in open cut opss num watermain installation in open cut opss num traffic control signing opss num protection of trees opss num topsoil opss num temporary erosion and sediment control measures num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply associated appurtenances means as defined in opss num for a sewer system and opss num for a watermain .
page num rev .
date num opss num num construction num general site preparatory work shall be performed prior to the installation of the pipelines utilities and associated structures .
num removal of existing signing removal of existing signing shall be according to opss num .
num clearing and grubbing clearing and grubbing and related work shall be according to opss num .
num shrub and tree relocation shrubs and trees to be relocated shall be protected according to opss num in their original and final locations .
shrub and tree relocation shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num tree protection and pruning tree protection and pruning shall be according to opss num .
num stripping and stockpiling topsoil stripping of topsoil shall be according to opss num .
topsoil shall be removed carefully in the work areas and shall not be mixed with subsoil or other materials .
stockpiling of topsoil shall be according to opss num and as specified in the contract documents .
topsoil shall not be placed in or near tree stands along flood plains and in areas containing natural wildlife habitats .
perimeter drainage ditches shall be constructed to intercept and divert runoff to adjacent settling ponds .
temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be according to opss num .
stockpiles shall be protected to ensure minimum environmental interference .
num removal of fences and guide rails property owners or occupants shall be given at least num hours notice in advance of dismantling fences .
fences and guide rails shall be dismantled where necessary .
all components that are broken bent or damaged as a result of the operation shall be removed from the site and replaced with new components .
all reusable components shall be stored and protected .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num basis of payment payment at the contract price for the appropriate tender items for the installation of sanitary and storm pipe sewers pipe culverts and end sections forcemains and associated appurtenances watermains and associated appurtenances and other underground utilities maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets or valve chambers and any other specified subsurface construction shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work of site preparation .
when the contract contains separate items for work required by this specification payment shall be at the contract prices and according to the specifications for such work .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the shrub and tree relocation and planting requirements in the contract documents .
num the designer may choose to specify a specific location for stockpiled topsoil in the contract documents .
num if separate items are required to cover the various components of site preparation they should be included in the contract documents .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
page num rev .
date num opss num page num rev .
date num opss num notice to users of opss num construction specification for preservation protection and reconstruction of existing facilities opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification construction specification for site restoration following installation of pipelines utilities and associated structures table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements not used num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment not used num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the restoration of a site following installation of sanitary and storm pipe sewers pipe culverts and end sections forcemains and associated appurtenances watermains and associated appurtenances and other underground utilities maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets or valve chambers and any other specified subsurface construction .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
metric opss num november num page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num grading opss num single and double surface treatment opss num hot mix asphalt opss num hot mix asphalt end result opss num untreated granular subbase base surface shoulder and stockpiling opss num concrete pavement and concrete base opss num concrete sidewalk opss num concrete curb and gutter systems opss num sewage forcemain installation in open cut opss num watermain installation in open cut opss num site preparation for pipelines utilities and associated structures opss num steel beam guide rail and cable guide rail opss num standard highway fence opss num chainlink fence opss num topsoil opss num sodding opss num seed and cover page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification material opss num aggregates base subbase select subgrade and backfill material opss num standard highway fence components opss num chainlink fence components opss num wood material preservative treatment and shop fabrication canadian general standards board cgsb num steel framework for chain link fence num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply associated appurtenances means as defined in opss num and opss num .
num materials num granular materials granular materials shall be according to opss num .
num barbed wire barbed wire shall be according to cancgsbnum .
num electric fence wire electric fence wire shall be num mm diameter hot dipped galvanized wire .
num wood fence wood fence material shall be according to opss num .
num board or split rail fence posts and boards shall be the same size and type as used in the original fence .
rails shall be split cedar in good condition and of adequate lengths to build either a straight or snake fence .
num wood braces for wire fence diagonal wood braces shall be according to opss num .
num highway fence highway fence material shall be according to opss num .
num steel posts steel posts shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num chainlink fence chainlink fence material shall be according to opss num .
num gates gates shall be fabricated from material suitable to the fence on either side of the gate opening .
material for highway fence gates shall be according to opss num .
material for chainlink fence gates shall be according to opss num .
num guide rail guide rail material shall be according to opss num .
num concrete concrete for sidewalks shall be according to opss num .
concrete for curb and gutter shall be according to opss num .
num construction num general all disturbed areas shall be restored to an equivalent or better condition than existed prior to the commencement of construction .
num grading rough grading shall be performed to the levels grades and contours as specified in the contract documents allowing for the placement of surface materials .
soil shall not be disturbed within the drip line of trees and shrubs during grading .
final grading shall be performed to the lines and elevations specified in the contract documents .
the final grading shall be according to opss num .
num roadway restoration the restoration of the roadway shall be scheduled to follow closely behind trench backfilling .
the roadway shall be made and maintained safe for the passage of vehicular and pedestrian traffic after completion of backfilling and until permanent restoration takes place as specified in the contract documents .
granular subbase and base courses of the type specified in the contract documents shall be placed on the prepared subgrade to the dimensions specified in the contract documents and shall be according to opss num .
the surface course of the type specified in the contract documents shall be placed on the prepared base course to the dimensions specified in the contract documents in accordance as follows a asphalt pavement shall be according to opss num or opss num as specified in the contract documents .
b concrete paving shall be not less than num mm in thickness and shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num c gravel surface courses shall be according to opss num. d surface treatment shall be according to opss num .
num fences and guide rails fences and guide rails shall be restored with the same type of fence or guide rail that existed prior to construction along the lines and levels specified in the contract documents .
a maximum clearance of num mm from ground level shall be maintained at any point along the fence line .
the erection of highway fence shall be according to opss num .
the erection of chainlink fence shall be according to opss num .
posts for fences other than highway and chainlink fences shall be installed to the spacing that existed prior to construction .
gates shall be installed at the same location and height as the gates that existed prior to construction .
gate size shall be according to the dimensions of the gate that existed prior to construction .
gates shall be secured with fittings to match the fence complete with latches hinges stops and all necessary fittings .
colour and finish material of the restored fence shall match the existing colour scheme and finish material .
where required two coats of finish material shall be applied .
the construction of guide rails shall be according to opss num .
num topsoil topsoil shall be placed after final grading operations have been completed and immediately prior to seeding or sodding operations .
topsoil shall be obtained from stockpiles prepared according to opss num or if the required quantity is not obtainable from stockpiles the contractor shall import the required topsoil .
the quality of the topsoil and the construction methods for placing topsoil shall be according to opss num .
stockpile sites within or adjacent to the contract limits shall be restored to the original condition or to a condition acceptable to the contract administrator .
num shrub and tree replanting shrubs and trees shall be replanted as specified in the contract documents .
num sodding and seeding lawns and grassed areas shall be sodded or seeded and covered as specified in the contract documents .
sodding shall be according to opss num .
seeding and cover shall be according to opss num .
num sidewalk and concrete curb and gutter systems concrete sidewalk shall be placed according to opss num .
alignment and dimensions shall match existing sidewalk on either end of the restored sidewalk .
damaged sections of any sidewalk slab shall be removed and replaced to the nearest joint on either end of the damaged section .
page num rev .
date num opss num concrete curb and gutter systems shall be placed according to opss num .
alignment and dimensions shall match the existing curb and gutter systems on either side of the restored curb and gutter .
damaged sections of curb and gutter shall be removed and replaced to the nearest joint or neat saw cut .
placement of granular a shall be according to opss num with a minimum depth of num mm as a base for the curb and gutter and sidewalk .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num basis of payment payment at the contract price for the appropriate tender items for the installation of sanitary and storm pipe sewers pipe culverts and end sections forcemains and associated appurtenances watermains and associated appurtenances and other underground utilities maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets or valve chambers and any other specified subsurface construction shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work of site restoration .
when the contract contains separate items for work required by this specification payment shall be at the contract prices and according to the specifications for such work .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents levels grades and contours for rough grading .
num lines and elevations for final grading .
num requirements for temporary roadway .
num type of granular subbase and base courses and surface course .
num dimensions of the granular subbase and base courses and surface course .
num opss num or opss num for asphalt pavement .
num a lines and levels for restoration of fences and guide rails .
num replanting of shrubs and trees .
num sodding or seeding and cover of lawns and grassed areas .
num designer should determine if the contract is to have separate items to cover the various components of site restoration or if the items for the installation of pipelines utilities and their associated structures will be all inclusive to cover the work .
if separate items are desired they should then be included in the contract documents along with the details of the work .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num to num guide rail system steel beam opsd num to num guide rail system cable opsd num to num fence highway installation opsd num to num fence chainlink page num rev .
date num opss num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification construction specification for temporary potable water supply services table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment not used num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation of temporary watermains service connections and associated appurtenances prior to disconnecting service of an existing watermain on a temporary basis .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
metric opss num november num page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincialoriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipaloriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num grading opss num watermain installation in open cut csa standards bnum double check valve dcva backflow preventers part of bnum seriesnum backflow preventers and vacuum breakers compendium american water works association awwa cnum double check valve backflow prevention assembly page num rev .
date num opss num astm international d num rigid poly vinyl chloride pvc compounds and chlorinated poly vinyl chloride cpvc compounds d num poly vinyl chloride pvc pressurerated pipe sdr series d num num joints for plastic pressure pipes using flexible elastomeric seals f num elastomeric seals gaskets for joining plastic pipe nsf international numa drinking water system components health effects num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply associated appurtenance means structures devices and appliances other than pipe and conduit that are used in connection with a water distribution system such as valves hydrants corporation cocks services and thrust restraints .
excavation earth and rock means the excavation classified as earth and rock according to opss num .
temporary hydrant means temporary fire hydrant and all associated temporary appurtenances .
temporary potable water supply services means temporary watermains services hydrants and all associated appurtenances .
temporary services means temporary potable water supply services installed on or just below the ground surface for the purpose of providing potable water to customers while the existing watermain is out of service .
temporary watermain means temporary potable water supply hose or pipe installed on or just below the ground surface for the purpose of providing potable water to temporary services and temporary fire hydrants while the existing watermain is out of service .
watermain means an installation designed for the conveyance of water under pressure using circular pipe .
num design and submission requirements num submission requirements the following information shall be submitted to the contract administrator num days prior to the commencement of any work requiring temporary potable water supply services a temporary potable water supply services plans including installation operation testing procedures and a list of material and equipment to be used .
b temporary hydrant details .
page num rev .
date num opss num num materials num general the pipe size type and class shall be as specified in the contract documents .
fittings shall be suitable for and compatible with the pipe material and class with which they are used .
all materials in contact with potable water shall be nsfansi num compliant and if being reused shall have been used exclusively for potable water services in the past .
all materials shall be capable of withstanding num kpa pressure and all other conditions of use .
num temporary potable water supply services the pipe hose and all other materials used in conjunction with the temporary potable water supply services shall be as follows a flexible hose jackets shall be abrasion resistant either double jacket or specially coated and be capable of being driven over by vehicles periodically without short term effects .
b hose lining shall be of material that does not impart any taste or odour to the water .
c hose shall come complete with aluminium couplings with threads .
d rigid pipe shall be made of class numb pvc material according to astm d num .
material shall have a minimum hydrostatic design stress of num mpa .
e pvc shall be formulated with impact modifiers heat stabilizers and ultraviolet inhibitors .
f pipe extrusion shall meet or exceed all requirements of astm d num. g joints and couplings shall be according to astm d num. h orings shall be according to astm f num. i double check valve backflow preventers shall be according to csa bnum and awwa cnum .
num valves valves shall be according to opss num .
num temporary hydrants temporary hydrants shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num construction num general written notices to all affected property owners are required a minimum of num hours prior to any disruption of water service as a result of the temporary bypass .
temporary water services shall be connected to the temporary watermain for each single residential unit or other building .
page num rev .
date num opss num connection to the private plumbing system of a residential unit shall be via a wye at an outside tap or an existing water service as specified in the contract documents .
the connection of single residential units in series is not permitted .
each temporary water service shall have its own valved connection to the temporary watermain .
connection to other buildings shall be as specified in the contract documents .
an adequate water supply shall be available at all times .
if the temporary potable water supply service fails it shall be restored within the time period specified in the contract documents .
care shall be exercised during the installation of temporary potable water supply services to avoid contamination of the services .
no work shall be done during freezing weather unless directed by the contract administrator .
no temporary watermains or temporary water services shall be installed or operated during freezing weather .
pipes already in use shall be removed or drained and existing services restored when so directed by the contract administrator .
num temporary watermains the temporary watermain shall be of a size to provide adequate water supply during peak demand of connected users .
at any connection of a temporary watermain to the water supply and distribution system e.g .
at hydrants a double check valve backflow preventer shall be installed .
source connections shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num temporary potable water supply services temporary potable water supply services for single residential units shall be a minimum of num mm inside diameter .
temporary potable water supply services for other users including flow to maintain fire protection systems shall be as specified in the contract documents .
the temporary potable water supply service connections shall be valved near the point of connection to the temporary watermain and also valved near the point of connection to a private plumbing system so that both the temporary watermain and the temporary potable water supply services may be disinfected .
num temporary hydrants when a hydrant is removed from service a temporary hydrant and the necessary valves and fittings shall be installed and maintained according to the contract documents .
before permanently shutting down the existing watermain the temporary hydrants shall be tested to ensure that they are in proper working order .
the hydrants that are out of service during construction operations shall be bagged and clearly marked with a hydrant out of service tag .
once in use the temporary hydrants shall be maintained until the existing or new hydrants are restored to service .
all temporary potable water supply service attachments to fire hydrants shall be easily removable for fire fighting purposes .
all temporary hydrants shall have reflective tape on the barrel for increased visibility .
the temporary hydrants shall stand in an upright position at all times .
page num rev .
date num opss num num valves valves shall be installed at each branch of a temporary watermain .
before permanently shutting down the existing watermain the valves shall be tested to ensure that they are in proper working order .
num protection the contractor shall provide protection of the temporary potable water supply services at locations such as road crossings sidewalks driveways and walkways .
when temporary watermains cross over the roadway the asphalt pavement shall be saw cut and removed and the temporary watermain shall be buried .
under no circumstance is a pipe road crossing to remain open and unprotected from vehicular and pedestrian traffic .
if a concrete road base exists it shall not be disturbed .
when temporary potable water supply services are used on full rightofway reconstruction projects the temporary potable water supply service piping shall also be buried at all sidewalks driveways and walkways .
when temporary potable water supply services are used on projects when the road surface is not being reconstructed the temporary service piping shall be buried only at all road crossings .
when temporary watermains or temporary potable water supply services cross a driveway or a sidewalk asphalt or another acceptable material shall be mounded over the pipe .
a polyethylene sheet shall be placed as a barrier on concrete or interlocking driveways .
if the work performed or material used is not to the satisfaction of the contract administrator action shall be taken to rectify the problem .
safety flashers and barricades as may be required shall be furnished and maintained .
in general the temporary potable water supply service pipe shall be laid where it causes the least obstruction and is least likely to be damaged .
the contractor shall protect the temporary potable water supply services installed across all road crossings sidewalks driveways and walkways during the extent of the construction schedule .
this shall include earth excavation backfill asphalt reinstatement and ramping material required as directed by the contract administrator .
the contractor shall provide adequate signage at locations where hoses are exposed and may present a public safety hazard such as blow off hoses at catchbasins .
num leakage testing the temporary potable water supply service shall be watertight .
leakage testing shall be conducted in the presence of the contract administrator upon completion of the watermain including services .
all leaks shall be repaired prior to covering the pipe .
num flushing and disinfecting temporary watermains and services flushing and disinfecting operations shall be conducted in the presence of the contract administrator .
the contract administrator shall be notified at least num business days in advance of the proposed date on which flushing and disinfecting operations are to commence .
watermains shall be flushed in a sequence approved by the contract administrator .
all temporary watermains and services shall be flushed at a flow velocity adequate to remove any foreign debris and until the discharged water runs clear .
after flushing is completed water from the existing distribution system shall be allowed to flow at a controlled rate into the new temporary watermain .
liquid chlorine solution shall be introduced so that the chlorine is distributed throughout the section being disinfected at chlorine concentration of num mglitre minimum throughout the section .
the system shall be left charged with the chlorine solution for num hours .
page num rev .
date num opss num sampling and testing for chlorine residual shall be carried out in the presence of the contract administrator .
the chlorine residual shall be tested in the section after num hours .
if tests indicate a chlorine residual of num mglitre minimum the section shall be flushed completely and recharged with water normal to the operation of the system .
if the test does not meet the requirements the chlorination procedure shall be repeated until satisfactory results are obtained .
twentyfour hours after the system has been recharged and ready for operation the contract administrator shall ensure that samples are taken for bacteriological tests .
samples shall be collected from every num m of the new watermain plus one sample from each end of each line and at least one sample from each branch .
if there is indication of contamination the disinfection procedure shall be repeated .
the temporary water supply service shall not be put into operation or the existing watermain removed from operation until approval has been given by the contract administrator .
regular sampling and testing for chlorine residual shall be carried out by the contract administrator .
num removal of temporary potable water supply services temporary potable water supply services may be used from approximately midapril to midoctober .
all temporary services shall be completely removed by midnovember .
any variation from this schedule shall be approved by the contract administrator .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
all chlorinated water used for testing flushing or disinfecting watermains shall be directed to an acceptable outlet in a manner that meets the requirements of all applicable regulations .
the method of disposal of chlorinated water is subject to the approval of the contract administrator .
num basis of payment num temporary potable water supply services item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
on completion of the supply installation flushing disinfecting and testing of the temporary potable water supply services prior to putting it in operation a progress payment to num of the above item shall be made .
the balance shall be prorated over the remainder of the working period .
removal or draining of the temporary potable water supply services during freezing weather and its subsequent return to service shall be at no additional cost to the owner .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer may consider including soil boring data a geotechnical report a subsurface report or a soils report in the tender documents .
the designer should include the following in the contract documents pipe size type and class .
num temporary hydrant requirements .
num temporary potable water supply services connection requirements to buildings other than single residential units .
num time requirements for restoring the temporary potable water supply service should it fail .
num temporary potable water supply services to buildings other than single residential units including flow to maintain fire protection systems .
num temporary hydrant and the necessary valves and fittings to be installed and maintained .
num where conditions of high ground water exist external fluids may enter via air release and airvacuum release valves therefore appropriate measures shall be taken .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num num mm blow off installation opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for compacting opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for site preparation for pipelines utilities and associated structures references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for site preparation for pipelines utilities and associated structures the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for preservation protection and reconstruction of existing facilities references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for preservation protection and reconstruction of existing facilities the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num notice to users of opss num construction specification for dust suppresants opss num has been removed from this ops volume there is no provincial version of opss num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for site restoration following installation of pipelines utilities and associated structures references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for site restoration following installation of pipelines utilities and associated structures the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the specification was reviewed by an ops specialty committee and some of the technical content has changed .
the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for removal opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents notice to users of opss num construction specification for riprap rock protection and granular sheeting opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for installation of gabions opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for trenching backfilling and compacting references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for trenching backfilling and compacting the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the specification was reviewed by an ops specialty committee and some of the technical content has changed .
the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for rock excavation for pipelines utilities and associated structures in open cut references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for rock excavation for pipelines utilities and associated structures in open cut the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the specification was reviewed by an ops specialty committee and some of the technical content has changed .
the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for excavating backfilling and compacting for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for excavating backfilling and compacting for maintenance holes catch basins ditch inlets and valve chambers the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the specification was reviewed by an ops specialty committee and some of the technical content has changed .
the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
notice to users of opss num construction specification for dewatering of pipeline utility and associated structure excavation opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for control of water from dewatering operations opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num june num construction specification for pavement marking references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for pavement marking the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for support systems references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for support systems the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the specification was reviewed by an ops specialty committee and some of the technical content has changed .
the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for temporary protection systems opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num april num construction specification for standard highway fence references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for standard highway fence the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for chainlink fence references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for chainlink fence the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for expanded metal antiglare screen references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for expanded metal antiglare screen the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num december num construction specification for traffic control signing references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for traffic control signing the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for steel beam guide rail and cable guide rail references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for steel beam guide rail and cable guide rail the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num february num construction specification for concrete barriers references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for concrete barriers the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for guide rail end treatment eccentric loader terminal system references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for guide rail end treatment eccentric loader terminal system the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for connecticut impact attenuation system references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for connecticut impact attenuation system the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for guide rail end treatment crashcushion attenuating terminal system references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for guide rail end treatment crashcushion attenuating terminal system the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num april num construction specification for guide rail end treatment steel beam energy attenuating terminal systems references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for guide rail end treatment steel beam energy attenuating terminal systems the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for the protection of trees references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for the protection of trees the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for topsoil references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for topsoil the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for sodding references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for sodding the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for seed and cover references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for seed and cover the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for temporary erosion and sediment control measures references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for temporary erosion and sediment control measures the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num notice to users of opss num construction specification for installation of electrical chambers opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for installation of ducts opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for installation of cables opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for grounding table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements not used num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation of electrical grounding equipment and grounding systems .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num site restoration following installation of pipelines utilities and associated structures opss num compacting opss num installation of ducts opss num removal of electrical equipment and materials ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num aggregates miscellaneous csa standards cnum no .
num thermosetinsulated wires and cables cnum no .
num grounding and bonding equipment gnumgnum rnum general requirements for rolled or welded structural quality steelstructural quality steel gnummnum rnum hot dip galvanizing of irregularly shaped articles page num rev .
date num opss num astm international b num num soft or annealed copper wire electrical safety authority esa ontario electrical safety code underwriters laboratories ul ul numsept num grounding and bonding equipment others ieee num standard for qualifying permanent connections used in substation grounding num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply certificate of conformance means a document issued by the quality verification engineer confirming that the specified components of the work are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract ddocuments .
quality verification engineer qve means an engineer retained by the contractor qualified to provide the services specified in the contract documents .
num materials num ground rods ground rods shall be solid steel num mm diameter num m long copper clad for the full length and shall be according to csa cnum no num .
num ground plates ground plates shall be hot dip galvanized solid steel num x num x num mm minimum dimensions .
steel shall be according to cancsa gnumgnum grade numw and shall be galvanized according to cancsa gnum .
num bare ground wire bare ground wire shall be soft drawn stranded copper and shall be according to astm b num .
num insulated ground wire insulated ground wire shall be stranded copper insulation colour green and shall be according to csa cnum no .
num type rwu num crosslink .
page num rev .
date num opss num num ground connectors moulded connectors shall consist of metallic alloys and fusible powder mixtures held in place by suitable moulds and connected using an exothermic type welding process .
physical requirements of the connection shall be according to csa cnum no .
num .
mechanical connectors shall be according to csa cnum no .
num or ul num .
high pressure irreversible compression connectors shall be a made of pure wrought copper extrusion .
b made of the same material as the conductors .
c according to csa num no .
num ul num and ieee num. d connected according to the manufacturers recommendations .
e connected using a minimum compressive force of num kn and a minimum compressive pressure of num mpa .
high pressure irreversible compression connectors shall have crimp verification for the inspection and verification of csa and ul compliance markings .
num solder solder shall be num tinlead mix resin core type .
num sand bedding sand bedding shall consist of sand conforming to the gradation requirements of mortar sand according to opss num .
num ducts and fittings ducts and fittings shall be csa approved and as specified in the contract documents .
num construction num general general requirements for electrical work shall be as specified in the contract documents .
all metallic components shall be connected to system ground .
all compaction shall be according to opss num .
num removals removals shall be according to opss num .
num excavation and backfill earth and rock excavation and backfill shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num ground wire in ducts ground wire shall be pulled through ducts using cable lubricant mechanical aids and pulling cables or ropes as required .
the pulling tension shall be according to the cable manufacturers specifications .
num ground wire direct buried when ground wire crosses over direct buried cables a minimum depth of num mm of sand bedding material shall be placed between the ground wire and the buried cables at the point of crossing .
when ground wire does not share a common trench with ducts or direct buried cable the ground wire shall be installed at a minimum depth of num mm below finished grade .
num ground wire on poles or open surfaces ground wire installed on concrete or metal poles shall be run in rigid duct .
ground wire installed on wooden poles shall be run in protective moulding or in rigid duct .
in both cases the conduit or moulding shall be aligned in straight runs complementing the taper of the pole .
conduit shall be mechanically fastened to wooden poles using pvc conduit clamps and galvanized lag screws .
moulding shall be mechanically fastened to wooden poles using galvanized steel staples .
stainless steel strapping shall be installed to secure conduit on concrete or metal poles .
when ground wire is to be installed on a concrete surface the concrete shall be drilled to accommodate expandable metal anchors for nylon cable clamps held in place with stainless steel bolts .
for installation on wooden surfaces galvanized steel staples shall be installed .
for installation on metal surfaces nylon cable clamps and stainless steel screws or bolts nuts and washers shall be installed .
the ground wire shall be installed in straight neat lines and shall be supported at maximum intervals of num mm .
num ground wire in electrical chambers or enclosures ground wires in electrical chambers and enclosures shall be trained towards the structure walls with bend radii greater than the minimum recommended by the cable manufacturer .
ground wires shall be fastened with mechanical supports when required .
ground wire in electrical chambers shall be connected to ground lugs attached to the frame .
for electrical chambers with metallic covers and nonmetallic frames the ground wire shall be connected to the ground lugs attached to the cover .
ground wire in electrical enclosures shall be connected to the ground lug provided .
num ground wire connections ground connectors shall be used on all ground wire connections .
all surfaces shall be cleaned to bare metal prior to making ground connections .
moulded connectors or high pressure irreversible compression connectors shall be used at pad mounted electricalelectronic equipment power supply locations and all locations where the ground connectors are direct buried or inaccessible .
messenger cables shall be grounded using compression connectors .
num coils of ground wire coiled ground wire shall be left at the locations shown in the contract documents .
coils shall be neatly taped and left in a safe readily accessible location .
page num rev .
date num opss num num ground electrodes num general the installation of ground electrodes shall be according to the ontario electrical safety code .
the work for ground electrodes shall include the work to install ground rods ground plates and the associated work described in this specification .
when bedrock rock fill or similar materials unsuitable for driving ground rods are encountered at depths of num mm to num m below finished grade the ground rod shall be replaced with a ground plate .
when bedrock rock fill or similar materials are encountered at less than num mm below finished grade the ground electrode shall be installed at a different location when driving of a ground rod or installation of a ground plate is possible .
num ground rods ground rods shall be driven in a vertical position when soil conditions allow .
when rocks stones or similar materials are encountered ground rods may be driven at a maximum angle of num to the vertical .
num ground plates ground plates shall be installed on a minimum num mm thick compacted bed of suitable native earth material over rock .
num bonding jumpers the work for bonding jumpers shall include the work described for ground wire on poles or open surfaces and ground wire connections .
num grounding systems the work included shall be as described for ground wires ground electrodes and bonding jumpers .
num testing requirements at pad and pole mounted power supply locations the resistance to ground of the grounding grid shall be tested and measured .
in soils of low conductivity additional ground rods ground plates and ground wires shall be added as required by the contract administrator or the electrical safety authority .
the contract administrator shall be notified num hours prior to resistance to ground measurements are taken .
these measurements shall be undertaken with the contract administrator present under dry soil conditions and when frost penetration has not exceeded num mm .
readings shall not exceed num ohms .
the test results shall be documented by the contractor and a copy of the test results shall be given to the contract administrator .
num quality control num preinstallation testing and inspection grounding cables bonding jumpers ground electrodes and connection components are to be inspected prior to and during installation to ensure that they meet the requirements of the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num proof of performance testing and inspection all system and components grounding shall be inspected and tested to ensure that they meet the requirements of the contract documents .
all electrical grounding connections and splices shall be inspected to ensure they have been properly installed .
at pad and pole mounted power supply locations the resistance to ground of the grounding grid shall be tested and measured .
these measurements shall be undertaken when frost penetration does not exceed num mm .
readings shall not exceed num ohms .
in soils of low conductivity additional ground rods ground plates and ground wires shall be added as required .
copies of all test documentation shall be submitted to the contract administrator .
a certificate of conformance shall be submitted to the contract administrator upon completion of the work .
the quality verification engineer shall affix his or her seal and signature to the completed certificate of conformance confirming that the following are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents a work b material and installations c inspection testing and test results num temporary electrical work the work for temporary electrical installations shall be the same as for permanent installations of the same type of work except the work shall include the removal of the installations when they are no longer required .
num restoration site restoration shall be according to opss num .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num ground wires measurement for ground wire shall be by length in metres horizontally along the longitudinal axis of the duct or trench or open surface from centre to centre of poles pole footings electrical chambers or enclosures sign footings controller cabinet pads and ground electrodes or the face of bridge structures retaining walls and substation pads .
num ground electrodes for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of ground electrodes installed .
num bonding jumpers for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of bonding jumpers installed .
page num rev .
date num opss num num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num ground wires item ground electrodes item bonding jumpers item grounding systems item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
when the contract contains separate items for the work required by this specification payment shall be at the contract prices and according to the specifications for such work .
num ground wires temporary item ground electrodes temporary item bonding jumpers temporary item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
progress payment for temporary installation of the above tender items shall be based on the following percentages of the contract price num for supply and installation num for removal num rock excavation for electrical installation payment for rock excavation for electrical installation shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents duct and fitting requirements .
num coiled ground wire locations .
num grounding should be shown symbolically on the contract drawings .
quantity sheets should include such information as location by station to station or structure to structure quantities for each location size of wire whether bare or insulated wire is used number of electrodes and bonding jumpers .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num electrical maintenance holes general installation requirements opsd num electrical handholes general installation requirements opsd num distribution assembly concrete pad and ducts plan and section aa opsd num distribution assembly concrete pad and ducts section bb opsd num supply control cabinet installation overhead and underground services opsd num wood pole with elliptical bracket overhead and underground circuits opsd num pole wiring diagram numv system opsd num pole wiring diagram numv system opsd num pole wiring diagram numv system opsd num pole wiring diagram lighting pole on bridge structure opsd num grounding for steel beam guide rail opsd num grounding for box beam median barrier opsd num distribution assembly wiring schematic opsd num supply control cabinet assembly type num numv numa numphase numwire opsd num supply control cabinet assembly type num numv numa numphase numwire opsd num supply control cabinet assembly type num numv numa numphase numwire opsd num high mast lighting pole internal drive raising and lowering equipment numv numphase wiring diagram opsd num high mast lighting pole internal drive raising and lowering equipment numv numphase wiring diagram opsd num high mast lighting pole external drive raising and lowering equipment numv numphase wiring diagram opsd num high mast lighting pole external drive raising and lowering equipment numv numphase wiring diagram opsd num traffic signal equipment pole wiring diagram opsd num flasher beacon and downlight for roadway sign and wiring diagram opsd num sign light assembly for keep right sign and wiring diagram page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa opsd num flasher beacons for roadway sign and downlight and wiring diagram opsd num aerial traffic signal installation opsd num aerial flasher beacon installation opsd num controller cabinet grounding system opsd num installation for aerial interconnection cables at terminal board opsd num traffic signal system equipment on wooden or concrete poles overhead wiring installation opsd num traffic signal system equipment on wooden or concrete poles underground wiring installation page num rev .
date num opss num notice to users of opss num construction specification for removal of electrical equipment and materials opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for installation of underpass luminaires table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary numb supplemental requirements for using opss num in municipal contracts num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation replacement and relamping of underpass luminaires .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications and publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num installation of ducts opss num cable installation opss num grounding opss num removal of electrical equipment and materials ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num underpass luminaires csa standards cnum no .
num flexible cords and cables cnum no .
num lowvoltage fuses part num class j fuses cnum no .
num wire connectors cnum no .
nummnum rnum pvc insulating tape cnum no .
num rnum liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit page num rev .
date num opss num gnumgnum rnum general requirements for rolled or welded structural quality steelstructural quality steel wnum rnum welded steel construction metal arc welding gnummnum rnum hot dip galvanizing of irregularly shaped articles american national standards institute ansi cnum electric lamps high intensity discharge lamps method of designation illuminating engineering society of north america iesna lmnum standard file format for electronic transfer of photometric data and related information lmnum electrical and photometric measurements of solidstate lighting products num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply certificate of conformance means a document issued by the quality verification engineer confirming that the specified components of the work are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
quality verification engineer qve means an engineer retained by the contractor qualified to provide the services specified in the contract documents .
num design and submission requirements num submission requirements a photometric test report shall be submitted for each photometric curve used in the luminaires to be installed under the contract .
the testing and test reports for high intensity discharge hid luminaires e.g .
high pressure sodium shall be according to iesna lmnum .
the testing and test reports for led luminaires shall be according to iesna lmnum .
the testing and test reports shall be completed by an independent laboratory or a national voluntary laboratory accreditation program nvlap accredited laboratory which is accredited for testing the type of luminaire to be installed under the contract i.e .
accredited for iesna lmnum for hid luminaires or iesna lmnum for led luminaires .
each test report shall be dated and signed .
the test reports shall be submitted to the contract administrator prior to the commencement of fabrication .
num materials num luminaires underpass luminaires shall be according to opss num .
num lamps lamps shall be clear or coated as specified in the contract documents and shall meet the requirements of ansi cnum .
page num rev .
date num opss num num lowvoltage cables single conductor lowvoltage cables for use in conduit systems shall be according to opss num .
lowvoltage cable for entry to luminaires shall be single conductor stranded copper and shall be according to csa cnum no .
num type gtf .
num wire connectors wire connectors shall be of the insulated spring or compression type and shall be according to cancsa cnum no .
num .
num ground wire ground wire shall be type gtf .
num fuses fuses shall be according to csa cnum no .
num numv num amps rating .
num ducts and fittings nonmetallic flexible liquidtight ducts and connectors shall be according to cancsa cnum no .
num .
num tape electrical insulating tape shall be according to csa cnum no .
num rated for num v and num to num c working temperature .
num luminaire mounting brackets luminaire brackets shall be steel according to csa gnumgnum grade numw and shall be hot dip galvanized according to csa gnum .
welding of members shall be carried out according to csa wnum .
num protective guard the luminaires shall be supplied with the luminaire manufacturers protective guard as specified in the contract documents .
num construction num general general requirements for electrical work shall be as specified in the contract documents .
the work for the installation replacement or relamping of the luminaires shall include all required hardware and fixtures to ensure operation of the unit .
page num rev .
date num opss num num ordering luminaires immediately following the award of the contract the contractor shall order the luminaires as required for this contract .
the contractor shall obtain verification of the delivery dates of the luminaires from the supplier and notify the contract administrator of the delivery dates within num hours after the award of the contract .
the contractor shall ensure timely and accurate communication with both the owner and the supplier regarding the delivery schedules and requirements for the luminaires .
delivery and offloading of the luminaires shall be completed in a timely and efficient manner .
num removals removals shall be according to opss num .
num surfacemounted ducts nonmetallic flexible liquidtight ducts and connectors shall be used for connecting the underpass luminaires to the closest junction boxes as specified in the contract documents .
surfacemounted ducts shall be installed according to opss num .
num luminaire mounting brackets when specified in the contract documents the luminaries shall be installed on mounting brackets .
luminaire mounting brackets shall be fastened to concrete surfaces by drilling and inserting metal expansion anchors and securing the bracket with num mm diameter stainless steel machine bolts and lock washers .
luminaire mounting brackets shall be fastened to steel structural members as specified in the contract documents using stainless steel hardware .
the luminaire mounting bracket shall be fastened to the surfaces to allow the level installation of the luminaire .
num wiring wiring shall be installed according to opss num .
each luminaire shall be individually protected with a fuse .
the fuse shall be located either in the junction box or in the luminaire .
all connectors shall be insulated and secured with tape .
each luminaire shall be wired with type gtf conductors connected to the ballast leads with insulated spring connectors secured with tape .
gtf conductors shall be connected to the underpass lighting circuits in the junction box with insulated spring connectors secured with tape .
num grounding underpass luminaires shall be connected to the system ground according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num installation of luminaires luminaires shall be protected from conditions where moisture or dirt could damage the ballasts or reflecting surfaces of the optical system .
luminaires shall be mounted on concrete surfaces specified in the contract documents by drilling and inserting metal expansion anchors and securing the luminaires with num mm diameter stainless steel machine bolts lock washers and pvc spacers .
luminaires shall be mounted on the steel structural members specified in the contract documents using stainless steel hardware .
all underpass luminaires are to be installed level using stainless steel hardware .
the luminaire reflector and refractor shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to installing lamps .
the wire guard and housing hardware shall be securely fastened in place .
num replacing luminaires when specified in the contract documents existing luminaires associated flexible conduit and wiring shall be removed and new luminaires associated flexible conduit fittings and wiring shall be installed .
when new luminaires are of a different style than the existing luminaires new concrete anchors or mounting hardware shall be installed .
num relamping existing lamps shall be removed the luminaires thoroughly cleaned and new lamps installed .
num quality control num preinstallation testing and inspection luminaires brackets socket setting refractor type and ballast type shall be inspected to ensure they meet the requirements of the contract documents .
num proof of performance testing and inspection luminaires shall be inspected and tested to ensure that they meet the requirements of the contract documents .
the contractor shall ensure that all lamps installed in luminaires have undergone a minimum burningin period of num consecutive nighttime hours prior to acceptance of the work by the contract administrator .
for daytime tunnel illumination systems the burnin time is not required to be continuous and shall be achieved during normal daytime hours .
lowvoltage system tests required on the wiring system shall be performed according to opss num .
a certificate of conformance shall be submitted to the contract administrator upon completion of the work .
the quality verification engineer shall affix his or her seal and signature to the completed certificate of conformance confirming that the following are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents a work b material and installations c inspection testing and test results page num rev .
date num opss num num temporary electrical work the work for temporary electrical installations shall be the same as for permanent installations of the same type of work except the work shall include the removal of the installations when they are no longer required .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num underpass luminaires for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of underpass luminaires installed .
num replace underpass luminaires for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of underpass luminaires replaced .
num relamp underpass luminaires for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of underpass luminaires relamped .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num underpass luminaires item replace underpass luminaires item relamp underpass luminaires item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
when the contract contains separate items for the work required by this specification payment shall be at the contract prices and according to the specifications for such work .
num underpass luminaires temporary item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
progress payments for temporary installation of the above tender item shall be based on the following percentages of the contract price num for supply and installation num for removal page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents clear or coated lamps .
num junction box locations .
num location of luminaire installations .
num the designer should determine if the following are required and if so specify them in the contract documents luminaires mounted on brackets .
num luminaire replacement .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num underpass luminaires wall mounted installation opsd num underpass luminaire ceiling mounted installation with tee bracket opsd num tee bracket for ceiling mounted underpass luminaire opsd num wedge mounting bracket for underpass luminaire opsd num support bracket for column mounted underpass luminaire opsd num .
underpass luminaire wiring detail page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numb november num for use in municipal contracts when referenced in the contract documents note this is a nonmandatory additional information appendix intended to provide supplementary requirements for the ops specification in a municipal contract when the appendix is invoked by the owner .
it is written in mandatory language to permit invoking it by reference in the contract documents .
if the appendix has not been invoked by reference in the contract documents it does not apply .
supplemental requirements for using opss num in municipal contracts opss num installation of underpass luminaires is amended as follows num definitions section num is amended by the deletion of the definition for quality verification engineer and replaced by the following quality verification engineer qve means a representative of the owner qualified to provide the services specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for installation of power supply equipment table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation of distribution assemblies and supply control cabinet assemblies .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num installation of ducts opss num installation of cable opss num grounding opss num footings and pads for electrical equipment ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num power supply equipment opss num photoelectric controllers electrical safety authority esa ontario electrical safety code page num rev .
date num opss num num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply certificate of conformance means a document issued by the quality verification engineer confirming that the specified components of the work are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
engineer means a professional engineer licensed by the professional engineers ontario to practice in the province of ontario .
quality verification engineer qve means an engineer retained by the contractor qualified to provide the services specified in the contract documents .
service box means an approved assembly consisting of an enclosure designed and constructed so that it can be effectually locked or sealed contain either service fuses and a service switch or a circuit breaker and allow the switch or circuit breaker to be manually operated .
num design and submission requirements num submission requirements the following information shall be submitted to the contract administrator a actual breakdown cost of utility work such as hook up transformation etc .
b utility company contact persons name title address and telephone and mobile phone numbers .
working drawings shall be submitted according to opss num .
num materials num distribution assemblies distribution assemblies shall be according to opss num and the contract documents .
num supply control cabinet assemblies supply control cabinet assemblies shall be according to opss num and the contract documents .
num service boxes nonmetallic enclosures for service boxes shall be certified or approved and marked suitable for use as service equipment .
num photoelectric controllers photoelectric controllers shall be according to opss num .
num cables and cable connectors cables and cable connectors shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num grounding materials grounding materials shall be according to opss num .
num conduit and fittings rigid ducts and fittings shall be according to opss num .
num construction num general general requirements for electrical work shall be as specified in the contract documents .
concrete pads shall be according to opss num and as specified in the contract documents .
num distribution assemblies equipment enclosures shall be installed squarely and symmetrically on concrete pads .
a neoprene gasket shall be attached squarely and symmetrically on the bottom base hbeam of the enclosure prior to installation .
base hbeam anchor bolts shall be secured in place at locations specified in the contract documents .
num supply control cabinet assemblies supply control cabinet assemblies shall be mounted securely on poles using stainless steel strapping .
rigid ducts and fittings shall be installed on wooden poles using twohole galvanized pipe straps one trade size larger with galvanized lag screws and on metal or concrete poles using stainless steel strapping at intervals specified in the ontario electrical safety code .
the conduit system shall be installed in straight lengths to follow the taper of the pole .
offset bends meter hubs terminal adapters and fittings shall be used when required to avoid pole attachments and be kept free of kinks or scorch marks .
when specified in the contract documents a meter socket acceptable to the power supply authority shall be installed .
num cables and fuses cables terminations and connections shall be installed according to opss num .
service cables from the point of service connection to the main disconnecting means shall be installed according to the ontario electrical safety code and the requirements of the power supply authority .
only highvoltage fuses that have a current rating approved by the power supply authority shall be installed .
num grounding all grounding work shall be according to opss num .
all concrete pad mounted equipment shall be bonded by means of bonding jumpers connected between the equipment ground bus and the exterior ground grid .
lightning arrestors shall have the ground cable connected securely to the equipment ground bus .
the neutral bus of the main disconnecting means or the secondary neutral terminal of the transformer shall be grounded .
page num rev .
date num opss num the system ground wire and the service ground wire shall be connected to the neutral bus in supply control cabinet assemblies .
num photoelectric controllers num general photoconductive cell windows shall be set to face in a northerly direction and away from any nearby light sources .
num distribution assemblies photoelectric controllers shall be installed according to the contract documents .
num supply control cabinet assemblies photoelectric controllers shall be installed on poles with twist lock mounting sockets and brackets .
brackets shall be mounted on metal or concrete poles with stainless steel strapping or on wooden poles with galvanized lag screws .
num quality control num preinstallation testing and inspection power supply equipment shall be inspected prior to installation to ensure that it meets the requirements of the contract documents .
a visual inspection of all the power supply equipment shall be performed prior to its delivery .
the following components shall be inspected to ensure that they meet the requirements of the contract documents a barriers and raceways k grounding connections b breakers l insulation c cabinet materials m labels d conduits and tubings n lightning arrestors e contactors o panelboards f disconnect switches p photoelectric controllers g doors and latching mechanisms q switches h enclosure materials r transformers i cabinet general appearance s wires and connectors j grounding and bonding materials num proof of performance testing and inspection the installed power supply equipment shall be inspected and tested .
all components listed under the preinstallation testing and inspection clause shall be inspected .
low voltage system tests shall be performed on wiring of the equipment according to opss num .
grounding of equipment shall be tested according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num a certification of conformance shall be submitted to the contract administrator upon completion of the work .
the quality verification engineer shall affix his or her seal and signature to the completed certificate of conformance confirming that the following are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents a work b material and installations c inspection testing and test results num as constructed drawings in the event changes to the accepted working drawings are necessary as constructed drawings bearing the stamp and signature of an engineer shall be submitted to the contract administrator .
num temporary electrical work the work for temporary electrical installations shall be the same as for permanent installations of the same type of work except the work shall include the removal of the installations when they are no longer required .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num distribution assemblies supply control cabinet assemblies for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of assemblies installed .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num distribution assemblies item supply control cabinet assemblies item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num num distribution assemblies temporary item supply control cabinet assemblies temporary item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment material to do the work .
progress payment for temporary installation of the above tender items shall be based on the following percentages of the contract price num for supply and installation num for removal additional payment shall not be made for the electrical energy and service required to do the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents distribution assembly material requirements as follows num distribution assembly pad mounted ____ kva num v numphase complete with ___ amp main fused disconnect ____ volt ___ amp main unfused disconnect ___ amp main lighting breaker ___ amp main auxiliary system fused disconnect ___ ___ amp ___ volt auxiliary system fused disconnect ___ ___ amp branch breakers for lighting panelboard ___ ___ amp branch breakers for ____ volt panelboard ___ amp meter socket as per local power supply authority standards meter socket catalogue no .
__________ supply control cabinet assembly material requirements as follows num supply control cabinet assembly type ___ ___ volt ___ amp ___ phase complete with ___ amp main circuit breaker ___ amp traffic signal circuit breaker ___ amp circuit breakers ___ amp meter socket as per local power supply authority standards meter socket catalogue no .
_________ the designer should determine if the following is required and if so specify it in the contract documents meter sockets .
num the designer should coordinate with the power supply authority the payment for electrical energy and service .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings power supply equipment drawings opsd num to opsd num opsd num to opsd num opsd num to opsd num page num rev .
date num opss num notice to users of opss num construction specification for erection of poles opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for footings and pads for electrical equipment opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for installation of roadway luminaires table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary numb supplemental requirements for using opss num in municipal contracts num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation of luminaires and brackets on poles complete with associated wiring and connections .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num installation of cable opss num grounding opss num removal of electrical equipment and materials ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num high pressure sodium luminaires for highway lighting csa standards cnum no .
num rnum general requirements for luminaires cnum no .
num wire connectors cnum no .
num rnum rigid pvc unplasticized conduit cnum no .
num lowvoltage fuses part num class j fuses cnum rnum communication and power line hardware page num rev .
date num opss num american national standards institute ansi cnum highintensity discharge lamps method of designation illuminating engineering society of north america iesna lmnum standard file format for electronic transfer of photometric data and related information lmnum electrical and photometric measurements of solidstate lighting products num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply certificate of conformance means a document issued by the quality verification engineer confirming that the specified components of the work are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
engineer means a professional engineer licensed by the professional engineers ontario to practice in the province of ontario .
quality verification engineer qve means an engineer retained by the contractor qualified to provide the services specified in the contract documents .
num design and submission requirements num submission requirements a photometric test report shall be submitted for each photometric curve used in the luminaires to be installed under the contract .
the testing and test reports for high intensity discharge hid luminaires e.g .
high pressure sodium shall be according to iesna lmnum .
the testing and test reports for led luminaires shall be according to iesna lmnum .
the testing and test reports shall be completed by an independent laboratory or a national voluntary laboratory accreditation program nvlap accredited laboratory which is accredited for testing the type of luminaire to be installed under the contract i.e .
accredited for iesna lmnum for hid luminaires or iesna lmnum for led luminaires .
each test report shall be dated and signed .
the test reports shall be submitted to the contract administrator prior to the commencement of fabrication .
num materials num luminaires num roadway lighting type roadway lighting luminaires shall be according to opss num and the contract documents .
num high mast lighting type high mast lighting luminaires shall be according to opss num and the contract documents .
num floodlighting type floodlighting luminaires shall be according to csa cnum no .
num and the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num lamps lamps shall be high pressure sodium according to ansi cnum with ansi lamp designations shown in table num .
lamp wattages shall be permanently marked using a label affixed to the underside of the luminaires as specified in the contract documents .
num lowvoltage cables single conductor lowvoltage cables shall be according to opss num .
num wire connectors wire connectors shall be of the compression type and shall be according to cancsa cnum no .
num .
num insulating covers insulating covers for connectors shall be of the vinyl snap lock type or heat shrink tubing type and rated at num v. num brackets brackets shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num conduit and fittings conduit and fittings required for wooden pole mounting shall be of the rigid pvc type according to csa cnum no .
num .
num hardware hardware for wooden pole mounting shall be according to csa cnum .
num grounding materials ground wire and connectors shall be according to opss num .
num fuse holders and fuses fuse holders shall be of the inline type suitable for use with num awg conductors rated num v and shall be complete with protective boots .
fuses shall be according to csa cnum no .
num num v with a current rating as specified in the contract documents .
num construction num general general requirements for electrical work shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num ordering luminaires immediately following the award of the contract the contractor shall order the luminaires as required for this contract .
the contractor shall obtain verification of the delivery dates of the luminaires from the supplier and notify the contract administrator of the delivery dates within num hours after the award of the contract .
page num rev .
date num opss num the contractor shall ensure there is timely and accurate communication with both the owner and the supplier regarding the delivery schedules and requirements for the luminaires .
delivery and offloading of the luminaires shall be completed in a timely and efficient manner .
num removals removals shall be according to opss num .
num lamp installation lamps shall be installed after poles have been erected and the brackets and luminaires mounted and levelled .
num brackets num roadway lighting type brackets shall be installed at right angles to the centreline of the roadway being served .
bracket clamping assemblies shall be securely tightened .
brackets shall be mounted on wooden poles using num mm diameter galvanized steel square head through bolts nuts and num x num mm washers .
num floodlighting type bracket assemblies shall be oriented to give the floodlight aiming specified in the contract documents .
bracket clamping assemblies shall be securely tightened .
num luminaires num general luminaires shall be stored in conditions free of moisture dirt and other factors that could damage the ballasts or reflecting surfaces of the optical system .
luminaires shall be mounted on brackets and shall be installed level along both the longitudinal and transverse axis .
luminaire clamping assemblies shall be securely tightened upon completion of levelling .
luminaires shall be orientated and aimed using the horizontal and vertical angles specified in the contract documents .
when instructed by the contract administrator each luminaire or luminaire component shall be readjusted once under nighttime operating conditions .
glass refractors shall be installed complete with gaskets .
mounting hardware shall be securely tightened .
the luminaire reflector and refractor shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to installing lamps .
lamps shall be installed with the installation date marked on the lamp base .
if required the refractor and the lamp holder shall be reset or replaced according to manufacturers instructions to give the proper type of light distribution specified in the contract documents .
when specified in the contract documents the luminaires shall be equipped with shields .
the shields shall be mounted in such a manner so as to prevent loosening turning or falling when subject to vibration or wind loading in the installed position and to permit relamping without removing or distorting the alignment of the shields .
page num rev .
date num opss num the shield shall be installed according to the manufacturers instructions .
the orientation of each shield shall be as specified in the contract documents .
after the shield is attached to the luminaireretaining ring it shall be rotated such that its centre the deepest point is aligned with the specified angle .
the angle specified is based on geometric rotation with the true north as its reference num degrees .
once the shield is aligned to the specified angle it shall be secured in place by tightening the holding ring .
the luminaire assembly when closed and in the operating position shall not be subject to damage by vibration .
num high mast lighting type a maximum of one luminaire shall be installed on each arm of the luminaire ring .
each luminaire shall be bolted and secured onto its respective luminaire arm .
num wiring and connections riser wires in metal and concrete poles shall be terminated at the luminaire terminal block and installed through the bracket and pole to the pole handhole .
riser wires on wooden poles shall enter the bracket with a drip loop and shall be installed in conduit when the distance from the bracket to the low voltage bus exceeds num mm .
connections or riser wires to the assigned feeder conductors shall be made with compression connectors insulated with insulating covers .
inline fuse holders and fuses shall be installed in the pole handhole and placed in an accessible location .
for wooden poles inline fuse holder and fuses shall be installed at the point of connection .
num grounding grounding shall be according to opss num .
for metal or concrete pole mounting a num awg insulated green stranded copper ground wire shall be installed between the luminaire housing ground terminal and the ground stud in the pole handhole .
for wooden pole mounting a num awg insulated green stranded copper ground wire shall be installed between the luminaire housing ground terminal and the system ground .
num replacing luminaires existing luminaires shall be removed and new luminaires shall be installed according to the contract documents .
existing riser wires and luminaire ground wire shall be salvaged and connected to the new luminaires .
num relamping when required existing lamps shall be removed .
the existing luminaires shall be thoroughly cleaned and new lamps shall be installed according to the contract documents .
num quality control num preinstallation testing and inspection luminaires brackets socket setting refractor type and ballast type shall be tested and inspected to ensure that they are according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num proof of performance testing and inspection luminaires shall be tested and inspected to ensure that they are levelled correctly and according to the contract documents .
all lamps installed in luminaires shall have a minimum burningin period of num nighttime hours prior to acceptance of the work by the contract administrator .
all luminaire shielding shall be installed prior to the start of the burnin period .
all tests required on the wiring system shall be according to opss num .
a certificate of conformance shall be submitted to the contract administrator upon completion of the work .
the quality verification engineer shall affix his or her seal and signature to the completed certificate of conformance confirming that the following are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents a work b material and installations c inspection testing and test results num temporary electrical work the work for temporary electrical installations shall be the same as for permanent installations of the same type of work except the work shall include the removal of the installations when they are no longer required .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num roadway lighting luminaires and bracket assemblies for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of roadway lighting luminaires and bracket assemblies installed .
num high mast lighting luminaires for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of high mast lighting luminaires installed .
num floodlighting luminaires and bracket assemblies for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of floodlighting luminaires and bracket assemblies installed .
num replace roadway lighting luminaires for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of roadway lighting luminaires replaced .
page num rev .
date num opss num num replace high mast lighting luminaires for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of high mast lighting luminaires replaced .
num replace floodlighting luminaires for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of floodlighting luminaires replaced .
num relamp roadway lighting luminaires for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of new lamps installed in existing roadway lighting luminaires .
num relamp high mast lighting luminaires for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of new lamps installed in existing high mast lighting luminaires .
num relamp floodlighting luminaires for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of new lamps installed in existing floodlighting luminaires .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num roadway lighting luminaires and bracket assemblies item high mast lighting luminaires item floodlighting luminaires and bracket assemblies item replace roadway lighting luminaires item replace high mast lighting luminaires item replace floodlighting luminaires item relamp roadway lighting luminaires item relamp high mast lighting luminaires item relamp floodlighting luminaires item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
num roadway lighting luminaires and bracket assemblies temporary item floodlighting luminaires and bracket assemblies temporary item high mast lighting luminaires temporary item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
progress payments for the above tender items shall be based on the following percentages of the contract price num for supply and installation num for removal page num rev .
date num opss num table num lamps for roadway lighting lamp type lamp wattage lamp nominal operating voltage lamp finish ansi lamp designation num num clear snum num num clear snum num num clear snum num num coated snumdnum num num clear snum num num clear snum num num clear snum num num clear snum num num clear snum high pressure sodium hps num num clear snum page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents roadway lighting luminaire requirements .
num high mast lighting luminaire requirements .
num floodlighting luminaire requirements .
num bracket type .
num fuse current rating .
num floodlight bracket orientation .
num light distribution requirements .
num high mast lighting horizontal and vertical orientation angles .
num the designer should determine if the following are required and if they are specify them in the contract documents luminaire shields .
num luminaire shield orientation .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num num m and num m steel truss bracket for steel poles opsd num num m and num m aluminum tapered elliptical bracket opsd num lamp wattage label for luminaire opsd num high mast lighting pole luminaire and handhole orientation opsd num high mast lighting pole flood light luminaire mounting details opsd num high mast lighting pole luminaire support ring opsd num high mast lighting pole luminaire shroud opsd num high mast lighting pole luminaire shroud details page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numb november num for use in municipal contracts when referenced in the contract documents note this is a nonmandatory additional information appendix intended to provide supplementary requirements for the ops specification in a municipal contract when the appendix is invoked by the owner .
it is written in mandatory language to permit invoking it by reference in the contract documents .
if the appendix has not been invoked by reference in the contract documents it does not apply .
supplemental requirements for using opss num in municipal contracts opss num installation of roadway luminaires is amended as follows num definitions section num is amended by the deletion of the definition for quality verification engineer and replaced by the following quality verification engineer qve means a representative of the owner qualified to provide the services specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num notice to users of opss num construction specification for traffic signal equipment opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for installation of sectional steel high mast lighting poles opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification construction specification for concrete footings and maintenance platforms for high mast lighting poles table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements not used num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation of concrete footings and maintenance platforms for high mast lighting poles .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
metric opss num november num page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num grading opss num compacting opss num installation of ducts opss num grounding opss num deep foundations opss num concrete structures opss num steel reinforcement for concrete opss num structural steel for bridges ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num aggregates base subbase select subgrade and backfill material opss num bearings elastomeric plain and steel laminated opss num concrete materials and production opss num steel reinforcement for concrete opss num corrugated steel pipe csp products opss num anchorage assembly high mast lighting pole page num rev .
date num opss num num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply certificate of conformance means a document issued by the quality verification engineer confirming that the specified components of the work are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
earth means as defined in opss num .
quality verification engineer qve means an engineer retained by the contractor qualified to provide the services specified in the contract documents .
num materials num concrete concrete shall be according to opss num with a nominal minimum numday compressive strength of num mpa .
num steel reinforcement steel reinforcement shall be according to opss num .
num structural steel structural steel shall be according to opss num .
num corrugated steel pipe corrugated steel pipe shall be according to opss num and as specified in the contract documents .
num neoprene pad neoprene pad shall be according to the plain bearing requirements specified opss num .
num granular a granular a shall be according to opss num .
num sleeves and ducts sleeves and ducts shall be according to opss num .
num anchorage assemblies anchorage assemblies shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num construction num general general requirements for electrical work shall be as specified in the contract documents .
concrete footings and maintenance platforms for high mast lighting poles shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num concrete footings for high mast lighting poles num earth excavation excavation of the pole base shall be to the neat lines and grades specified in the contract documents .
when additional excavation beyond the neat limits is required such excavation shall be a minimum of num mm beyond the neat dimensions of the footing to accommodate backfill .
the contractor is responsible for constructing excavations without disturbing the sides or bases of the excavation .
when rock is encountered the earth excavation shall be widened to the dimensions suitable for rock excavation or rock drilling operations .
rock excavation shall be according to opss num .
num caisson pile caisson piles shall be as specified in the contract documents and placed according to opss num .
the base of the caisson or shallow foundation shall be cleaned of loosened or softened materials or both and inspected prior to pouring concrete .
complete documentation of the inspection and installation of each caisson shall be maintained and submitted to the contract administrator .
num steel reinforcement steel reinforcement shall be placed according to opss num .
num anchorage assemblies anchorage assemblies of the size diameter length and type specified in the contract documents shall be positioned in footings to obtain the proper position and handhole orientation .
anchorage assemblies shall be securely tied to the steel reinforcement and provided with supports to maintain the position of the anchorage assembly during the placing of concrete .
the anchorage assembly shall not be welded to the steel reinforcement .
the anchorage setting templates shall remain in place until immediately prior to the installation of the poles .
num sleeves and ducts sleeves and ducts for footings shall be located to suit incoming duct or cable systems and shall be securely tied to the steel reinforcement and supported prior to the placing of concrete .
the number of sleeves shall be as specified in the contract documents .
sleeves shall be cut off cleanly above the footing to a minimum of num mm above the pole base plate .
sleeves shall be temporarily plugged or sealed until wiring is installed .
page num rev .
date num opss num num concrete concrete shall be placed according to opss num except as noted herein .
in earth concrete may be placed directly against the undisturbed earth or may be formed in place such that a minimum of num mm all around the footing is available for the placing of granular backfill .
the upper portion of the footing shall be formed to a minimum of num mm below grade level .
formwork shall be removed to a minimum depth of num mm below finished grade prior to placing granular backfill .
in rock concrete shall be placed directly against the excavated rock surfaces .
portions of footings in earth above the top of the rock surface shall be formed as noted in the previous paragraph .
prior to the installation of the pole the concrete shall have reached the minimum strength specified in the contract documents .
concrete for the high mast lighting pole footings shall be cured according to opss num except as noted herein .
a wet burlap shall be applied to the top surface of the footing immediately after completion of the finishing operation without damaging or marring the surface of the concrete and shall be kept wet during the curing period .
b when white pigmented membrane is used as a curing compound on adjacent concrete barrier wall a minimum of one coat of the curing compound shall be applied to the concrete footing immediately after completion of the curing cycle for the footing .
additional curing compound shall be applied as necessary to ensure colour uniformity with the adjacent concrete barrier wall .
c the curing compound shall only be used on the exposed final surfaces of the footing .
curing compound shall not be applied to construction joints .
num granular backfill granular a backfill shall be placed around footings in earth and compacted according to opss num .
num granular apron a granular apron consisting of granular a shall be placed around each high mast lighting pole footing as specified in the contract documents .
num grading earth grading around the high mast lighting pole footings shall be as specified in the contract documents and opss num .
num maintenance platforms for high mast lighting poles num neoprene pad the size of the neoprene pad shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num fabrication delivery and installation fabrication delivery and installation of the platform and railing shall be according to opss num and the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num grounding grounding shall be according to opss num .
num mechanical concrete anchors mechanical concrete anchors shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num quality control num submission of certificate of conformance a certificate of conformance shall be submitted to the contract administrator upon completion of the work .
the quality verification engineer shall affix his or her seal and signature to the completed certificate of conformance confirming that the following are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents a work b material and installations c inspection testing and test results the certificate of conformance shall include that a the excavation was carried out without causing instability to the base and walls of the excavation .
b the base of the caisson or shallow concrete foundation was cleaned of loosened or softened material or both prior to placing concrete .
c the anchorage assemblies sleeves and ducts were properly placed in the centre of the concrete footings within a num mm tolerance .
d the placement of concrete was completed according to opss num .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num concrete footings for high mast lighting poles for payment purposes a count shall be made of the number of concrete footings for high mast lighting poles installed .
num maintenance platform for high mast lighting poles for payment purposes a count shall be made of the number of maintenance platforms for high mast lighting poles installed .
page num rev .
date num opss num num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clause under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num concrete footings for high mast lighting poles item maintenance platform for high mast lighting poles item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
num rock excavation for electrical installation payment for rock excavation for electrical installation shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents pole base excavation lines and grades .
num caisson pile requirements .
num anchorage assembly size diameter length and type .
num number of sleeves into the pole bases .
num minimum concrete strength for pole installation .
num grading around pole footing requirements .
num maintenance platform requirements .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num high mast lighting pole apron opsd num high mast lighting pole anchorage assembly placement opsd num high mast lighting pole anchorage assembly details for double base plate opsd num high mast lighting pole anchorage assembly details page num rev .
date num opss num issued num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for watermain installation in open cut references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for watermain installation in open cut the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the technical content has not changed .
only the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for cathodic protection of new and existing watermains references to opss num shall be deemed to mean opss num construction specification for corrosion protection of new and existing watermains the renumbered specification has been relocated to division num of this ops volume .
ops users please note for the relocated specification opss num the specification was reviewed by an ops specialty committee and some of the technical content has changed .
the specification designation publication date and references to other renumbered specifications have been changed .
page num rev .
date num opss num issued num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for permanent small signs and support systems table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements not used num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation and removal of permanent small signs and support systems and the relocation of small signs .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num compacting ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num signs ontario ministry of transportation publications ontario traffic manual otm book numb sign design principles page num rev .
date num opss num csa standards onum seriesnum rnum wood preservation onum rnum softwood lumber astm international a numa nummnum zinc hotdip galvanized coatings on iron and steel products a numanummnum zinc coating hotdip on iron and steel hardware a numa nummnum repair of damaged and uncoated areas of hotdip galvanized coatings others national lumber grade authority nlga canadian wood preservers bureau cwpb num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply relocation means to move an existing permanent sign to a new chainage or offset or both .
removal means to remove and dispose of an existing permanent sign or support system or both .
sign and sign board means a traffic control device mounted on a fixed support that conveys a specific message by means of symbols and or words and is officially erected for the purpose of regulating warning informing and guiding traffic .
sign support system means a wooden or steel post of specified dimensions hardware and material embedded vertically into the ground for mounting signs at a specified height above the roadway and ground .
the system may consist of a single double or triple post configuration .
sign hardware means metal hardware including but not limited to nuts bolts washers spacers and lock washers for attaching signs to sign support systems .
small sign assembly means one or more signs mounted on a sign support system with specified sign hardware having a total sign or sign board area not greater than num m .
num materials num general the contractor shall select a sign support system for each small sign assembly installation as specified in the contract documents .
all supplied components shall be according to the manufacturers specifications and as specified in the contract documents .
all sign hardware shall be hot dip galvanized according to astm a num .
new sign boards shall be supplied as specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num wooden posts num general all wooden posts shall be in dressed sizes and pressure treated with wood preservative .
the tolerance on the crosssectional dimensions of all wooden posts shall be num mm .
num wood preservative wood preservative shall be according to cancsa onum series use category uc num .
num marking of wood for identification of grade and species all wooden posts shall be stamped for species and grading according to csa onum by an approved agency authorized by the national lumber grade authority nlga .
the stamp shall be visible after installation and located at least num m from the bottom of the post .
num marking of wood for identification of preservative treatment all wooden posts shall be stamped for wood preservative treatment using a certification mark authorized by the canadian wood preservers bureau cwpb .
the wood preservative stamp shall be visible after installation and located at least num m from the bottom of the post .
num metal posts num general all supplied metal posts bolts washers and nuts shall be according to the manufacturers specifications and the contract documents .
all metal posts shall be hot dip galvanized after fabrication according to astm a num .
all sign hardware shall be hot dip galvanized according to astm a num .
num signs signs shall be according to opss num .
num construction num general all breakaway and nonbreakaway sign support systems shall be installed according to the manufacturers specifications and as specified in the contract documents at locations specified in the contract documents .
all sign boards shall be installed according to otm book numb and as specified in the contract documents .
all signs shall be installed relocated or removed at locations specified in the contract documents .
signs shall be installed so that they do not obstruct and are not obstructed by existing permanent signs or other objects .
the contract administrator shall be notified prior to installation of sign supports if it is not possible to install a new or relocated sign as specified in the contract documents due to this requirement .
page num rev .
date num opss num signs shall be covered temporarily for traffic operational reasons when directed by the contract administrator .
signs shall be covered so they are not visible to approaching motorists .
the cover shall remain securely in place until the signs are appropriate for display as directed by the contract administrator .
the covering material shall not damage or make any marks on the signs .
acceptable material from post hole excavation shall be used as backfill around posts and compacted according to opss num .
posts shall be plumbed within a tolerance of num mm .
the sign shall be levelled on a multiple post system within a tolerance of num mm .
backtoback signs may be installed on single or multiple posts .
the sign support system shall be selected based on the largest sign area on one side of the post .
cut ends and field drilled holes shall receive two applications of num copper napthenate wood preservative .
field applied wood preservative that comes in contact with any metal components shall be removed immediately .
damaged and cut areas of hot dip galvanized coatings on any galvanized components shall be repaired according to astm a num .
num sign supply signs shall be supplied by the owner or by the contractor as specified in the contract documents .
num owner supplied signs num sign ordering the contractor shall submit a list of signs required for this contract to the contract administrator .
the list of signs shall contain the quantity and details of the signs and the date for pick up by the contractor .
the list of signs shall be submitted a minimum of num weeks prior to the pickup date .
num sign pickup the contractor shall pickup all the ordered signs on the list of required signs at a location provided in the contract documents to be supplied by the owner within num business days of receiving notice from the contract administrator that the signs are ready for pickup .
the contractor shall ensure that all signs are safely secured and packaged prior to transporting the signs .
num sign confirmation and inspection the contractor shall within num business days confirm in writing with the contract administrator that all the ordered signs were received in accordance with the list of required signs .
the owner shall be notified of any incorrect signs identified by the contractor .
the contractor shall be responsible for the cost of replacing all damaged missing and incorrect signs subsequent to the contractors order confirmation .
num contractor supplied signs the contractor shall supply all signs as specified in the contract documents .
num new signs new sign boards shall be attached to new sign support systems with sign hardware as specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num relocation of signs relocated sign boards shall be attached to new support systems with sign hardware as specified in the contract documents .
no portion of the existing sign support system and sign hardware shall be left at the original sign location and any excess material including support system and sign hardware shall be managed as specified in the contract documents or as directed by the contract administrator .
num removal of signs no portion of the removed sign support system and sign hardware shall be left at the original sign location and any excess materials shall be managed as specified in the contract documents .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num small signs ground mounted new for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of new small sign assemblies installed .
num small signs relocation for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of small sign assemblies relocated .
num small signs removal for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of small sign assemblies removed .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clause under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num small signs ground mounted new item small signs relocation item small signs removal item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
costs associated with any required repairs or removals and replacements of defective materials shall be the contractors responsibility at no additional cost to the owner .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents new sign board material requirements .
num locations of breakaway and nonbreakaway sign support systems .
num locations of signs to be installed relocated or removed .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num to num small sign support systems page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for post mounted delineators table of contents num scope num references num definitions not used num design and submission requirements not used num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation of post mounted delineators .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num signs ontario ministry of transportation publications ontario traffic manual otm book num pavement hazard and delineation markings astm international a numa nummnum carbon structural steel a numa nummnum zinc hotdip galvanized coatings on iron and steel products a numa nummnum zinc coating hotdip on iron and steel hardware d num retroreflective sheeting for traffic control page num rev .
date num opss num num materials num delineator posts delineator post dimensions shall be as specified in the contract documents .
delineator posts shall be fabricated from steel according to astm a numm and hot dip galvanized after fabrication according to astm a numm .
num hardware hardware shall be as specified in the contract documents .
all hardware shall be hot dip galvanized according to astm a numm .
num delineators delineators shall be outfitted with high intensity retroreflective sheeting according to astm d num type iii or iv and the colour according to otm book num .
dimensions shall be as specified in the contract documents .
sign blanks shall be metal and according to opss num with dimensions as specified in the contract documents .
num construction num general post mounted delineators shall be installed plumb and set according to alignment and grade according to and at the locations and spacing specified in the contract documents .
num delineators delineators shall be mounted on the posts as specified in the contract documents .
delineators shall be centred vertically and horizontally over the post holes .
the type shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num post mounted delineators for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of complete post mounted delineators installed .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
page num rev .
date num opss num num basis of payment num post mounted delineators item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
costs associated with any required removals and replacement or repairs of defective work and materials shall be the contractors responsibility at no additional cost to the owner .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents post mounted delineator locations and spacing .
num type a or type b post mounted delineators .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num post mounted delineator installation page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for flexible delineator posts table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation of permanent and temporary flexible delineator posts and relocation of temporary flexible delineator posts .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standards specifications material opss num hot poured rubberized asphalt joint sealing compound ontario ministry of transportation publications ontario traffic manual otm book num temporary conditions book num pavement hazard and delineation markings astm international d num retroreflective sheeting for traffic control page num rev .
date num opss num num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply flexible delineator post means a tubular plastic marker installed vertically for the purpose of channelizing traffic or delineating roadside features in temporary or permanent applications .
the tubular post is securely fixed to the ground surface by hinged flexible connection to a solid base .
when impacted by a vehicle the post has the ability to bend num from vertical and selfrestore following impacts .
num design and submission requirements num submission requirements one copy of the manufacturers installation instructions shall be submitted to the contract administrator .
installation of the flexible delineator posts shall not commence until the contract administrator has received the copy of the instructions .
num materials num flexible delineator posts a list of approved manufacturers shall be as specified in the contract documents .
all supplied system components shall be according to the manufacturers specifications .
the height of the post shall be as specified in the contract documents .
the post colour shall match the colour of the reflective sheeting .
to maintain a visually consistent installation only one product shall be used on the contract .
num anchor and support hardware anchor and support hardware used to fix the flexible delineator post to the ground surface shall be supplied by the manufacturer .
num reflective sheeting flexible delineator posts shall be outfitted with high intensity retroreflective sheeting according to astm d num type iii or iv .
for permanent conditions the colour shall be according to otm book num .
for temporary conditions the colour shall be according to otm book num .
dimensions spacing and quantity shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num temporary flexible delineator posts temporary flexible delineator posts may be reused provided each post meets each of the following criteria a the ability to bend num from vertical and selfrestore to a vertical position after impacts .
b the base is intact and permits anchorage to the ground surface that is equivalent to a new post .
c the post is intact without any cracks or fissures .
page num rev .
date num opss num d the retroreflective sheeting is fully intact with only minor tears or scratches that do not affect the reflectivity of the sheeting .
num construction num general permanent and temporary flexible delineator posts shall be installed and securely fixed to the ground surface according to the manufacturers instructions at locations specified in the contract documents .
num relocation of temporary flexible delineator posts flexible delineator posts shall be relocated as specified in the contract documents including the removal of existing and installation of new anchorage hardware and adhesives .
all holes resulting from the relocation of the delineator post assemblies shall be filled with a hot poured rubberized asphalt joint sealing compound according to opss num when they are located in areas not to be resurfaced as part of the work .
at the time of filling the holes shall be dry and free of dust and debris .
num maintenance of temporary flexible delineator posts flexible delineator posts shall be maintained for the duration of the construction period for which they are required .
flexible delineator posts shall be monitored on a daily basis .
missing or broken flexible delineator posts shall be replaced within num hours .
posts that do not have a uniform or satisfactory appearance to the satisfaction of the contract administrator shall be replaced or corrected within num hours of notification .
d num removal of temporary flexible delineator posts flexible delineator posts and associated hardware and adhesives shall be removed at the completion of the construction period for which they were required .
all holes resulting from the removal of the delineator post assemblies shall be filled with a hot poured rubberized asphalt joint sealing compound according to opss num when they are located in areas not to be resurfaced as part of the work .
at the time of filling the holes shall be dry and free of dust and debris .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num flexible delineator post permanent for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of complete flexible delineator posts installed .
page num rev .
date num opss num num flexible delineator post temporary for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of complete flexible delineator posts installed and removed up to the maximum number of flexible delineator posts required to be in place at any one time during the contract .
num flexible delineator post relocation for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of complete flexible delineator posts relocated .
flexible delineator posts that are temporarily surplus and are required for future stages shall be paid for as one relocation for the combined moves into and out of storage including any offsite storage required due to onsite restrictions .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num flexible delineator post permanent item flexible delineator post temporary item flexible delineator post relocation item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
when the contract contains separate items for the work required by this specification payment shall be at the contract price and according to the specification for such work .
costs associated with any required removals and replacement or repairs of defective work and materials shall be the contractors responsibility at no additional cost to the owner .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents a list of approved manufacturers .
num post height .
num dimensions spacing and quantity of retroreflective sheeting .
num flexible delineator post locations .
num relocation of flexible delineator posts .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
notice to users of opss num construction specification for temporary traffic control devices opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification construction specification for modified overhead signboards table of contents num scope num references num definitions not used num design and submission requirements not used num materials not used num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation of new overlay signboards on existing overhead extruded signboards .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
metric opss num november num page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario ministry of transportation publications ontario traffic manual otm sign support manual num construction num general all existing overlay signboard panels shall be removed by drilling out all pop rivets used to fasten it to the extruded sign .
new overlay signboard panels shall be installed according to the sign details .
aluminum pop rivets num x num shall be used to install the overlay panel directly on top of the existing extruded sign .
the rivets shall be spaced around the perimeter of each overlay panel num mm num from the edge of the panel at num mm num centre to centre spacing .
page num rev .
date num opss num inside each num mm num panel num aluminum pop rivets shall be inserted equally spaced num mm num from the edge of the panel .
inside each num mm num panel num aluminum pop rivets shall be inserted equally spaced num mm num from the edge of the panel .
if the panel is over num mm num in height num pop rivets shall be installed equally spaced num mm num from the edge of the panel .
to ensure panels do not peel  stainless steel selftapping screws shall be attached to the corners of all overlay panels regardless of size .
num sign ordering the following shall be submitted to the contract administrator a minimum of num weeks prior to the installation date a list of all required overlay signboards b sign details for the overlay signboards and c date for pickup .
num sign pick up all ordered signboards shall be picked up at the location specified in the schedule of materials to be supplied by the owner within num business days of receiving notice from the contract administrator that the signs are ready for pick up .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num modified overhead signboards for measurement purposes a count shall be made of each modified signboard installed .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num modified overhead signboards item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix num november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations no information provided here .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num formerly opss num june num construction specification for pavement marking table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment num construction num application num quality assurance num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the application of pavement markings onto bituminous or concrete pavement .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num june num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincialoriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipaloriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num organic solvent based traffic paint opss num thermoplastic pavement marking materials opss num field reacted polymeric pavement marking materials opss num preformed plastic pavement marking tap opss num waterborne traffic paint opss num traffic paint reflectorizing glass beads ontario ministry of transportation publications manual of uniform traffic control devices for ontario mutcd page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num june num num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions shall apply durable pavement markings refer to pavement markings produced by either thermoplastics field reacted polymer or a preformed plastic tape of durable type .
field reacted polymeric pavement marking material refers to a pavement marking material consisting of two separate components a polymerizable component and a curing agent or a polymerization catalyst .
these two components are designed to be mixed at the site at recommended proportions and applied during the pot life of the mixture .
hot applied thermoplastic pavement marking material refers to a thermoplastic material that is specifically formulated for hot spray or screed application .
organic solvent based traffic paint refers to a traffic paint whose components are carried in an organic solvent system and will form a solid paint film on evaporation of the solvent after application .
pavement markings refer to markings on pavements used to delineate vehicle operating limits on highways and streets conforming to the size and shape as specified in the mutcd .
permanent pavement markings refer to pavement markings placed other than temporary pavement markings or short term pavement markings .
preformed plastic pavement marking tape refers to plastic material specifically designed and preformed into pliable rolls or ribbons of various lengths and widths or into symbols .
premarking refers to the indicating marks required to identify the position of pavement markings .
reflectorization refers to a material treatment or process to enable incident light to be returned in high proportions in the general direction of the light source .
short term pavement markings refer to the markings placed prior to the placement of permanent pavement markings on any milled levelling binder or top course pavements where existing lane widths arrangements and alignments are maintained .
temporary pavement markings refer to pavement markings placed on temporary roadway surfaces or alignments during construction .
temporary pavement marking material refers to pavement marking materials designed to maintain a service life of a minimum of three months .
temporary pavement markings removable refer to pavement markings using materials designed to be removed after use .
temporary raised pavement markers refer to raised reflective devices .
traffic paint refers to a paint specifically formulated for use as a pavement marking .
waterborne traffic paint refers to a traffic paint whose components are carried in water either as an emulsion or a dispersion and will form a solid paint film on deposition and evaporation of water and volatiles after application .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num june num num design and submission requirements num general onelitre samples of solvent based andor water borne paint num g samples of thermoplastics num g sample of field reacted polymeric materials with an adequate amount of catalyst or curing agent one metre section of preformed pavement marking tape and a num g sample of reflectorizing glass beads to be used on the contract shall be supplied to the authority one month prior to use prepaid by the contractor .
if any sample fails to conform to the specification requirements none of the batch from which the sample was taken shall be used .
new batches shall be obtained at no additional cost to the authority and the new batches shall be tested until an acceptable batch is obtained .
num materials num classification pavement markings are classified into the following types based on performance requirements a .
traffic paint b. pavement marking durable c. pavement marking temporary d. pavement marking temporary removable num organic solvent based traffic organic solvent based traffic paint shall conform to opss num .
num thermoplastic pavement marking materials thermoplastic pavement marking materials shall conform to opss num .
num field reacted polymeric pavement marking materials field reacted polymeric pavement marking materials shall conform to opss num .
num preformed plastic pavement marking tape preformed plastic pavement marking tape shall conform to opss num .
num waterborne traffic paint waterborne traffic paint shall conform to opss num .
num special considerations materials not conforming to the notracking time requirements of the applicable specification may be used when approved by the authority .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num june num num equipment num general the equipment to be used for application or installation of pavement markings shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the respective pavement marking material .
num spray equipment num general spray equipment shall be used for application of solvent based traffic paint waterborne traffic paint thermoplastics and field reacted polymeric material recommended for spray application .
spray equipment shall be fabricated from materials that will not contaminate the traffic paint and other pavement marking materials .
the spray equipment shall provide a uniform stripe to the required width and thickness with sharp edges without excessive splatter or overspray .
the equipment shall have the capability to provide pavement markings conforming to the mutcd .
the equipment shall be provided with glass bead dispenser to apply overlay glass beads at the recommended rate .
num thermoplastic pavement markings equipment to be used for the application of thermoplastic material shall be capable mixing maintaining and applying the material at the recommended temperature .
num other methods of application field reacted polymeric materials and thermoplastics shall be applied using a screed applicator .
preformed plastic tape shall be installed conforming to the manufacturers recommendations .
num construction num general as part of the work the contractor shall supply pavement marking and symbols conforming to the applicable shapes and sizes as outlined in the mutcd .
the contractor shall apply the pavement marking and symbols conforming to the contract drawings when provided mutcd and the manufacturers recommendations .
the work of pavement marking includes providing samples of materials for testing for conformity to the appropriate material specification surface preparation pavement marking obliterating premarking application of temporary short term and permanent pavement markings .
where the pavement marking scheme is not shown in the contract drawings it shall conform to the mutcd or be provided by the authority .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num june num num surface preparation the pavement surface must be clean and dry .
contaminants such as dirt loose asphalt particles and oily residue shall be removed prior to application of pavement marking .
num pavement marking obliterating durable markings and traffic paint shall be obliterated or removed using the method indicated in the contract at the locations specified .
num premarking the contractor shall provide the necessary measurements required to establish the position of all pavement markings .
num temporary pavement marking temporary markings shall include surface preparation premarking and placement of temporary markings .
temporary pavement marking shall be placed on temporary road surfaces prior to the opening to the general public conforming to mutcd or as specified in the contract .
num short term pavement marking short term pavement marking is required when a paved roadway is to be opened to the general public prior to the application of permanent pavement markings .
as part of the work of pavement marking the contractor shall apply short term pavement markings for the centreline and lane lines .
short term pavement markings shall be applied conforming to mutcd and as amended by table num .
short term pavement markings shall not conflict with permanent pavement markings .
short term pavement markings placed on final surface course shall be of the removable type .
a temporary raised pavement marker may be used in place of one num m line .
num permanent pavement marking permanent pavement marking includes surface preparation premarking short term pavement marking removal of short term pavement markings and placement of permanent pavement markings .
when permanent pavement markings can not be placed prior to the opening to traffic freeways major and minor roadways must have short term pavement markings conforming to division c of the mutcd and as amended by table num .
permanent pavement markings must be in place and maintained prior to any winter shut down .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num june num table num short term pavement markings type of marking note num type of roadway length of lines min .
length of gaps max .
length of time before permanent markings are placed max .
a freeway six lanes or greater three lanes per direction num m note num num m note num num working days b freeway four lanes two lanes per direction num m num m num working days c major roadways six lanes or greater three lanes per direction num m note num num m note num num working days d major roadways four lanes or less num m num m num working days e minor roadways num m num m num working days notes num .
type of marking as specified elsewhere in the contract .
num .
same as mutcd .
num selection of materials when the item pavement marking or pavement marking symbols is called for the contractor is restricted to traffic paint .
when the item pavement marking durable or pavement marking symbols durable is called for the contractors choice of material is restricted to durable preformed plastic tape field reacted polymeric pavement marking material thermoplastic pavement marking material when the item pavement marking temporary or pavement marking symbols temporary is called for the contractor may choose from all marking materials .
when the item pavement marking temporary removable or pavement marking symbols temporary removable is called for the contractors choice of material is restricted to temporary preformed removable pavement marking tape .
selection of pavement marking material for use on a particular type of pavement surface shall conform to the manufacturers recommendations .
num application num general all pavement markings shall be accurately spaced and present a cleancut uniform appearance during either the day or night .
the application of pavement marking materials shall conform to the following requirements and the manufacturers recommendations .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num june num num organic solvent based traffic paint paint shall be applied when the pavement surface temperature is numc and above unless otherwise approved in writing by the authority .
paint shall be applied at a rate which results in a uniform thickness of num num microns dry film .
reflectorizing glass beads conforming to opss num shall be applied uniformly at a rate as shown below immediately after paint application to ensure embedment of the glass beads .
overlay glass beads shall not be applied on to black paint which is used for obliterating previous markings .
rate of application for overlay glass beads per litre of traffic paint volume solids of traffic paint glass beads required in kg num num num num the paint temperature shall be between numc and numc when applied to the pavement .
num waterborne traffic paint paint shall be applied as specified in clause num except that the pavement surface temperature shall be numc and above .
num thermoplastic pavement marking material the material shall be applied when the pavement surface temperature is numc and above .
the maximum relative humidity shall be num .
at pavement surface temperatures below numc the pavement shall be preheated immediately prior to material application .
thermoplastics shall be applied at a rate which results in a uniform thickness of num mm num mm measured dry .
markings shall not be applied over pavement joints .
reflectorizing glass beads conforming to opss num with the exception of the requirements for silicone coating shall be applied uniformly at a rate of num kg num kg per num mnum of marking immediately after marking material applications and before the material hardens .
num field reacted polymeric pavement marking materials field reacted polymeric pavement marking materials which are recommended for screed application shall be applied at a rate which results in a uniform thickness of num mm .num mm measured dry .
markings shall not be applied over pavement joints .
the materials shall be applied when the pavement surface temperature is numc and above .
the maximum surface temperature shall be numc .
the maximum relative humidity shall be num .
reflectorizing glass beads conforming to opss num with the exception of the requirement for silicone coating shall be applied uniformly at a rate of num kg num kg per num mnum of marking immediately before the material hardens .
field reacted polymeric pavement marking materials recommended for spray application shall be applied at a uniform thickness of .num mm .num mm unless otherwise approved in writing by the authority .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num june num num preformed plastic tape the tape shall be applied when the pavement surface temperature is numc and above .
the maximum relative humidity shall be num .
joints of marking tape shall be butt joints without overlaps .
preformed markings shall not be applied over pavement joints .
num pavement marking temporary removable temporary removable pavement markings shall be applied conforming to the manufacturers recommendation and shall be removed as indicated .
removed material shall be disposed of outside the rightofway .
num raised pavement markers temporary the contractor shall supply and install temporary raised pavement markers conforming to the authoritys requirements and the manufacturers recommendations .
markers used shall be capable of remaining in place for a period of one to six months as specified in the contract .
temporary raised pavement markers shall be removed as specified in the contract .
removed material shall be disposed of outside the rightofway .
num quality assurance num general random sampling may be carried out by the authority during material application to assess line quality .
num line quality line width thickness the nature of the edges and uniformity in appearance will be assessed by the authority .
the dry film thickness will be measured by a paint inspection gauge or a coating thickness gauge .
glass bead distribution will be inspected for evenness in distribution degree of embedment and retroreflectance .
num measurement of temperature and humidity the testing of ambient and surface temperature will be by thermometer and surface thermometer respectively .
humidity will be measured using recording hygrometer .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num pavement marking pavement marking durable pavement marking temporary pavement marking temporary removable pavement marking obliterating measurement for pavement marking is by the horizontal length in metres of num cm wide line excluding gaps .
wider lines are measured in num cm equivalents .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num june num each symbol to be obliterated will be approximately equated in area to a num cm wide line .
num pavement marking symbols pavement marking symbols durable pavement marking symbols temporary pavement marking symbols temporary removable raised pavement markers temporary the unit of measurement is each .
num plan quantity measurement num pavement marking pavement marking durable pavement marking temporary pavement marking temporary removable pavement marking obliterating measurement for pavement markings is by plan quantity as may be revised by adjusted plan quantity of the horizontal length in metres of num cm wide line excluding gaps .
wider lines are measured in num cm equivalents .
each symbol to be obliterated will be approximately equated in area to a num cm wide line .
num pavement marking symbols pavement marking symbols durable pavement marking symbols temporary pavement marking symbols temporary removable raised pavement markers temporary measurement is by plan quantity as may be revised by adjusted plan quantity .
the unit is each .
num basis of payment num pavement marking item pavement marking symbols item pavement marking durable item pavement marking symbols durable item pavement marking temporary item pavement marking symbols temporary item pavement marking temporary removable item pavement marking symbols temporary removable item raised pavement markers temporary item pavement marking obliterating item payment at the contract price for the above items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material required to do the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num june num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents method and locations of markings and paint obliteration and removal .
num temporary pavement marking requirements .
num type of markings .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num june num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for steel beam guide rail and cable guide rail opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for energy attenuators opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for guide rail end treatment steel beam energy attenuating terminal systems opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num formerly opss num february num construction specification for concrete barriers table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the construction of permanent concrete barriers and temporary concrete barriers .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num february num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincialoriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipaloriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num restoring unpaved roadway surfaces opss num asphaltic concrete hot mix hot laid and hot mix patching opss num untreated granular subbase base surface shoulder and stockpiling opss num compacting opss num concrete structures opss num formwork and falsework ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num aggregates granular a b m and select subgrade material opss num asphaltic concrete hot mix and hot laid opss num moisture vapour barriers opss num burlap opss num joint filler concrete opss num white pigmented membrane curing compounds for concrete opss num concrete materials and production page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num february num opss num precast concrete barriers opss num steel reinforcement for concrete opss num epoxy coated steel reinforcement for concrete ontario ministry of transportation publications manual of uniform traffic control devices of ontario m.u.t.c.d .
csa standards cancsagnummnum structural quality steels csagnummnum hot dip galvanizing of irregularly shaped articles num definitions asymmetric refers to the barrier placed where the pavement elevations on each side of the barrier differ .
num design and submission requirements num general where the contractor wishes to use a concrete barrier design other than as called for in the contract he shall request permission from the authority at least four weeks prior to starting any work affected by his proposed change .
num materials num concrete general the concrete mix design for all concrete barriers shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
num concrete for castinplace barrier the concrete for castinplace concrete barrier shall be a minimum strength of num mpa except that the tall wall concrete barrier shall be a minimum strength of num mpa and shall conform to opss num using a nominal maximum size aggregate of num mm .
all coarse aggregate used for slip formed tall wall concrete barrier shall have all faces crushed .
num precast concrete barrier precast concrete barrier shall conform to opss num .
num concrete pad for precast concrete barrier the concrete pad under the precast concrete barrier shall be a minimum strength of num mpa and shall conform to opss num .
num curing membrane curing compound shall conform to opss num .
burlap shall conform to opss num moisture vapour barrier shall conform to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num february num num joint filler joint filler for permanent concrete barrier shall conform to opss num .
num formwork formwork for permanent concrete barrier shall conform to opss num .
num reinforcing steel all reinforcing steel in permanent precast concrete barriers shall be epoxy coated conforming to opss num .
epoxy patching compound shall be applied to all welds of epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
reinforcing steel in temporary concrete barriers shall conform to opss num .
num asphaltic concrete asphaltic concrete shall conform to opss num .
num granular granular foundation material shall conform to opss num .
num interlocking components hollow structural steel and wide flange steel sections used in permanent precast concrete barrier shall be numw grade conforming to cancsa gnum and shall be hot dip galvanized after fabrication conforming to csa gnum .
num construction num concrete barrier the work shall include foundation preparation placement of the concrete barrier or precast concrete barrier units expansion joints construction joints curing of the concrete surface finish and treatment at bridge piers .
construction of permanent concrete barrier shall be by use of the following methods num. conventional wooden or steel formwork num. slipform num. precast concrete barrier units .
permanent concrete barrier constructed by methods num. and num. above shall conform to opss num and num except as otherwise stated in this specification .
precast concrete barrier containing the ilock connection may be used in permanent installations .
the precast concrete barrier shall be secured in place with num mm of asphalt placed on both sides of the barrier as shown on the contract drawings .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num february num num foundation preparation preparation of the granular foundation shall conform to opss num and num as appropriate .
immediately ahead of placing concrete the contractor shall wet down the subgrade by means of a uniform spray of water sufficient to wet the subgrade thoroughly without leaving standing water .
placement of asphaltic concrete pavement beneath and adjacent to the precast concrete barrier shall conform to opss num .
the concrete pad for the precast barrier shall conform to opss num and shall be placed in such a manner and to such width and thickness as to ensure that there are no voids between the concrete pad and the barrier and that the barrier is set to the correct line and grade .
num tolerances the dimensions of the completed barrier shall not deviate by more than num mm from the dimensions specified .
the horizontal alignment shall not deviate more than num mm from the required lines indicated in the contract .
when a num m long straight edge is placed on the top and faces of the castinplace concrete barrier surface the surface of the concrete shall not vary more than num mm from the edge of the straight edge .
when the slipformed concrete barrier does not conform to the tolerances the contractor may correct to the required tolerances using a magnesium float while the concrete is still plastic providing the surface andor the barrier is not damaged during such adjustments .
num surface finish the surface of the concrete barrier placed with conventional forms shall be given a basic treatment and class b finish conforming to opss num .
the slipformed barrier surface shall not be brushed .
offsets and fins shall be removed immediately by light trowelling .
surface blemishes num mm or less in diameter shall be left untouched .
if surface blemishes larger than num mm diameter occur adjustments in the operation shall be made to correct the condition .
if the adjustments do not correct the condition within num m the operation shall be halted until the condition is corrected either by adjustments to the operation or to the concrete mix .
the use of water on the completed barrier to correct imperfections shall not be permitted .
num curing curing for unformed surfaces of castinplace slip form concrete barrier shall conform to opss num for unformed surfaces .
curing for formed surfaces shall conform to opss num for formed surfaces .
when joints are made after the application of curing compound the exposed face of the barrier in the vicinity of the joint shall be retreated with curing compound .
when white pigmented membrane is used as curing compound on slip formed barrier it shall also be used on adjacent preformed barrier sections for colour uniformity .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num february num num cold weather concreting concrete shall not be placed by slipforming when the air temperature is below numc .
placing concrete by slipforming shall not be carried out when the air temperature is below numc unless the concrete at the time of placing is between numc and numc .
concrete placed by slipforming when the air temperature is below numc or concrete subject to temperatures below numc during the first num days shall conform to opss num .
num expansion joints expansion joints num mm min .
in width shall be installed where concrete barrier abuts a structure adjacent to piers over existing deck expansion joints and at the locations indicated in the contract .
the expansion joint shall be filled with type a expansion joint filler .
if forming the joint is performed before the concrete has hardened the adjacent portions of the barrier shall be supported firmly to ensure the design shape of the barrier wall is constructed as specified .
num construction joints construction joints located at the end of a days placement shall be squared .
continuity between adjacent sections of the construction joint shall be achieved by installing three horizontal epoxy coated reinforcing bars size num mm x num m long placed num mm on each side of the joint .
the three bars shall be located on the barrier centreline placed num mm from the top and equally spaced at num mm .
tall wall concrete barrier type e design shall contain five horizontal epoxy coated reinforcing bars spaced as above at each construction joint .
num treatment at bridge piers granular a material with asphalt surface shall be used to fill the area between concrete barriers where separation occurs at bridge piers or at other locations where separation of the barriers is required .
compaction of granular shall conform to opss num .
the asphalt surface shall conform to opss num .
num temporary concrete barrier the work shall include foundation preparation placement of the precast concrete barrier units placement of construction markers and removal of the barrier and barrier debris from the contract site upon completion of the contract .
construction of temporary concrete barrier shall be by use of precast concrete barrier units .
the precast units shall be installed with interlocking devices properly engaged .
each run of precast concrete barrier shall consist of units having the same type of connecting device including the end treatments .
repaired precast concrete barrier units may be used providing the structural integrity of the unit conforms to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num february num num restrictions on use of connections for contracts awarded on or before december num num contractors may use precast concrete barrier units with one of the following connections ilock concrete key hook eye for contracts awarded after december num num contractors shall use only precast concrete barrier units with ilock connection on a. divided roadways with two or more lanes in each direction and b. on other roadways with posted speeds of num kmh or greater .
for contracts awarded on or before december num num contractors may continue to use one of the three above connections on c. roadways with posted speeds of less than num kmh .
for contracts awarded after december num num only the ilock connection shall be permitted on all roadways .
num foundation preparation temporary concrete barrier shall be installed on a solid foundation having a slope of up to num maximum measured perpendicular to the installation .
two days shall be allowed between the placement of final asphalt surface and placement of temporary concrete barrier .
temporary concrete barrier shall be in place prior to the opening of traffic operations .
drainage shall be maintained under the temporary concrete barrier .
num tolerances the horizontal and vertical alignment at the junction of each barrier section shall be within num mm .
the maximum radius on which the barrier may be placed shall be as specified for each interlocking design .
num construction markers construction markers shall be placed in advance of the temporary precast concrete barrier installation to assist in directing the traffic away from the flared approach end treatment .
lane closure taper length and maximum distance between markers shall conform to the m.u.t.c.d .
num on site storage temporary concrete barrier being stored on site for reuse on the same contract shall be stored a. with protection by means of a standard temporary concrete barrier installation placed at a minimum of num m from the edge of the driving lane .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num february num b. without protection storage shall be offset from the edge of the driving lane conforming to the following posted speed kph offset m num num num num num num num num num num num num num temporary concrete barrier relocation the work shall include the relocation of temporary concrete barrier and shall conform to subsection num .
removal of the barrier units from the contract site upon completion of the contract is included with the item temporary concrete barrier .
num reflectors reflectors placed on temporary and permanent concrete barrier shall conform to the m.u.t.c.d .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num quality assurance num acceptance criteria for precast concrete barrier final inspection of the precast units will not be made until they have been installed .
precast units damaged in transit or during placement shall be replaced by the contractor at his own expense .
all temporary concrete barrier units shall meet each of the following criteria .
a .
the elements of each connecting device shall be intact and shall provide an effective connection equivalent in strength to that of a newly manufactured connection .
b .
concrete within num mm of each connecting device shall be structurally sound free of cracks spalling and breakage to ensure safe and satisfactory performance of the connection .
c. concrete breakouts in areas other than a addressed in b shall not exceed num mm in diameter in either vertical or longitudinal directions .
d. individual areas of surface damage including concrete spalls shall not measure more than num mm in any direction and shall not exceed a num mm depth .
max .
num x num x num mm .
the accumulated total surface damage on the traffic side of the unit shall not exceed num of the total surface area of the respective side .
e. other than as addressed by d there shall be no exposed coarse aggregate such as honeycombing .
the top and bottom surface of the precast unit are excluded from this condition .
f. cracks shall not extend through the precast unit .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num february num num measurement for payment num actual measurement num concrete barrier tall wall barrier asymmetric concrete barrier asymmetric tall wall barrier measurement will be made in metres along the centreline of the barrier from end to end of installation and shall include the length required for lighting pole footings and overhead sign structure footings .
where two concrete barriers are constructed back to back type b or enum they will be treated as a single installation and the length will be measured only once for payment purposes .
num granular measurement will conform to opss num .
num asphaltic concrete measurement will conform to opss num .
num temporary concrete barrier measurement will be made along the centreline of the barrier in metres from end to end of the installation including temporary end sections for the supply installation and removal of the maximum length of barrier required to be in place at any one time during the life of the contract .
num temporary concrete barrier relocation measurement will be made along the centreline of the barrier in metres from end to end including end sections for each relocation .
barrier that is temporarily surplus for intermediate stages but will be required for later stages will be paid as one relocation for the combined moves into and out of on site storage including any off site storage required due to space restrictions .
num plan quantity measurement num concrete barrier tall wall barrier asymmetric concrete barrier asymmetric tall wall barrier measurement is by plan quantity as may be revised by adjusted plan quantity of the length in metres along the centreline of the barrier from end to end of the installation and shall include the length for lighting pole footings and overhead sign structure footings .
where two concrete barriers are constructed back to back type b or enum they will be treated as a single installation for measurement and payment purposes .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num february num num temporary concrete barrier measurement is by plan quantity as may be revised by adjusted plan quantity of the length in metres along the centreline of the barrier from end to end of the installation for the supply installation and removal of the maximum length of barrier required to be in place at any one time during the life of the contract .
num temporary concrete barrier relocation measurement is by plan quantity as may be revised by adjusted plan quantity of the length in metres along the centreline of the barrier from end to end of the installation for each relocation .
barrier that is temporarily surplus for intermediate stages but will be required for later stages will be paid as one relocation for the combined moves into and out of on site storage including any off site storage required due to space restrictions .
num basis of payment num concrete barrier item tall wall barrier item asymmetric concrete barrier item asymmetric tall wall barrier item payment at the contract price for the above items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material required to construct the barriers including any concrete backfill between type b or enum concrete barriers at the location of bridge piers or transitions .
when the contractor installs precast units as a permanent concrete barrier the contract price shall include full compensation for placing the concrete pad .
num granular granular material used as backfill between concrete barriers shall be paid for at the contract price for the appropriate granular items .
num asphaltic concrete asphaltic concrete laid as a foundation or used as asphalt surface at bridge piers shall be paid for at the contract price for the appropriate hot mix item .
num temporary concrete barrier item temporary concrete barrier relocation item payment at the contract price for the above items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material required to do the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num february num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents horizontal alignment .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num february num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for temporary concrete barriers table of contents num scope num references num definitions not used num design and submission requirements not used num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the construction of temporary concrete barriers .
this specification also covers the requirements for installation of restraint systems for temporary concrete barrier type m connection only by the following three methods pinning to asphalt pavement strapping to concrete or bolting through concrete .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
page num rev .
date num opss num use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincialoriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipaloriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num concrete materials and production opss num steel reinforcement for concrete opss num steel beam guide rail opss num wood preservative treatment and shop fabrication ontario ministry of transportation publications ontario traffic manual otm book num temporary conditions book num pavement hazard and delineation markings mto form phccnum certification of temporary precast concrete barrier installations page num rev .
date num opss num csa standards gnumgnum rolled or welded structural quality steelstructural quality steel wnum welded steel construction metal arc welding astm international a numa nummnum zinc hotdip galvanized coatings on iron and steel products d num retroreflective sheeting for traffic control num materials num concrete concrete shall be according to opss num except that the restrictions on volume batching shall not apply .
the contractor shall assume the responsibility for the mix design .
the following specific requirements shall apply a class of concrete nominal minimum numday compressive strength of num mpa b coarse aggregate num mm nominal maximum size num reinforcing steel bars reinforcing steel bars shall be according to opss num and the contract documents .
num connection assembly components connection assembly components including steel shapes and hollow sections for the ilock connection shall be grade numw according to csa gnumgnum and the contract documents .
connection assembly components for other nonproprietary temporary concrete barrier systems shall be according to the contract documents .
connection assembly components for proprietary temporary concrete barrier systems shall be according to manufacturers specifications and the contract documents .
num restraint systems type m connection only all materials required for the restraint systems shall be according to the contract documents .
num thrie beam guide rails bolts and nuts thrie beam guide rails shall be fabricated according to opss num and the contract documents .
bolts and nuts shall be according to opss num .
num steel plates bolts and nuts steel plates shall be fabricated according to csa gnumgnum and the contract documents .
steel plates shall have minimum yield strength of num mpa .
all steel plates shall be hot dip galvanized after fabrication according to astm a num .
bolts and nuts shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num wooden block wooden blocks shall be according to opss num .
num delineators delineators shall be twosided and each side shall have a minimum reflective surface of num x num mm high intensity retroreflective sheeting according to astm d num type viii orange colour and flexibility to bend num from vertical and self restore .
num marking all temporary concrete barrier units manufactured before march num num shall be permanently and legibly marked by the manufacturer on the top or sides of each temporary concrete barrier as follows a name or trademark of the manufacturer .
b identification of plant if manufacturer has more than one plant .
c the date of manufacture identifying at minimum the year of manufacture with two digits .
d markings shall be stencilled in indelible ink stencilled in paint or embossed .
all temporary concrete barrier units manufactured on or after march num num shall be permanently and legibly marked by the manufacturer on each temporary concrete barrier as follows a name or trademark of manufacturer on file with owner including identification of plant if manufacturer has more than one plant and year of manufacture embossed on top of each temporary concrete barrier at one end .
b owner approved three digit code of manufacturer and plant identification and six digit code for date of manufacture year month day example january num num is num stencilled in minimum num mm high digits with indelible ink or paint on top of each temporary concrete barrier at opposite end of embossed markings .
c duplicate three digit code of manufacturer and plant identification and six digit code for date of manufacture stencilled in minimum num mm high digits with indelible ink or paint on the vertical face of one end elevation of each temporary concrete barrier .
d markings are not permitted on traffic faces of temporary concrete barrier .
num construction num temporary concrete barrier temporary concrete barrier shall be installed at locations specified in the contract documents .
construction of temporary concrete barrier shall be by use of precast concrete barrier units .
temporary concrete barrier shall be installed with connections properly engaged .
page num rev .
date num opss num it is acceptable to transition from one type of temporary concrete barrier to another type of temporary concrete barrier using the temporary concrete barrier transition detail according to the contract documents .
the proportion of each type of approved temporary concrete barrier used for the work shall be at the contractors discretion .
however a minimum continuous length of num m of any one type of temporary concrete barrier is required prior to transitioning to another type .
num restrictions on use of connections contractors shall use temporary concrete barriers with one of the following types of connections a type j b type m c type t contractors shall be permitted to use temporary concrete barriers with ilock connections on roadways with posted speeds less than num kmh .
at locations where restrained temporary concrete barriers are specified in the contract documents temporary concrete barriers with type m connections shall be used .
num foundation preparation temporary concrete barrier shall be installed on a solid foundation having a slope of up to num maximum measured perpendicular to the installation .
two days shall be allowed between the placement of final asphalt surface and placement of temporary concrete barrier .
temporary concrete barrier shall be in place prior to the opening of traffic operations .
drainage shall be maintained under the temporary concrete barrier .
num tolerances the horizontal and vertical alignment at the junction of each barrier section shall be within num mm .
the minimum radius on which the barrier may be placed shall be as specified for each type of connection .
num construction markers construction markers shall be placed in advance of the temporary precast concrete barrier installation to assist in directing the traffic away from the flared approach end treatment .
taper length for full lane closures and the maximum distance between markers shall be according to otm book num .
num quality control the contractor is responsible to supply and install the temporary precast units and certify that they meet the acceptance criteria listed under the acceptance criteria for temporary precast concrete barrier clause .
the contractor shall do an initial inspection of the units prior to installation and a further inspection of the units after each installation .
when the installed or relocated units do not meet the acceptance criteria the contractor shall remove such units and replace them with units that meet the acceptance criteria .
each installation and relocation of units shall be certified by submitting to the contract administrator a completed mto form ph ccnum certification of temporary precast concrete barrier installations within num hours of installation or relocation of the units .
certification shall be done by an authorized representative of the contractor .
page num rev .
date num opss num while inservice on the contract and when units have been damaged or alignment discontinuity is beyond that allowable by the acceptance criteria the affected units shall be reinstalled or replaced as necessary .
the contractor shall perform the repair within a num hour period starting at the occurrence or first awareness .
repaired precast concrete barrier units may be used provided that the structural integrity of the unit is maintained .
an engineers seal and signature shall be affixed to documentation certifying that the repair method used shall not impact the structural integrity of the unit .
num acceptance criteria for temporary precast concrete barrier for all applications any unit that fails one or more of the following acceptance criteria shall be rejected a dimensions of each unit shall not deviate from those specified by more than the following tolerance i .
specified dimensions up to num mm num mm ii .
specified dimensions greater than num mm num mm b steel elements of each connecting device shall be free of visible fracture distortion and perforation .
c concrete within num mm of a connecting device shall be free of visible cracks that exceed num mm in width measured at the widest point of the crack .
d all cracks wider than num mm other than addressed in c shall neither extend through the precast unit nor be longer than num mm .
e the unit shall be free of honeycombing .
f the end of any unit shall not be located further than num mm from the horizontal alignment of the installation .
in addition to the above criteria when the precast units are used on facilities with a posted regulatory speed limit of num kmh or higher any unit that fails one or more of the following acceptance criteria shall be rejected a damage to edges shall not extend more than num mm onto any adjacent face .
when edge damage extends more than num mm onto such a face damage to the opposite side of that edge shall not extend more than num mm onto the opposite face .
b the total length of concrete breakout damage to edges flanking the connecting devices whether repaired or not shall not exceed num of the respective connecting device length on each side of each connecting device .
c the concrete damage in the area of the drainage recess shall not reach higher than one third of the lower sloped surface containing the recess .
d concrete breakouts on the traffic faces or on the top of the precast unit other than addressed in a to c above shall not be greater than num mm in any direction measured on the surface nor shall the breakout depth at any point exceed num mm measured perpendicularly to the face .
e accumulated total concrete breakouts addressed in d on the traffic sides of the unit shall not exceed num of the total surface area of the respective side .
f drilled holes into the barrier shall not have diameter greater than num mm .
g the horizontal and vertical alignment discontinuity between adjacent units shall not exceed num mm as measured with a num m straightedge .
page num rev .
date num opss num num drainage gaps for temporary concrete barrier gaps for drainage shall be installed according to the contract documents and at locations specified in the contract documents .
num temporary concrete barrier restraint systems type m connection only num general type m temporary concrete barrier used for temporary concrete barrier restraint systems shall have been manufactured after october num as verified by the markings .
restraint systems shall be installed at locations specified in the contract documents .
mechanical and adhesive anchoring systems shall be installed according to the manufacturers specifications to the minimum embedment depth specified in the contract documents .
all welds shall be according to csa wnum .
num restoration of asphalt and concrete surfaces restoration of asphalt and concrete disturbed during the installation and removal of restrained temporary concrete barrier shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num transitions transitions between restrained temporary concrete barrier and unrestrained temporary concrete barrier shall be as specified in the contract documents .
transitions between unrestrained temporary concrete barrier and permanent concrete barrier shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num delineators delineators according to otm book num shall be installed at num m intervals .
delineators shall be securely fastened to the top of the temporary concrete barrier with reflective surfaces clearly visible .
delineators shall be maintained at all times .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num quality assurance num general the owner may conduct random quality assurance checks on units that have been supplied and installed or relocated to verify the contractors ability to ensure compliance with the acceptance criteria .
units that are identified by the owners representative as not meeting the acceptance criteria or those units that have been repaired and do not have documentation certifying the method of repair must be removed and replaced with units that meet the acceptance criteria for temporary precast concrete barrier .
this shall be done within a num hour period of notice to the contractor unless agreed otherwise in writing .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num temporary concrete barrier measurement of barriers shall be by length in metres along the centreline of the barrier from end to end including temporary end sections installed and removed up to the maximum length of barriers required to be placed at any one time during the contract .
num temporary concrete barrier relocation measurement of barriers shall be by length in metres along the centreline of the barrier from end to end including temporary end sections relocated .
barriers that are temporarily surplus but are required for future stages shall be paid for as one relocation for the combined moves into and out of storage including any offsite storage required due to onsite restrictions .
num temporary concrete barrier drainage gap for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of temporary concrete barrier drainage gaps delivered and accepted .
num temporary concrete barrier restraint system pinned temporary concrete barrier restraint system strapped temporary concrete barrier restraint system bolted measurement of barrier restraint systems shall be by length in metres along the centreline of the barrier restraint system from end to end installed and removed .
transitions shall be included with the appropriate restraint system .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clause under actual measurement .
page num rev .
date num opss num num basis of payment num temporary concrete barrier item temporary concrete barrier relocation item temporary concrete barrier drainage gap item temporary concrete barrier restraint system pinned item temporary concrete barrier restraint system strapped item temporary concrete barrier restraint system bolted item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
costs associated with any required removals and replacements of defective workmanship or materials shall be the contractors responsibility at no cost to the owner .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents locations where temporary concrete barriers are required .
num drainage gap locations .
num locations where temporary concrete barriers are restrained .
temporary concrete barrier restraint systems should be considered for use on a high speed roadway typically with a posted speed of num kmh or more when barrier protection is required within num m of an excavation within num m of structures not designed for impacts e.g .
scaffolding or within num m of the edge of a bridge deck .
num details should be provided to cover the method and payment for the restoration of asphalt and concrete surfaces that are disturbed during the installation and removal of temporary concrete barrier restraint systems .
num locations where transitions are required between unrestrained temporary concrete barrier and restrained temporary concrete barrier and between unrestrained temporary concrete barrier and permanent concrete barrier .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num to opsd num guide rail system concrete barrier drawings ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for connecticut impact attenuation system cias table of contents num scope num references num definitions not used num design and submission requirements not used num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation of connecticut impact attenuation systems cias .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num untreated granular subbase base surface shoulder and stockpiling opss num concrete structures ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num aggregates base subbase select subgrade and backfill material opss num concrete materials and production opss num steel reinforcement for concrete csa standards gnumgnum rolled or welded structural quality steels wnum certification of companies for fusion welding of steel wnum welded steel construction metal arc welding page num rev .
date num opss num astm international a numa nummnum pipe steel black and hotdipped zinccoated welded and seamless a numa nummnum zinc hotdip galvanized coatings on iron and steel products a numa nummnum zinc coating hotdip on iron and steel hardware a num carbon steel bolts and studs num num psi tensile strength num materials num concrete concrete shall be according to opss num with a nominal minimum numday compressive strength of num mpa .
num granular base granular base shall be granular a according to opss num .
num reinforcing steel bars reinforcing steel bars for concrete backwall shall be according to opss num .
num fasteners bolts nuts washers and spacers shall be according to astm a num and hot dip galvanized according to astm a num .
num steel cylinders cylinders shall be fabricated from steel according to csa gnum grade numw and hot dip galvanized after fabrication to provide a zinc coating not less than num gmnum according to astm a num .
cylinders shall be cut square and seamless or electric welded .
the finished cylinder shall be within num mm of true round .
each cylinder shall be labelled at the top with the designated a to n alphabetical character .
all edges shall be machined and free of burrs and sharp edges .
num steel rails steel rails shall be fabricated as specified in the contract documents from flat stock steel according to csa gnum grade numw and hot dip galvanized after fabrication to provide a zinc coating not less than num gmnum according to astm a num .
num steel straps lid support angles and lifting devices steel straps lid support angles and lifting devices shall be steel according to csa gnum grade numw .
all straps shall be cut to the width and length and welded to the cylinder as specified in the contract documents .
num steel pipes steel pipes shall be num mm od standard weight schedule num steel pipe according to astm a num and welded to one side of the cylinder as specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num steel pipe retainers steel pipe retainers shall be num mm by num mm od standard weight schedule num steel pipe according to astm a num and welded to the side of the cylinder as specified in the contract documents .
num lids lids shall be fabricated from lowdensity polyethylene composed of num recycled plastic materials .
lids shall be black in colour and uv stabilized to a minimum rating of uvnumd .
the lid shall be of sufficient strength to support a centred point load having a mass of num kg producing a maximum deflection of num mm .
each lid shall have a steel restraining chain for attachment of the lid to the cylinder .
associated metal hardware for the lids such as washers eye bolts chains and screws shall be hot dip galvanized according to astm a num or equivalent electroplated or anodized treated .
num welds all welding shall be according to csa wnum and csa wnum .
num construction num general connecticut impact attenuation systems shall be installed according to and at locations specified in the contract documents .
num concrete pads and backwalls levelling and site preparation required for the existing granular base shall be performed prior to placing the concrete pad and backwall .
concrete pads and backwalls shall be constructed as specified in the contract documents .
concrete shall be placed cured and finished according to opss num .
cross fall of the concrete pad is desirably num or less and shall not exceed num .
all exposed edges of the backwall shall have a num mm chamfer .
drilling of anchor holes shall commence a minimum of five days after concrete has been placed .
num granular base the granular base below the concrete pad shall be a minimum depth of num mm and shall be placed according to opss num .
the granular material shall be compacted to num of the maximum dry density .
num connection to barriers the concrete backwall shall be connected to the barrier as specified in the contract documents .
num delineation delineation shall be provided as specified in the contract documents .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num measurement for payment num actual measurement num connecticut impact attenuation system for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of complete connecticut impact attenuation systems installed .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num connecticut impact attenuation system item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
costs associated with any required removals and replacement or repairs of defective work and materials shall be the contractors responsibility at no additional cost to the owner .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents connecticut impact attenuation system locations .
num the designer should determine to which standard connecticut impact attenuation systems should be installed and specify it in the contract documents a the connecticut impact attenuation system should only be installed at a num skew to the centreline of the roadway when the length of the median hazard and the median width can accommodate a connecticut impact attenuation system at each end of the hazard within the limits specified in opsd num .
in this case the designer should specify that the system be installed according to opsd num. b the connecticut impact attenuation system should only be installed at a num skew to the centreline of the roadway when the length of the median hazard is too long and the median width is too narrow to accommodate a connecticut impact attenuation system at each end of the hazard within the limits specified in opsd num .
in this case the designer should specify that the system be installed according to opsd num .
wherever possible the designer should eliminate the use of curb with gutter in advance of and along the length of end treatments and crash cushions .
see the mto roadside safety manual for additional information .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num energy attenuator crash cushion connecticut impact attenuation system component steel cylinder opsd num energy attenuator crash cushion connecticut impact attenuation system component polyethylene lid opsd num energy attenuator crash cushion connecticut impact attenuation system component concrete backwall opsd num energy attenuator crash cushion connecticut impact attenuation system installation opsd num energy attenuator crash cushion connecticut impact attenuation system installation long median hazard opsd num energy attenuator crash cushion connecticut impact attenuation system installation short median hazard opsd num energy attenuator crash cushion connecticut impact attenuation system delineation installation permanent page num rev .
date num opss num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for noise barrier systems table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation of noise barrier systems .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num grading opss num compacting opss num removal opss num grounding opss num concrete structures opss num structural steel for bridges ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num concrete materials and production opss num steel reinforcement for concrete csa standards snum canadian highway bridge design code page num rev .
date num opss num astm international a numa nummnum zinc hotdip galvanized coatings on iron and steel products a num a nummnum repair of damaged and uncoated areas of hot dip galvanized coatings b num aluminum and aluminumalloy sheet and plate num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply certificate of conformance means a document issued by the quality verification engineer confirming that the specified components of the work are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
engineer means a professional engineer licensed by the professional engineers ontario to practice in the province of ontario .
manufacturer means the party that supplies andor specifies the design materials and components for the proprietary noise barrier system selected by the contractor .
quality verification engineer qve means an engineer retained by the contractor qualified to provide the services specified in the contract documents .
num design and submission requirements num design requirements noise barrier system design shall be as specified in the contract documents and according to the manufacturers specifications .
num footings num general depth of footings shall be according to cancsa snum and based on the soil design parameters and wind load as specified in the contract documents .
num footings in earth when footings are to be installed on or within num m from a downward slope of numhnumv or steeper the working drawings shall reflect this and shall note an increase in embedment depth of a minimum of num m greater than the requirements specified in cancsa snum .
num footing in rock when rock is encountered within the specified excavation depth for footings in earth the footing shall be designed and constructed according to the footings in earth clause based on soil properties and wind load as specified in the contract documents .
alternatively the design depth into rock shall be designed based on rock properties provided by the owner .
the minimum design depth below final grade shall not be less than num m or to the frost depth whichever is the greater .
page num rev .
date num opss num num submission requirements num working drawings the contractor shall submit num copies of working drawings for the noise barrier system to the contract administrator at least num weeks prior to the commencement of construction .
the working drawings shall show full details of noise barrier related items erection procedures and if applicable connections to structures .
an engineers seal and signature shall be affixed on the working drawings verifying that the drawings are consistent with the contract documents .
num materials num general all components for noise barrier systems shall be according to the manufacturers specifications and as specified in the contract documents .
num granular materials granular material shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num footings castinplace concrete in footings shall be according to opss num with a nominal minimum numday compressive strength of num mpa .
num steel reinforcement steel reinforcement for the footings shall be according to opss num .
num construction num general noise barrier systems shall be installed according to manufacturers specifications at locations specified in the contract documents .
num site grading and preparation grading and berm construction associated with the barrier installation shall be completed to within num mm below the bottom of the barrier prior to constructing the barrier footings .
grading up to num mm shall be part of installation of noise barrier system .
all grading shall be according to opss num .
earth and granular materials shall be compacted according to opss num .
there shall be no visible gaps between any barrier panels or beneath the bottom panels after completion of the barrier .
tree pruning and removal shall be kept to a minimum and shall be subject to the approval of the contract administrator prior to the commencement of any pruning and removal .
page num rev .
date num opss num num footings concrete shall be according to opss num .
concrete for drilled footings shall be cast entirely against undisturbed soil .
for other footings the footing shall be formed and the excavation shall be backfilled with granular materials and compacted to at least num standard proctor maximum dry density .
when required the top of all footings shall be shaped to provide for full horizontal seating of panels and the remaining surface area shall be sloped away from the post to shed water .
stepped footings shall be constructed to suit grade changes .
concrete in the footings shall be cured to meet design strength as specified by the engineer prior to the installation of noise barrier panels .
all excavations into rock shall be backfilled entirely with concrete .
excavation above the top of rock shall be formed to the required dimensions and the remainder of the excavation backfilled with granular material .
num posts structural steel posts shall be according to opss num .
steel posts and components shall be hot dip galvanized after fabrication according to astm a num .
galvanized surfaces that are abraded shall be cleaned and painted with a zincrich paint according to astm a num .
the top of footing and underside of post base plate shall be filled with nonshrink grout according to the manufacturers specifications .
tolerance for post plumb shall be according to the manufacturers specifications .
num panels panels shall be installed horizontally and stepped when necessary to match the elevation profile specified on the working drawings .
changes in horizontal direction shall be made using special arrangements of the posts according to the manufacturers specifications .
all panels shall be cleaned of any oils dirt and debris .
num noise barriers on structures noise barrier system shall be attached to the structure as specified in the contract documents .
flashing shall be installed and sealed in a manner so that water will not pond on the structure according to the manufacturers specifications .
num precast noise and traffic barriers precast noise or traffic barrier units or both shall be constructed to the line and grades as specified in the contract documents with a tolerance of num mm .
page num rev .
date num opss num when changes in horizontal alignment are greater than num or when changes in vertical alignment are greater than num between adjacent units occur the ends of the units shall be manufactured with the appropriate skewed end detail .
units required to match ground profiles with grades in excess of num shall be manufactured with skewed ends to match the vertical post detail .
the space between each unit on the traffic side surface shall not exceed num mm at the base of the traffic barrier .
the difference in elevation between adjacent units shall not exceed num mm .
any levelling or plumbing of units shall be done according to the manufacturers specifications .
granular base for the precast noise or traffic barrier units or both shall be placed in a manner to ensure that there are no voids between the bottom surface of units and the granular material and that the units are set to the correct line and grades .
precast noise or traffic barrier units or both shall be set according to the manufacturers specifications .
top of footings shall be clear of foreign material ice snow or water .
precast noise or traffic barrier units or both shall be positioned to have complete contact with the post flange along the traffic side of the units .
top of the noise or traffic barrier units or both shall be cleared of any foreign or loose material ice snow or water prior to installing the noise barrier panels .
the point of contact between the top of the precast noise or traffic unit or both and the bottom of the noise barrier panels shall be sealed according to manufacturers specifications .
num noise barrier access openings openings frames doors and hardware for noise barrier access shall be supplied and installed in accordance with the manufacturers working drawings and installation instructions at the locations and of the types specified in the contract documents .
openings shall be cut a minimum distance of num mm from the centerline of the noise barrier post to the centerline of the opening .
the centre of fire hose access openings shall be located within the range of num to num mm measured from the finished ground surface .
standard opening sizes for fire hose access and person door access are shown in table num .
dimensions and details for all other access opening types including but not limited to electrical access vehicle access and hydraulic access are as specified in the contract documents .
the openings shall meet the specified dimensions and shall be centred between adjacent posts .
each noise barrier access opening shall be fitted with a hinged door that opens away from the roadway to a minimum opening angle of num .
when doors are in the closed position there shall be no impact to the acoustical characteristics of the noise barrier system .
all gaps between openings and frames shall be sealed to ensure that there are no gaps .
num connection to existing fence when sections of an existing parallel or cross fence are to be removed or replaced or both with a noise barrier system the contractor shall ensure that a sufficient length of existing fence is maintained in good condition to adequately allow for connection to a new post at locations shown in the contract documents .
removal of any fence shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num underground utility and drainage crossings reduced post spacing shall be allowed according to the manufacturers specifications to avoid placing posts on top of utilities and drainage facilities .
num existing overhead high voltage lines when the potential of arcing exists due to the close proximity of existing overhead high voltage lines steel noise barrier panels and posts shall be grounded according to opss num .
num marking identification plates provided by the manufacturer shall be attached to the completed noise barrier system at the following intervals a at the start and end of noise barrier system .
b at a maximum interval of num m. the identification plate shall be located within num mm of a terminal post with the top of the plate located approximately num m above the ground .
the maximum dimensions of the plate shall be num by num mm .
the plate shall be made from num mm thick anodized aluminum sheet according to astm b num series num or numhnum .
each plate shall be engraved with the following information a contract number .
b name of manufacturer of noise barrier system .
c name of subcontractor that installed the noise barrier system .
d date of completed installation i.e .
yyyymm .
the height of the letters and numerals shall be within the range of num to num mm .
num quality control num interim inspection of footings and posts during construction of the noise barrier footings and posts and prior to the installation of the noise barrier panels from the fabrication facility the quality verification engineer shall conduct an inspection during the work to verify that the footings and posts have been constructed in general conformance with the contract documents and issue the contractor written permission to proceed with the work .
a copy of the written permission to proceed shall be submitted to the contract administrator prior to commencement of the next operation .
num certificate of conformance a completed certificate of conformance shall be submitted to the contract administrator upon completion of the installation of the noise barrier system .
the quality verification engineer shall affix his or her seal and signature to the completed certificate of conformance confirming that the installation has been carried out in general conformance with the contract documents and manufacturers specifications .
page num rev .
date num opss num num site restoration after noise barrier system installation the site shall be cleaned and trimmed and the ground restored to a neat condition .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num quality assurance num construction noise barrier components damaged in transit or during placement shall be replaced by the contractor at no cost to the owner .
the contractor shall install noise barrier materials that are visually uniform in appearance in terms of colour pattern and texture .
uniformity of appearance is subject to approval of the contract administrator .
noise barrier panels shall visually match adjacent panels .
inspection shall occur at a distance of approximately num metres from the noise barrier system .
final inspection of the complete noise barrier system shall not be made until it has been installed .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num noise barrier system noise barrier system including precast noisetraffic barrier noise barrier system on structures measurement of noise barrier system shall be along the horizontal length in metres of the specified height .
transitions between barrier heights shall form part of the higher barrier and terminations shall form part of the adjoining barrier .
at the discretion of the contract administrator if unidentified difficult soil conditions i.e .
rock shale or unstable earth are encountered above the design footing depths work necessary to complete the design requirements such as caissons dewatering additional concrete or different augering equipment shall be paid for as additional work .
num noise barrier access for measurement purposes a count shall be made of the number of accesses installed .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
page num rev .
date num opss num num basis of payment num height noise barrier system item height noise barrier system including precast noisetraffic barrier item height noise barrier system on structures item noise barrier access item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
grading up to num mm shall be included as part of the noise barrier system item .
for earth grading requirements greater than num mm the full grading is provided under the earth excavation item .
num removals and replacements cost associated with any required removals and replacements of defective workmanship or materials shall be the contractors responsibility at no cost to the owner .
page num rev .
date num opss num table num noise barrier access standard opening sizes type of door opening opening size w mm x h mm fire hose access num x num person door access num x num page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents noise barrier system design requirements should include the following num a acoustics the noise barrier system shall be designed for one of the following acoustical characteristic i .
either sound absorptive or reflective ii .
sound absorptive on the highway side iii .
sound absorptive on the residential side iv .
sound absorptive on both sides .
if more than one acoustical characteristic apply to this contract for various sections then each section shall be designed accordingly with clearly defined limits .
b height the designer shall select an appropriate height according to the acoustical requirements which shall not be more than num metres .
c aesthetics the designer shall plan the number of colours and textures for the contract .
the designer shall also specify the patterns and proportions in which each is required .
the exact colour texture and pattern for the noise barrier system shall be specified following the award of the contract but will be within the following parameters the number of colours adjacent to highway is _______ in the proportion of _______ _______ _______ _______ the number of textures is _______ in the proportion of _______ _______ _______ _______ the number of colours adjacent to residential property is _______ in the proportion of _______ _______ _______ _______ the number of textures is _______ in the proportion of _______ _______ _______ _______ page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa final colour selections shall be determined by the contract administrator at the point of manufacture from samples prepared by the manufacturer .
if only one colour and texture are to be used the noise barrier shall be constructed using only one colour and texture which shall be specified by the contract administrator following the award of the contract .
final colour selection shall be determined at the point of manufacture from samples prepared by the manufacturer .
d noise barrier access the designer should provide station and offset lt. or rt .
locations for all required barrier access points and indicate the type of access opening required at each location .
opening sizes for fire hose access and person access are standard .
opening sizes for other types of access including but not limited to electrical access vehicle access and hydraulic access are site specific and should be specified by location and opening size .
soil design parameters and wind loads for footings should include the following num a footings the designer shall design the noise barrier system footings according to cancsa snum with the assistance of soil design parameters .
the designer shall also provide the soil design parameters as per the example below .
station to station soil design parameter east bound lane num to num shoulder  num west bound lanes num to num row num to num row num to num shoulder  num cu num kpa  num b wind pressure the wind pressure information shall be used from cancsa snum for the city where the project is located e.g .
num pa for hamilton area .
noise barrier system material requirements .
num granular material to be used .
num noise barrier system locations .
num attachment requirements for noise barrier system to structure .
num line and grade specifications for precast noisetraffic barrier units .
num noise barrier access opening requirements .
num page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa locations where noise barrier system connects to existing fence .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for standard highway fence opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents notice to users of opss num construction specification for chainlink fence opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for expanded metal antiglare screen table of contents num scope num references num definitions not used num design and submission requirements not used num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the installation of expanded metal antiglare screens on concrete barrier steel beam guide rail and chainlink fence .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications canadian general standards board cgsb num steel framework for chain link fence csa standards wnum welded steel construction metal arc welding astm international a numa nummnum steel castings carbon for general application a numa nummnum zinc hotdip galvanized coatings on iron and steel products a numa nummnum zinc coating hotdip on iron and steel hardware a num structural bolts steel heat treated num ksi minimum tensile strength a num num metalliccoated steel marcelled tension wire for use with chainlink fence a numa nummnum steel sheet and strip hotrolled carbon structural highstrength lowalloy highstrength lowalloy with improved formability and ultrahigh strength b num aluminum and aluminumalloy sheet and plate page num rev .
date num opss num f num fence fittings num materials num mesh steel mesh panels shall be fabricated from expanding quality hot rolled sheets according to astm a numm .
aluminum mesh panels shall be fabricated from expanding utility grade num hnum sheets or num hnum rolls .
mesh panels shall consist of regular num mm diamond shaped patterns formed by expanding num mm thick panels to provide panels num mm or num mm in width and a minimum of num mm plus one diamond width in length .
the diamonds shall be according to the following a width of diamond centre to centre of strand shall be num mm .
b length of diamond centre to centre of strand shall be num mm .
c width of strand shall be num mm .
d cutoff angle shall be a minimum of num degrees .
mesh panels installed on concrete barrier and steel beam guide rail shall be num mm in width .
mesh panels installed on chainlink fence shall be num mm in width .
the size of the finished mesh panels shall not deviate more than num mm from the specified width and more than num mm from the specified length .
mesh panels shall be levelled and wire brushed after the expanding operation .
mesh panels fabricated from steel sheets shall be hot dip galvanized after fabrication to provide a mass of zinc coating not less than num gmnum of total surface .
num posts and wire fasteners posts shall be steel pipe and according to cancgsb num .
posts installed on concrete barrier shall be fabricated with a welded steel base plate grade numw hot dip galvanized after fabrication according to astm a num and according to the contract documents .
all welds shall be to a low hydrogen classification according to csa wnum .
manual electrodes shall be enum enum or enum .
all welds shall be continuous .
wire fasteners for fastening the mesh panels to the line posts shall be made of aluminum galvanized steel or stainless steel .
num top wires bottom wires diagonal brace wires and tie wires top wires bottom wires and diagonal brace wires shall be num mm diameter marcelled tension wire type ii according to astm a num with a minimum class num galvanized coating .
tie wires shall be num mm diameter aluminum or galvanized steel or num mm diameter stainless steel wire .
tie wires shall be made with the same type of material as the mesh panels or stainless steel .
page num rev .
date num opss num num miscellaneous hardware washers nuts and bolts shall be according to astm a num .
all hardware shall be galvanized according to astm a num and to provide a mass of zinc coating of not less than num gmnum of total surface .
metal discs used to fasten mesh panels to the chainlink fence fabric shall be fabricated from num mm thick steel and hot dip galvanized after fabrication to provide a mass of zinc coating of not less than num gmnum of the total surface .
num post caps all posts shall be fitted with waterproof metal caps according to astm f num and in a colour matching the posts .
post caps shall be designed to fit and fasten securely over the posts .
all line post caps shall carry the top wire as specified in the contract documents .
num turnbuckles turnbuckles shall be drop forged steel according to astm a num and shall be galvanized according to astm a num .
the average overall length shall be approximately num mm with ends in the closed position .
bolt diameter shall be approximately num mm and capable of taking up a minimum of num mm slack .
num construction num general expanded metal antiglare screens shall be installed at locations specified in the contract documents .
mesh panels shall be oriented as specified in the contract documents .
num expanded metal antiglare screens on concrete barrier mesh panels and posts shall be fastened to the concrete barrier as specified in the contract documents .
num expanded metal antiglare screens on steel beam guide rail tops of guide rail posts shall be cut to accommodate the mesh panels as specified in the contract documents .
exposed surfaces of the guide rail posts shall be field treated with two applications of a preservative compatible with that used for the pressure treatment of the post .
num expanded metal antiglare screens on chainlink fence mesh panels shall be fastened to the chainlink fence as specified in the contract documents .
num marking identification plates provided by the material supplier shall be securely attached to the completed expanded metal antiglare screen installation at the following intervals a at the start and end of each expanded metal antiglare screen installation .
b at a maximum interval of num m. page num rev .
date num opss num the expanded metal antiglare screen identification plate shall be located within num mm of a terminal post with the top of the plate located approximately num mm from the top of the expanded metal antiglare screen .
the maximum dimensions of the plate shall be num by num mm .
the plate shall be made from num mm thick anodized aluminum sheet according to astm b num series num or numhnum .
each expanded metal antiglare screen identification plate shall be engraved with the following information a contract number .
b name or trademark of antiglare screen subcontractor .
c name or trademark of antiglare screen supplier i.e .
suppliers of expanded metal antiglare screen and posts .
d date of completed installation i.e .
yyyymm .
the height of the letters and numerals shall be within the range of num to num mm .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num quality assurance num construction the contract administrator may perform a spot visual inspection to determine conformance with the workmanship design and dimensional requirements of this specification .
failure to conform to the specifications may result in a partial or complete inspection of the installation and removal and replacement of all defective workmanship or materials .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num expanded metal antiglare screen measurement of expanded metal antiglare screen shall be by length in metres along the length of concrete barrier steel beam guide rail or chainlink fence for the actual length of screen installed .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num expanded metal antiglare screen item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents locations of expanded metal antiglare screens .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num expanded metal antiglare screen installation concrete barrier opsd num expanded metal antiglare screen installation steel beam guide rail with wooden post opsd num expanded metal antiglare screen installation chainlink fence notice to users of opss num construction specification for the protection of trees opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num formerly opss num november num construction specification for topsoil table of contents num scope num references num definitions not used num design and submission requirements not used num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for stockpiling supplying and placing topsoil .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num november num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num grading num materials num topsoil topsoil shall be a fertile loam material that is free of roots vegetation or other debris of a size and quantity that prevents proper placement of the topsoil .
the topsoil shall not contain material greater than num mm in size such as stones and clods .
imported topsoil shall not have contaminants that adversely affect plant growth .
soil from swamps or muskeg areas may be used in place of topsoil when approved by the contract administrator .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num november num num construction num stockpiling topsoil topsoil shall be removed stockpiled and managed according to the contract documents .
stockpiles shall be constructed neatly with uniform surfaces .
when required the top surface shall be dished .
num preparation for topsoil areas where topsoil is to be placed shall be fine graded to a uniform surface according to opss num .
the surface shall be loosened to a depth of num mm .
it shall be free of all vegetation debris and stones which would not be covered by the depth of topsoil specified in the placement of topsoil subsection .
these areas shall be maintained in the condition described above until the topsoil is placed .
num placement of topsoil topsoil shall be placed to a uniform depth of num mm on areas specified in the contract documents and up to the subgrade elevation on the roadway front slope .
soil from swamps or muskeg areas when used in place of topsoil shall be placed according to the contract documents to a uniform depth of num mm with no woody material protruding more than num mm above the surface .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num topsoil from stockpiles measurement shall be by volume in cubic metres of topsoil placed from a stockpile .
num topsoil imported measurement shall be by volume in cubic metres of topsoil imported and placed .
num basis of payment num preparation for topsoil item payment at the contract price for the above item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
payment for this item shall be on surfaces graded under a previous contract that require preparation for topsoil .
there is no payment for this item on surfaces constructed on this contract .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num november num num topsoil from stockpiles item payment at the contract price for the above item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
num topsoil imported item payment at the contract price for the above item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num november num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents topsoil removal and stockpiling areas .
num topsoil placement areas .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
page num rev .
date num opss num formerly opss num november num notice to users of opss num construction specification for sodding opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for seed and cover opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents notice to users of opss num construction specification for temporary erosion and sediment control measures opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for rootwad structures opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for large woody debris opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for lunkers opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for riffles on streambeds opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for pools in streambeds opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for rocky ramps on streambeds opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for low flow channels opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for baffles in a culvert opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for local seed bank opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for excavating and backfilling structures table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary numb supplemental requirements for using opss num in municipal contracts num scope this specification covers the requirements for excavating and backfilling for structures including dewatering .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following specifications standards or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num grading opss num compacting opss num removal opss num control of water from dewatering operations opss num temporary protection systems ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num aggregates miscellaneous opss num aggregates base subbase select subgrade and backfill material opss num clay seal opss num geotextiles page num rev .
date num opss num num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply bedding means granular material to be placed in areas so designated in the contract documents .
certificate of conformance means a document issued by the quality verification engineer confirming that the specified components of the work are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
channel means a natural or artificial watercourse .
culvert means a structure that provides an opening through an embankment and to which roadway loads are distributed through fill or that is designated as a culvert in the contract documents .
designated payment surface means the original ground surface shown in the contract documents unless a specially designated payment surface is shown either by elevation or by profile .
the specially designated payment surface is horizontal in the transverse direction .
for rock excavation the designated payment surface shall be the existing rock surface as established in the field before rock excavation begins unless another designated payment surface is specified .
earth means all soils except those defined as rock and excludes stone masonry concrete and other manufactured materials .
engineer means a professional engineer licensed by the professional engineers ontario to practice in the province of ontario .
foundation means that portion of the ground below the structure base or footings that supports the structure or that portion of the ground supporting the pile caps .
quality verification engineer means an engineer retained by the contractor qualified to provide the services specified in the contract documents .
rock means natural beds or massive fragments of the hard stable cemented part of the earths crust igneous metamorphic or sedimentary in origin which may or may not be weathered and includes boulders having a volume of num cubic m or greater .
soil means all loose or moderately cohesive organic or inorganic deposits of the earths crust such as silt sand gravel or clay or any of their mixtures .
structure means any bridge tunnel concrete culvert retaining wall dock guideway or sign support .
num design and submission requirements num design requirements num dewatering where dewatering is required the contractor shall be responsible for the design of the dewatering scheme for the intended purpose .
page num rev .
date num opss num num submission requirements num preconstruction survey prior to commencing the work a condition survey of property and structures that may be affected by the work shall be submitted to the contract administrator .
the survey shall include the locations and conditions of adjacent properties buildings underground structures utility services and structures such as walls abutting the site .
num milestone inspections the quality verification engineer shall witness the following interim inspections of the work a dewatering of excavation for structure .
b completion of excavation for foundation .
c excavation for backfill and frost tapers .
d backfilling .
a copy of the written permission to proceed shall be submitted to the contract administrator prior to commencement of the successive operation .
num materials num granular granular material to be used for backfill bedding and frost tapers shall be according to opss num .
the num mm clear stone to be used for wall drains shall be according to opss num .
num native backfill native and imported material shall be approved by the contract administrator .
all material shall be free from frozen lumps cinders ashes refuse vegetable or organic matter rocks and boulders over num mm in any dimension and other deleterious material .
num clay seal clay seal shall be according to opss num .
num geotextile geotextile shall be according to opss num and be of the type class and filtration opening size fos range specified in the contract documents .
num equipment num compaction equipment compaction equipment shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num construction num removals removals shall be according to opss num .
num removal of ice and snow all ice and snow shall be removed from all portions of the work area before any excavation and backfill operations proceed .
frozen materials shall not be incorporated into the work .
material shall not be placed over frozen ground ice or snow .
num protection systems protection systems shall be according to opss num .
protection systems shall be installed a where the stability safety or function of an existing structure roadway railway or other facility can be impaired by an excavation or temporary slope .
b to permit excavation where there is a necessity to retain the sidewalls of an excavation and to permit dewatering by restricting water flow and facilitating safe execution of the work .
num dewatering structure excavation until backfilling has been completed and to permit the placing of concrete in the dry the contractor shall carry out all work necessary to control the flow of water into the excavation and to prevent disturbance of the founding material .
control of water shall be according to opss num .
all temporary dewatering shall remain the property of the contractor and shall be removed from the right ofway when they are no longer required .
num excavation num general deterioration of the foundation soil or rock surface water from entering and eroding the face of the excavation and build up of hydrostatic pressures that may have harmful effects upon the temporary or permanent structures shall be prevented .
num excavation for foundations excavation for footings working slabs and granular pads shall be to the neat lines specified in the contract documents .
the bottom of the excavation on which the footing working slab or granular pad is to rest shall not be disturbed .
in soft conditions construction of the footing or structural slab shall commence immediately after the final removal of material to the foundation level has been completed .
in the case of concrete culverts of the open footing type no excavation shall be made between the footings below the level of the stream bed or the top of the footings whichever elevation is lower unless authorized in writing by the contract administrator .
the elevation of the bottom of the footing working slab or granular pad shall not be changed without the approval of the contract administrator .
page num rev .
date num opss num overexcavated areas shall be restored to their original conditions .
overexcavated areas shall be backfilled with a material suitable for the particular application and approved by the contract administrator .
concrete fill shall be used for overexcavation in rock .
where material other than concrete is used the material shall be compacted to the dry density specified in opss num .
when authorized by the contract administrator additional excavation as may be required shall be carried out .
num excavation for backfill and frost tapers excavation for backfill and frost tapers shall be to the neat lines specified in the contract documents .
overexcavated areas shall be restored with material approved by the contract administrator .
the material shall be compacted to the dry density specified in opss num .
num preservation of channel where a channel crosssection is altered it shall be restored to its original condition .
num backfilling num general frozen materials shall not be incorporated into the work .
footings shall be protected against frost action .
other than the backfill placed to the tops of the footings no fill shall be placed against an abutment wingwall retaining wall or concrete culvert until the concrete has reached num of its design strength .
backfilling around culverts arches rigid frames and piers shall proceed simultaneously and evenly on both sides of the structure .
the differential in surface elevation of the backfill material on each side of the structure and individual component shall not be greater than num mm .
all voids around abutments piers or other permanent work shall be backfilled to the level of the surrounding ground or to the grade specified in the contract documents whichever is the lower before the general backfilling commences .
when rock fill is to be placed around a structure the structure shall be protected to prevent damage from the rock fill .
the minimum height of fill specified in the contract documents shall be placed before traffic or construction equipment shall pass over the culvert .
granular material shall be placed within the lines and grades specified in the contract documents .
wall drains shall have a num mnum pocket of num mm minimum size clear stone wrapped in geotextile placed over the opening of the wall drain at the backfilled side of the wall .
num compaction backfill shall be placed according to opss num and compacted according to opss num .
only hand operated vibratory type compaction equipment shall be used for compaction of fill material within the restricted zone behind all earth retaining structures .
page num rev .
date num opss num num clay seal when specified in the contract documents clay seals shall be placed to the dimensions shown .
num certificate of conformance a completed certificate of conformance shall be submitted to the contract administrator upon completion of the work .
the qualification verification engineers seal and signature shall be affixed on the completed certificate of conformance confirming that the work has been carried out in general conformance with the contract documents .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num excavation for structure measurement of earth or rock excavation for structure shall be by volume in cubic metres .
measurement of excavation for footings shall be based on the neat horizontal dimensions of the footing to the depth of the bottom of the footing working slab or granular pad .
except as noted below the quantity of excavation shall include only the quantities below the designated payment surface within the neat lines specified in the contract documents .
the above measurement also includes a removal of asphalt pavement except where there is a separate tender item for pavement removal that includes pavement overlapping the area of structure excavation .
b the excavation quantities below the designated payment surface required for placing granular backfill and granular frost tapers .
c for open footing culverts the excavation quantities as measured below the designated payment surface but between the plan areas of the footings and above the stream bed or the tops of the footings whichever is higher .
where the structure excavation overlaps excavation required for other work the measurement shall be made as specified in the contract documents with no deductions for overlap .
the volume of boulders in an excavation shall be calculated from the three maximum rectilinear dimensions .
the following provisions shall apply a only the amount removed shall be considered for payment .
b the volume of the boulders removed shall be deducted from the volume of excavation as calculated above .
the measurement of the total volume of materials considered for payment shall not exceed the calculated volume of excavation within the theoretical lines .
page num rev .
date num opss num num granular backfill measurement for payment of granular backfill shall be by volume in cubic metres or tonnes as specified in the contract documents .
the quantity of granular backfill and granular bedding shall include only those quantities measured below the subgrade and as measured within the theoretical line and grades specified in the contract documents .
where the contractor has excavated beyond the limits specified in the contract documents the conversion factor of num tmnum shall be used in measurement of the excess volume when it is replaced with granular on a tonne basis .
the weighing of granular material supplied on a tonnage basis shall be according to the contract documents .
num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clauses under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num earth excavation for structure item rock excavation for structure item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
when the contract administrator requests excavation for concrete working slabs granular working pads or granular bedding payment shall be at the contract price for the type of excavation required .
num dewatering structure excavations item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
num granular backfill to structure item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material required to do the work .
when the contract documents do not include a separate item for granular backfill to structure the contract price for the items directly associated with the granular backfill to structure shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material required to do the work .
num clay seal item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
num overexcavation payment shall not be made for overexcavation that has not been approved by the contract administrator or for backfill restoration of such overexcavation .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents geotextile requirements .
num neat lines of excavations for footings working slabs and granular pads .
num neat lines of excavation for backfill and frost tapers .
num grade of backfill around abutments piers and other permanent work .
num lines and grades for granular materials .
num measurement units for granular material .
num the designer should determine if the following is required and if so it should be specified in the contract documents clay seals and dimensions for clay seals .
num opss num contains information written for provincial contracts .
to ensure completeness of municipal contract documents the designer should invoke appendix numb .
the appendix contains supplemental requirements that modify opss num so it can be used by a municipality in its contracts .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num foundation frost penetration depths for northern ontario opsd num foundation frost penetration depths for southern ontario opsd num walls abutment backfill minimum granular requirement opsd num walls abutment backfill rock opsd num walls abutment backfill drain opsd num walls retaining concrete toe wall opsd num walls retaining backfill minimum granular requirement opsd num walls retaining and abutment wall drain page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numb november num for use in municipal contracts when referenced in the contract documents note this is a nonmandatory additional information appendix intended to provide supplementary requirements for the ops specification in a municipal contract when the appendix is invoked by the owner .
it is written in mandatory language to permit invoking it by reference in the contract documents .
if the appendix has not been invoked by reference in the contract documents it does not apply .
supplemental requirements for using opss num in municipal contracts opss num excavation and backfilling structures is amended as follows num definitions section num is amended by the deletion of the definitions for certificate of conformance and for quality verification engineer .
num milestone inspections clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following the contract administrator shall witness the following interim inspections of the work a dewatering of excavation for structure .
b completion of excavation for foundation .
c excavation for backfill and frost tapers .
d backfilling .
the next operation shall not proceed until the contract administrator has examined the excavation and given approval in writing to perform subsequent work .
num dewatering structure excavation the third paragraph of clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following after the dewatering the excavation shall be inspected and accepted by the contract administrator prior to construction of the footing .
the contractor shall not proceed with subsequent work until the contract administrator has given permission in writing .
num certificate of conformance subsection num is deleted in its entirety .
page num rev .
date num opss num notice to users of opss num construction specification for deep foundations opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num moved in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for concrete structures opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented mto general conditions of contract and general construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented ops general conditions of contract and general construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num moved num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for steel reinforcement for concrete opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for structural steel for bridges table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance num measurement for payment not used num basis of payment appendices numa commentary numb supplemental requirements for using opss num in municipal contracts num scope this specification covers the construction requirements for the fabrication delivery and erection of structural steel for highway bridges .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num coating structural steel opss num formwork and falsework opss num installation of bearings ontario provincial standard specifications materials opss num bearingselastomeric plain and steel laminated opss num bearingsrotational and sliding surface ontario ministry of transportation publications structural manual page num rev .
date num opss num csa standards gnum rnum general requirements for rolled or welded structural quality steelstructural quality steel snum design of steel structures wnum certification of companies for fusion welding of steel wnum rnum filler metals and allied materials for metal arc welding wnum rnum welded steel construction metal arc welding wnum certification of welding inspection organizations wnum certification of welding inspectors snum canadian highway bridge design code astm international a nummnum standard specification for structural bolts steel heat treated num mpa minimum tensile strength metric a nummnum steel bolts classes num and num for structural steel joints metric a nummnum carbon and alloy steel nuts a num a nummnum highstrength lowalloy structural steel up to num ksi num mpa minimum yield point with atmospheric corrosion resistance f nummnum hardened steel washers american society of mechanical engineers asme bnum surface texture surface roughness waviness and lay international organization for standardizationinternational electrotechnical commission isoiec num general requirements for the competence of the testing and calibration laboratories joint publications of the society for protective coatings sspc and national association of corrosion engineers nace sspcspnumnace no .
num commercial blast cleaning num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply bearing contact area means two planes that are in contact or have a separation between them not exceeding num mm .
certificate of conformance means a document issued by the quality verification engineer confirming that the specified components of the work are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
engineer means a professional engineer licensed by the professional engineers ontario to practice in the province of ontario erection diagrams means drawings showing the dimensioned layout of the steel structure from which shop details are made and that correlate the fabricators piece markings with the location in the structure .
faying surface means the mating surface of a member that is in contact with another member to which it is to be joined .
page num rev .
date num opss num flush means a profile of weld reinforcement in which there is a smooth gradual transition between the base and weld metal involving grinding where necessary .
weld reinforcement not exceeding num mm in height may remain on each surface unless the weld is part of a faying surface when all reinforcement is removed .
fracture critical member means a member including attachments in a single load path structure that is subject to tensile stress and whose failure could lead to collapse of the structure .
inspector means an individual who is a canadian welding bureau cwb certified level ii or level iii inspector according to the requirements of csa wnum and has documented evidence of professional knowledge skill and experience in the inspection of fabrication and erection of steel bridges .
new steel means structural steel that has not previously been used .
nondestructive testing technician means an individual who has documented evidence of training professional knowledge skill and experience in nondestructive testing of structural steel welds and material and has a valid certificate showing qualification to a level ii or lll according to cancgsb num and the cwb for the nondestructive testing specified .
primary tension member means a member including attachments that are subject to tension stress .
quality verification engineer qve means an engineer retained by the contractor qualified to provide the services specified in the contract documents .
smooth means a profile of weld reinforcement in which the surface finish or weld reinforcement has sufficient smooth gradual transition involving grinding where necessary .
weld reinforcement not exceeding the following limits may remain on each surface num mm for plate thickness num mm num mm for plate thickness num mm snug tight means the tightness attained by a few impacts of an impact wrench or the full effort of a person using a spud wrench .
num design and submission requirements num design requirements num general design shall be according to cancsa snum and the structural manual .
num welding welding design shall be according to csa wnum .
welding procedures shall be according to csa wnum and csa wnum except where modified by cancsasnum clause num .
symbols for welding and nondestructive testing shall be according to csa wnum .
page num rev .
date num opss num num submissions num general when other authorities are involved in the approval of the design or construction of a highway structure submissions shall be made at least num weeks prior to commencement of work and one additional copy of the submission shall be provided for each authority .
the requirements of each authority shall be satisfied prior to commencement of fabrication .
num shop details and welding procedures the contractor shall submit num sets of the shop details and welding procedures to the contract administrator at least num days prior to commencement of fabrication for information purposes only .
prior to making a submission an engineers seal and signature shall be affixed on the shop details and welding procedures verifying that the details and procedures are consistent with the contract documents .
the shop details shall include at least the following a full detail dimensions and sizes of all component parts of the structure .
these dimensions shall make allowance for changes in shape due to weld shrinkage camber and any other effects that cause finished dimensions to differ from initial dimensions .
b erection marks .
c all necessary specifications for the materials to be used .
d identification of areas requiring special surface treatment .
e identification of fracturecritical and primary tension members and component parts .
attachments having a length of more than num mm in the direction of tension and welded to the tension zone of a fracturecritical or primary tension member shall be treated as part of that member .
f bolt installation requirements including number of fitting up bolts required at each connection and oversize and slotted holes .
g details of all welds .
h identification of material and welds requiring nondestructive testing including the limits of the weld undergoing testing and the frequency and type of testing .
i temporary welds .
j location of shop and field splices .
the fabricator shall not commence fabrication until he has received one set of shop detail drawings and welding procedures sealed and signed by an engineer .
the fabricator shall have a copy of the shop detail drawings and welding procedures at the manufacturing plant during fabrication .
num erection diagrams and erection procedure drawings and calculations the contractor shall submit num sets of the erection diagrams and erection procedure drawings and calculations to the contract administrator at least num days prior to commencement of erection for information purposes only .
prior to making a submission an engineers seal and signature shall be page num rev .
date num opss num affixed on the erection diagrams and erection procedure drawings and calculations verifying that the erection diagrams and erection procedure drawings and calculations are consistent with the contract documents .
erection diagrams and erection procedure drawings shall include at least the following a principal dimensions of the bridge .
b erection marks .
c sizes of all members .
d field welding requirements including identification of welds requiring nondestructive testing .
e size and type of bolts .
f bolt installation requirements including the number of fitting up bolts required at each connection and identification of oversize and slotted holes .
g bracing during erection of structural steel .
h treatment at faying surfaces for joints designed as slip critical .
the contractor shall not commence erection until he has received one set of erection diagrams and erection procedure drawings and calculations sealed and signed by an engineer .
the contractor shall have a copy of the erection diagrams and the erection procedure drawings and calculations at the site during erection .
num mill test certificates prior to the use of any material in fabrication num copies of the mill test certificates for that material shall be submitted to the contract administrator confirming that the material is according to the contract documents .
copies of the mill test certificates for all material to be used in the fabrication shall be available for review at the fabricating plant during fabrication .
the certificates shall show that the material is according to the contract documents .
if the material can not be identified by mill test certificates coupons shall be taken and tested and these test certificates shall be made available .
when mill test certificates originate from a mill outside of canada or the united states of america the contractor shall have the information on the mill test certificate verified by testing at a canadian laboratory .
this laboratory shall be certified by an organization accredited by the standards council of canada to comply with the requirements of isoiec num for the specific tests or type of tests required by the material standard specified on the mill test certificate .
the mill test certificates shall be stamped with the name of the canadian laboratory and appropriate wording stating that the material is according to the specified contract requirements .
the stamp shall include the appropriate material specification number testing date i.e .
yyyymmdd and the signature of an authorized officer of the canadian laboratory .
num test reports for fasteners proof that the bolts nuts and washers meet the chemical composition mechanical properties dimensions workmanship and head burst as required by astm a numm astm a numm astm a numm page num rev .
date num opss num or astm f numm shall be submitted to the contract administrator .
verification of the acceptability of assemblage of zinccoated bolts nuts and washers delivered to the job site shall also be submitted to the contract administrator .
for bolts nuts and washers supplied from a manufacturer outside canada or the united states of america the above information shall be verified by testing at a canadian laboratory as outlined in the mill test certificates clause .
num interim inspection after fabrication of components upon completion of fabrication of the components and prior to erection the quality verification engineer shall conduct an interim inspection of the work to verify that the fabrication of components has been carried out in general conformance with the shop details welding procedures and contract documents and issue the fabricator written permission to proceed with the work .
num materials num steel structural steel shall be new and of the grade and category specified in the contract documents and shall be according to cancsa gnum .
astm a num may be substituted when either of the following steel grades have been specified a cancsa gnum grade numa .
b cancsa gnum grade numat when the charpy impact energy requirements are verified by the submission of test documentation .
substitution of other material for size and grade is not permitted unless approved by the contract administrator .
the steel shall be identified as specified in the control of material clause .
num high strength bolts nuts and washers high strength bolts shall be according to astm a numm or astm a numm .
high strength nuts and hardened washers shall be suitable for use with the types of bolts being specified and shall be according to astm a numm and astm f numm .
the nuts bolts and washers shall be supplied and shipped together as an assembly from the same manufacturer .
high strength bolts nuts and washers for use with unpainted corrosionresistant steel shall be type num .
bolts nuts and washers used with steel specified in the contract documents to receive a paint coating or galvanizing shall be type num and shall be galvanized .
high strength astm a numm bolts shall not be galvanized or plated .
num electrodes welding electrodes electrode and flux or electrode and gas combinations shall be low hydrogen level hnum or less and shall be according to csa wnum csa wnum and section num of csa wnum .
page num rev .
date num opss num the weld filler metal in fracturecritical and primary tension members shall meet the charpy v notch impact energy requirements of cancsasnum table num .
weld metal used with corrosion resistant steels shall have similar corrosion resistance and colour to the base metal and shall be according to csa wnum .
num shear connectors material requirements for stud shear connectors shall be according to csa wnum appendix h. only studs of type b shall be used .
num pins and rollers pins and rollers more than num mm in diameter shall be forged and annealed or forged and normalized .
pins and rollers num mm or less in diameter shall be forged and annealed forged and normalized or cold finished carbonsteel shafting .
num bearings bearings shall be according to opss num or opss num or both .
num construction num fabrication num general the fabrication shall be according to cancsasnum clause num .
all atmospheric corrosion resistant acr steel components shall be abrasive blastcleaned according to sspcspnumnace no .
num to completely remove mill scale rust coating oxides corrosion products oil grease dust dirt and other foreign matter .
num plate edges plasma arc cutting of plates up to and including num mm in thickness is permitted .
plasma arc cutting of plates thicker that num mm shall not be permitted unless approval is received in writing from the contract administrator .
when permitted plasma arc cutting of plates shall use oxygen as the cutting gas and all edges shall be free of dross .
inspection and repair of planar discontinuities shall be according to csa wnum .
corners of oxygen cut girder flanges shall be chamfered num to num mm by grinding .
num straightening material material with sharp kinks shall be rejected .
straightening of bends shall only be done using mechanical means or by the application of controlled heating according to csa wnum .
details of the straightening procedure including testing requirements signed and sealed by an engineer shall be submitted to the contract administrator prior to the straightening for information purposes only .
straightening shall only be carried out in the presence of the owners inspector .
page num rev .
date num opss num if necessary the contract administrator shall specify additional testing to be performed by the contractor .
if evidence of damage is discovered the material shall be rejected and the cost of testing shall be at the expense of the contractor .
the contract administrator shall be given num days prior notice to arrange for the inspection .
num cambering when rolled sections are heat cambered the details of the heat cambering procedure signed and sealed by an engineer shall be submitted to the contract administrator num days prior to cambering for information purposes only .
plate girders shall have the required camber cut into the web with suitable allowance for camber loss due to cutting and welding .
steel box girders fabricated with webs in an upright position shall have the fabricated camber verified by subtracting ordinates for deflections for girder segments from the relaxed camber diagram ordinates .
the use of heat to alter the camber of fracture critical or primary tension members shall be subject to approval by the contract administrator prior to the application of heat .
the ends of cambered girders shall be vertical under full dead load .
num horizontally curved girders num heat curving of rolled beams and welded girders girders shall be cambered before heat curving .
a detailed procedure for the heat curving operation signed and sealed by an engineer shall be submitted to the contract administrator num days prior to heat curving for information purposes only .
num identification marking for erection each member shall carry an erection mark for identification .
permanent marking shall be affixed in an area not exposed to view in the finished structure .
num welded construction num general all welded construction shall be according to csa wnum and clause num of cancsasnum .
all welding shall be carried out by welders having a csa wnum identification card valid for the type of welding to be done and for the duration of the welding work .
the fabrication weld metal requirements base metal repairs and repairs of weld in fracture critical and primary tension members shall be according to cancsasnum clause num .
any company undertaking welded fabrication or erection or both shall be certified according to csa wnum division num or num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num altering the sweep of fracturecritical and primary tension members the use of heat to alter the sweep of fracture critical or primary tension members shall be subject to approval by the contract administrator prior to the application of heat .
num submissions of repair procedures canadian welding bureau cwb accepted welding procedure specifications datasheets and repair procedures for prequalification signed and sealed by an engineer shall be submitted for approval to the contract administrator num days prior to commencement of work .
num assembly for welding assembly for welding shall be according to csa wnum and the following a bearing stiffeners shall be vertical under full dead load .
b intermediate stiffeners shall be either true vertical or perpendicular to the horizontal work lines used to layout the girder .
c bearing stiffeners fitted to bear shall have a minimum bearing contact area of num and a maximum separation of num mm over the remaining area .
d fitted intermediate stiffeners shall have a minimum bearing contact area of num and a maximum separation of num mm .
num temporary welds temporary welds shall not be used on fracturecritical and primary tension members .
temporary welds shall not be used on flange material in compression unless approved by the contract administrator .
num preheat interpass temperature and heat input control when making welding repairs to fracturecritical and primary tension members the preheat requirements shall be according to cancsasnum table num .
num profile of welds profile of welds shall be according to csa wnum and the structural manual .
num corrections welding corrections and repairs to fracturecritical and primary tension members shall be according to cancsa snum clause num .
any steel members subjected to shape corrections or straightening shall be allowed to cool in still air .
num peening peening when required shall be subject to approval by the contract administrator .
page num rev .
date num opss num num stress reliefheat treatment stress reliefheat treatment temperatures shall be recorded using thermocouples or other methods acceptable to the contract administrator .
a record showing temperature and time data of the heat treating operation shall be maintained and be made available to the contract administrator upon request .
num welding inspection num general all welding inspection shall be according to csa wnum .
num identification cards canadian welding bureau prior to commencement of welding the contractor shall make available to the contract administrator the canadian welding bureaus transferable or nontransferable identification cards for each tacker welder or welding operator to be employed on the work .
such identification cards shall be currently valid and shall indicate the welding processes and the welding positions at which the personnel are qualified to weld .
num certification of the independent testing organization the independent organization undertaking welding testing under the quality control subsection shall be certified for testing bridges according to csa wnum .
the certification shall encompass at least the following methods radiographic ultrasonic and magnetic particle .
num certification of the nondestructive testing technician the independent organizations nondestructive testing technician undertaking nondestructive testing of welds under the quality control subsection shall be certified for testing bridges according to csa wnum .
certification shall be to either level ii or iii for the methods used as required by cancgsb num .
num welding corrections and repairs for fracturecritical and primary tension members num general all repair procedures requiring approval shall be submitted to the contract administrator at least num days prior to commencement of the work .
repair procedures shall be according to cancsasnum clause num .
num approval for noncritical repairs noncritical repairs are those listed in cancsasnum clause num .
repair procedures shall be prepared and submitted to the contract administrator .
work on the repair shall not commence until the contract administrator has given written approval to proceed .
num approval for critical repairs repair procedures that are more severe than those described in cancsasnum subclause num are considered critical and shall be individually approved by the contract administrator before repair welding proceeds .
critical repairs include those listed in cancsasnum clause num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num nondestructive testing of fracture critical members the fabricator shall maintain documentation of all visual and nondestructive testing for review and confirmation by the contract administrator .
documentation shall be submitted to the contract administrator upon completion of the project .
num repair of welds any section of weld that does not meet the acceptance standards shall be removed rewelded and re examined .
num bolted construction num general bolted construction shall be according to cancsasnum clause num .
bolts shall be sufficiently long to exclude threads from the shear plane .
num plasma arc cutting of holes plasma arc cutting of holes shall only be permitted in plates up to and including num mm in thickness .
plasma arc cut holes shall be produced by mechanically guided means and the diameter of the holes shall be greater than or equal to the thickness of the plate .
when plasma arc cutting of holes is permitted the cutting gas as well as the shielding gas shall be oxygen and the surface roughness shall not exceed num microns num microinches as defined in asme bnum .
occasional gouges not more than num mm in depth are permitted .
thermally cut holes shall be num mm larger than the nominal diameter of the bolt and the taper shall not exceed num degrees .
num holes drilled using numerically controlled machines as an alternative to the shop trial assembly requirements of cancsasnum when numerically controlled machines have prepared the boltholes a check assembly consisting of the first components of each type of bolthole pattern to be made shall be undertaken to adequately demonstrate the accuracy of the drilling .
if the check assembly is satisfactory further assemblies of like components are not required .
if the check assembly is unsatisfactory the work shall be redone or repaired in a manner acceptable to the contract administrator .
num inspection inspection shall be according to cancsasnum as required .
num tolerances num dimensional and workmanship tolerances dimensional and workmanship tolerances shall be according to csa wnum and clause num of cancsasnum .
num transportation delivery and storage the contractor shall perform all work necessary to ensure safe loading delivery unloading and storage of structural steel .
the work shall consist of loading the members transporting them and unloading at the site and shall include temporary works for access .
page num rev .
date num opss num structural steel shall be loaded for shipping in such a manner that it can be transported and unloaded at its destination without being excessively stressed deformed or otherwise damaged .
plate girders shall be transported with their webs in a vertical plane .
when girders can not be shipped with their webs in the vertical plane static and dynamic forces during handling transportation and storage shall be determined using a dynamic load allowance of num .
computed stresses shall be according to cancsasnum clause num and the maximum cyclic stress range shall not exceed the constant amplitude fatigue threshold for the appropriate fatigue categories specified in cancsasnum table num .
all the calculations and associated sketches including reasons why the girders can not be shipped with the webs in the vertical plane shall be submitted by the contractor to the contract administrator for approval num days prior to shipping .
the calculations and sketches shall be signed and sealed by an engineer .
structural steel shall be stockpiled to avoid excessive stress deformation or other damage while stored .
the delivery schedule shall be provided to the contract administrator not less than num days before any shipping begins .
advertising by means of removable signing is permitted on elements only while in transit to the specified site .
painting of advertisements directly on elements is not permitted .
num erection num general erection shall be according to cancsasnum clause num .
additional permanent material may be provided to ensure that the member capacities are not exceeded during erection if approved by the contract administrator .
the additional material shall be shown in the erection diagram .
the contract administrator shall be notified in writing of the starting erection date at least num days prior to the commencement of field operations .
repairs to erected material shall only be permitted after the contract administrator has approved the repair procedure .
welding shall not be used to fill misplaced holes .
hammering that can damage or distort the members is not permitted .
num falsework falsework shall be according to opss num .
num connections holes made in the field shall be drilled or subdrilled and reamed .
any error that prevents the proper assembly and fitting of parts shall be reported and the proposed method of correction shall be submitted to the contract administrator .
corrective measures shall not commence until the submitted proposal is accepted .
bolt heads shall be located on the outside faces of the exterior girders .
bolt heads in field splices for box girders shall be located on the exterior surfaces .
num maintaining alignment and camber the bridge shall be erected to the alignment and elevations specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num bearings the installation of bearings shall be according to opss num .
num coatings coating of new structural steel shall be according to opss num .
num quality control num general quality control shall be according to cancsasnum clause num .
the acceptance standards of csa wnum for dynamically loaded structures shall also apply .
in addition to quality control measures instituted by the contractor the contractor shall be responsible for the quality control procedures specified herein .
num control of material a record for each component shall be kept to identify the material as to heat number corresponding mill test certificate and colour coding or other identifying markings .
num visual inspection the contractors inspector shall carry out full visual inspection .
num nondestructive testing num general an independent testing organization shall carry out all nondestructive testing of the welds for bridge structures by using radiographic ultrasonic magnetic particle and liquid penetrant test methods .
a nondestructive testing technician shall do the testing .
neither the technician nor the independent testing organization shall be changed without the approval of the contract administrator .
num notification of testing the independent testing organization shall be given at least num days notice of when the work is ready for testing .
such notice shall include the type and quantity of work to be tested .
num testing of welds radiographic ultrasonic or magnetic particle testing shall be carried out using procedures according to csa wnum .
the amount and location of welding to be tested shall not be less than a visual inspection of all welds .
page num rev .
date num opss num b radiographic or ultrasonic inspection of groove welds in flanges and webs of builtup girders i. flange splices in tension or stress reversal zones num of all welds .
ii .
flange splices in compression zones num of the weld of num in num splices .
iii .
web splices for num the depth from the tension flange num of the weld length for each weld .
iv .
web splices for num the depth from the compression flange num of the weld length of num in num splices .
if defects are found during testing of compression zones two additional zones shall be tested for each zone exhibiting defects .
c magnetic particle inspection of webtoflange fillet welds i. submergedarc welds num of length of each weld .
ii .
semiautomatic welds num of length of each weld .
iii .
manual welds num of length of each weld .
d magnetic particle inspection of fillet welds in connection plates and stiffeners to which diaphragms or cross bracing are attached i .
for num the depth from the tension flange num of weld length of each weld .
ii .
transverse welds on tension flanges num of weld length of each weld .
e arc strikes shall be lightly ground and checked for cracks by magnetic particle inspection .
radiographic and ultrasonic testing shall be performed prior to the assembly of the flanges to the webs .
num repair of welds the section of weld that does not meet the acceptance standards shall be removed rewelded and re examined .
num inspection reports inspection reports shall bear the seal and signature of an engineer .
copies of all inspection reports shall be submitted to the contract administrator .
num erected girder elevations the top of flange elevations and top of splice plate elevations specified in the contract documents shall be checked and the elevations recorded and submitted to the contract administrator .
num certificate of conformance upon completion of the work upon completion of erection the contractor shall submit to the contract administrator a certificate of conformance sealed and signed by a quality verification engineer .
the certificate shall state that the work has been carried out in general conformance with the signed and sealed shop details welding procedures erection diagrams erection procedure drawings and contract documents .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num quality assurance num general visual inspection nondestructive testing and sampling shall be done in the fabricating shop and in the field by an owners inspector to confirm the material supplied fabrication and erection has been done as specified in the contract documents .
the contractor shall supply electric power scaffolding protection from the weather and free access for inspection and testing of material to all aspects of the fabrication delivery and erection of the structural steel .
num basis of payment num fabrication of structural steel item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
structural steel that is stored at the fabricators premises or some other location away from the working area shall be paid for when the contractor obtains a lease from the property owner that names the owner as the tenant .
the owner shall provide the form of lease for this purpose that specifies payment of num for the term of the lease .
the contractor shall retain full responsibility for the members .
num delivery of structural steel item erection of structural steel item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
num shop and field inspection and testing the supply of electric power scaffolding protection from the weather and access for material testing and inspection shall be the contractors responsibility at no extra cost to the owner .
num bearings payment for the supply and installation of bearings shall be according to opss num .
when the contract does not contain a separate item for bearings and bearings are not paid as part of any concrete tender item according to opss num the contract price for the erection of structural steel shall include full compensation for all labour equipment and material to supply and install the bearings .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents grade and category of structural steel .
num bridge alignment and elevation .
num girder top flange and top splice plate elevations .
num opss num contains information written for provincial contracts .
to ensure completeness of municipal contract documents the designer should invoke appendix numb .
the appendix contains supplemental requirements that modify opss num so it can be used by a municipality in its contracts .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num deck girders steel method of obtaining screed elevations opsd num deck girders steel box access hatch page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numb november num for use in municipal contracts when referenced in the contract documents note this is a nonmandatory additional information appendix intended to provide supplementary requirements for the ops specification in a municipal contract when the appendix is invoked by the owner .
it is written in mandatory language to permit invoking it by reference in the contract documents .
if the appendix has not been invoked by reference in the contract documents it does not apply .
supplemental requirements for using opss num in municipal contracts opss num structural steel for bridges is amended as follows num definitions section num is amended by the deletion of the definitions for certificate of conformance and for quality verification engineer .
section num is amended by the addition of the following certificate of fabrication and installation means a document issued by the design engineer confirming that the specified components of the work are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
num shop details and welding procedures the first paragraph of clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following the contractor shall submit num sets of shop details and welding procedures to the contract administrator at least num days prior to commencement of fabrication for review .
prior to making a submission the seal and signature of an engineer shall be affixed on the shop details and welding procedures verifying that the details and procedures are consistent with the contract documents .
the second to last paragraph of clause num is deleted in its entirety .
num erection diagrams and erection procedure drawings and calculations the first paragraph of clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following the contractor shall submit num sets of the erection diagrams and erection procedure drawings and calculations to the contract administrator at least num days prior to commencement of erection for review .
prior to making a submission the seal and signature of an engineer shall be affixed on the erection diagrams and erection procedure drawings and calculations verifying that the erection diagrams and erection procedure drawings and calculations are consistent with the contract documents .
the second to last paragraph of clause num is deleted in its entirety .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numb num submissions subsection num is amended by the addition of the following num return of submissions two copies of each submission shall be returned as one of the following a stamped with the wording that allows for permission to construct .
in this case work can commence on receipt of the drawings by the contractor .
b stamped with the wording that allows for permission to construct as noted .
in this case work can commence on receipt of the drawings by the contractor .
the drawings shall be updated as noted and shall be sealed and signed by an engineer stating the drawings have been revised according to the noted comments .
c showing only required changes .
in this case the drawings shall be updated as required and the submission process repeated .
num interim inspection after fabrication of components clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following upon completion of fabrication of the components and prior to erection an engineer shall conduct an interim inspection of the work to verify that the fabrication of components has been carried out in general conformance with the shop details welding procedures and contract documents and issue the fabricator written permission to proceed with the work .
num general the second paragraph of clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following the contract administrator shall be notified in writing of the erection starting date at least num weeks prior to the commencement of field operations .
num connections the second paragraph of clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following fabrication errors that prevent the proper assembly and fitting of parts shall be reported immediately to the contract administrator .
the proposed method of correction shall be submitted to the contract administrator for review .
corrective measures shall not commence until written approval to proceed is issued by the contract administrator .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numb num certificate of conformance clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following num certificate of fabrication and installation a certificate shall be submitted for all fabrication and installation work for which working drawings are submitted .
a completed certificate of fabrication and installation shall be submitted to the contract administrator upon completion of the structure erection .
an engineers seal and signature shall be affixed on the completed certificate of fabrication and installation confirming that the work has been carried out in general conformance with the shop details welding procedures erection diagrams erection procedure drawings and contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num april num construction specification for structural wood systems table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for structural wood systems .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num compacting opss num excavating and backfilling structures opss num concrete structures opss num steel reinforcement for concrete opss num stressing systems for posttensioning ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num granular base subbase selected subgrade and backfill material opss num concrete materials and production opss num steel reinforcement for concrete opss num wood material preservative treatment and shop fabrication opss num geotextiles page num rev .
date num opss num ontario ministry of transportation publications structural manual csa standards bnum rnum wire nails spikes and staple gnumgnum rnum general requirements for rolled or welded structural quality steel structural quality steel gnummnum rnum hot dip galvanizing of irregularly shaped articles onum consolidation engineering design in wood snum canadian highway bridge design code astm international a numa nummnum num ferritic malleable iron castings a num carbon steel bolts and studs num psi tensile strength a numa nummnum steel sheet zinccoated galvanized or zinciron alloycoated galvannealed by the hot dip process a numa nummnum uncoated highstrength steel bar for prestressed concrete num definitions for the purpose of this specification definitions in opss num and the following definitions apply engineer means a professional engineer licensed by the professional engineers ontario to practice in the province of ontario .
fastener means hardware used to connect wood members or components .
girders means generally very large size beams and stringers or gluedlaminated member for use in bending with load applied to the narrow face .
groove and dap means the wood base of a woodconcrete composite deck using alternating height laminations where the higher laminate is grooved and dapped according to cancsasnum .
laminated wood deck means dimension lumber placed side by side on its narrow face to form a wood slab .
lamination means dimension lumber sizes when used in a laminated wood deck .
longitudinally laminated deck means a deck where the wood laminations are placed on edge and oriented parallel to the longitudinal centreline of the deck .
notch and spike means the wood base of a woodconcrete composite deck using uniform height laminations where all laminations have square notches reinforced with spikes according to cancsasnum .
reinforcing spike means a common nail used to reinforce the shear key in notch and spike wood concrete composite decks .
stresslaminated wood deck means a laminated wood deck which is held together by pressure applied perpendicular to the laminations using highstrength bars according to cancsasnum .
page num rev .
date num opss num stringers means sawn wood that has a minimum thickness of num mm and a width at least num mm greater than the thickness for use in bending with load applied to the narrow face .
transversely laminated deck means a deck in which the wood laminations are placed on edge and oriented transversely to the longitudinal centre line of the deck .
truss plates means a sheet of steel that has been punched by a special die where the displaced material forms sharp teeth used to connect laminations at butt joints in woodconcrete composite decks .
woodconcrete composite deck means a deck that has a laminated wood base made composite with a reinforced concrete overlay .
num design and submission requirements num submission requirements num general all working drawings stressing details and calculations shall bear the seal and signature of an engineer .
at least num days prior to commencement of work num copies of any proposal shall be submitted to the contract administrator .
when other authorities are involved in the approval of the design or construction of a highway structure the submission shall be made at least num weeks prior to commencement of the work .
one additional set is required to be submitted for each authority .
num submission of working drawings for fabrication and fastening details at least num weeks before the commencement of fabrication the contractor shall submit num complete sets of the working drawings to the contract administrator .
fabrication details shall include the following a the grade and species of all wood components and all necessary specifications .
b the type of preservative treatments to be used for all wood components including the penetration and retention required .
c details of shop fabrication .
d details of all fabrication to be performed in the field .
e details of all field cuts and field boring .
f special handling or protection details required in the shop during shipping or in the field .
g the field installation details of any temporary attachments such as running planks barricades and railings .
h protective treatment of heattreated alloy components .
i fastening details .
page num rev .
date num opss num num submission of erection procedures erection procedures shall bear the seal and signature of an engineer .
at least num weeks before commencement of erection the contractor shall submit to the contract administrator num complete sets of the erection procedures including lifting point locations details of all temporary supports and prestressing procedures .
num return of submissions two copies of each submission to be returned shall be marked as one of the following a stamped with wording that allows for permission to construct .
in this case work can commence upon the contractors receipt of the working drawings .
a copy of the working drawings shall be available at the site prior to and during construction .
b stamped with wording that allows for permission to construct as noted .
in this case work can start upon the contractors receipt of the working drawings .
the working drawings shall be updated as noted and shall have a stamp affixed that is signed by an engineer stating that the working drawings have been revised according to the noted comments .
a copy of the stamped updated working drawings shall be available at the site prior to and during construction .
c showing only required changes .
in this case the working drawings shall be updated as required and the submission process repeated .
num materials num wood wood shall be according to opss num .
num preservatives the preservatives shall be according to opss num .
for wood structural systems in bridges preservatives shall also be according to the cancsasnum and the structural manual .
num fasteners and hardware num bolts rods and lag screws bolts rods and lag screws shall be according to astm a num or csa gnumgnum .
num truss plates sheet steel for manufacturing truss plates shall be according to astm a num type a or type b .
num split ring and shear plate connectors split ring and shear plate connectors shall be according to csa onum .
page num rev .
date num opss num num glulam rivets glulam rivets shall be according to csa onum .
num nails and spikes nails and spikes shall be according to csa bnum .
num drift pins steel used for drift pins shall have minimum yield strength of num mpa and shall be according to csa gnumgnum .
num washers steel washers shall be according to csa gnumgnum .
malleable iron casting washers shall be according to astm a numm .
num highstrength bars highstrength bars shall be according to astm a numm .
num galvanizing all fasteners and hardware shall be hot dip galvanized according to csa gnum after manufacture .
heattreated alloy components shall be galvanized according to the manufacturers specifications .
num granular materials granular materials shall be according to opss num .
num geotextile geotextile shall be nonwoven class ii according to opss num table num with an fos of num m .
num concrete concrete shall be according to opss num with a minimum numday specified compressive strength of num mpa .
num steel reinforcement steel reinforcement for concrete shall be according to opss num .
num equipment num hydraulic and mechanical press hydraulic or mechanical presses capable of applying uniform pressure over the whole area of truss plates shall be used for the installation of all truss plates .
num hydraulic jack system stresslaminated wood decks the stressing equipment shall be according to opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num the hydraulic jack system shall be capable of stressing a minimum of six posttensioning locations at a time .
for longitudinally laminated decks the number of jacks shall not be less than those required to stress a length of deck equal to one half the width of the deck at the same time .
num construction num handling and storage of wood all wood shall be handled stacked and protected according to opss num .
num shop fabrication shop preparation and fabrication shall be according to opss num .
num field fabrication field fabrication shall only be permitted when specified in the contract documents .
field cut portions of treated wood members shall not be buried or placed in contact with the ground .
cutting and boring shall not puncture the internal voids of bridge decks containing the posttensioning bars .
field cuts abrasions and boreholes made in fabricated wood after preservative treatment shall be trimmed and treated to be according to opss num .
num fasteners num bolts rods and lag screws holes shall be prebored as specified in the contract documents .
holes shall be aligned and the bolts and rods shall be driven with a hammer not larger than num kg in order to make the connection .
lag screws shall be turned into the wood not driven .
holes for smooth dowels and drift pins shall be num mm less in diameter than the dowels or pins .
holes for galvanized bolts shall be bored with a bit num mm larger in diameter than the bolt .
holes for lag screws shall have the same diameter and depth as the shank of the screw plus a lead hole for the threaded portion with the diameter approximately num of the shank diameter .
washers shall be placed under all bolt heads and nuts .
excess bolt lengths of more than num mm shall be cut off to a level where at least num threads are still extending beyond the nut .
the cut ends of galvanized bolts shall receive num coats of zinc rich paint .
after final tightening all nuts shall be checked and threads burred effectively with a pointing tool to prevent loosening .
field cuts or damaged surfaces shall be touchedup with a zinc rich paint within num hours of exposure .
num nailing for laminated decks gauge lines for horizontal nailing shall be followed .
nails in the upper gauge line shall be inclined slightly downward and those in the lower gauge line inclined slightly upward .
the nailheads shall be flush and well set so that they do not protrude from the surface .
power nailing devices shall be permitted for stress laminated wood decks according to the cancsasnum .
page num rev .
date num opss num num wood in cribs excavation shall be according to opss num .
cribs shall be erected to the dimensions shown in the contract documents with each layer horizontal before placing the next .
wood with the least surface oils shall be located in or nearest to the water .
wood which appears to be more heavily treated shall be placed at the back of the crib against the ground .
the cribs shall be filled to num m below the top of the crib with boulder or rock fragments having dimensions in the range num to num mm .
the top metre of the cribs shall be filled with granular a or b .
the granular material shall be protected against migration into the rock layer by the placement of geotextile fabric between the rock and the granular layers .
the geotextile shall be placed uniformly free of tears and as specified in the contract documents .
all seams shall have a minimum overlap of num mm and the geotextile shall be fixed to prevent movement .
filling of the cribs shall be such that distortion is avoided .
fill material shall be placed in even horizontal layers and shall be compacted according to the requirements of opss num .
num placement of members num stringers and girders stringers and girders shall be placed and adjusted when necessary so that full and accurate bearing is achieved on the supports .
sawn wood members shall be oriented so that elevation differences between adjacent members due to natural curvatures along their lengths are minimized .
num laminated wood deck each lamination shall be placed in the bridge so that initially full and accurate bearing is achieved .
subsequently the alignment of predrilled holes in stresslaminated decks or slots in composite wood concrete decks shall be achieved .
finally the laminations shall be brought to position by nailing .
num stresslaminated wood decks num stressing hydraulic jacks shall be used for stressing the stresslaminated wood decks .
for transversely laminated decks all tendons shall be uniformly stressed at the same time .
highstrength bars shall be stressed to the forces shown in the contract documents .
the tensioning shall be performed in the following sequence a initial stressing at time of construction of deck .
the initial stressing shall consist of two stressing operations not less than num hours apart .
b numst restressing not less than num weeks after completion of the initial stressing .
c numnd restressing not less than num weeks after the numst restressing .
the allowable variation of prestressing force in each bar shall be num .
the contract administrator may increase the time periods between restressings when the ambient temperature is below num c. page num rev .
date num opss num num securing of deck the deck shall not be secured to the supporting members except as specified in the segmental construction clause until after the numst restressing .
when a deck requires restraint against buckling during stressing the restraint shall not inhibit free movement of the deck perpendicular to the laminates .
num segmental construction when a deck is to be constructed in segments each segment shall undergo all restressings as specified in the stressing clause before being installed .
the method of installation of the segments shall be such that the final assembled deck is continuous .
when the method of installation requires the temporary release of stressing in a segment in order to facilitate installation that segment shall then be stressed twice before any segments are attached to it .
the first stressing shall be at the time of installation of that segment .
the second stressing shall be performed no sooner than num x t after the first stressing where t equals the total time period the segment was not under stress .
num woodconcrete composite decks num wood base construction woodconcrete interface construction of the deck shall be according to cancsasnum .
num concrete concrete placement and testing shall be according to opss num .
num steel reinforcement steel reinforcement for concrete shall be placed according to opss num and cancsasnum .
num reinforcing spikes reinforcing spikes for notch and spike construction shall be driven into the top of the laminations in every notch of alternate laminations .
these spikes shall be inclined at about num from the vertical toward the nearest internal support or end support .
if the notches in adjacent laminations are staggered by more than num mm then all laminations involved shall contain reinforcing spikes .
reinforcing spikes shall be a minimum of num mm longer than the full vertical depth of the wood deck .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num wood in cribs measurement of wood in cribs shall be by volume in cubic metres using dressed dimensions of the wood with no deductions for grooves notches and holes .
page num rev .
date num opss num num plan quantity measurement when measurement is by plan quantity such measurement shall be based on the units shown in the clause under actual measurement .
num basis of payment num wood in structure item wood in cribs item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
when rock is available on the contract no deduction shall be made from the tender item rock excavation grading for the quantity of rock used in cribs .
num excavation for wood cribs when excavation for wood cribs overlaps excavation for other work measurement of the overlapping excavation shall be according to the specification for such other work .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa april num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the following should be specified in the contract documents allowable field fabrication .
num prebored holes for bolts rods and lag screws .
num crib details .
num geotextile placement details .
num stressing forces for highstrength bars .
num the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
page num rev .
date num opss num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for metal traffic barriers and metal railings for structures opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents notice to users of opss num construction specification for prestressed concrete precast girders opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for stressing systems for posttensioning opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented mto general conditions of contract and general construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented ops general conditions of contract and general construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num moved as part of revision number num volume num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for coating structural steel systems opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents notice to users of opss num construction specification for embedded work in structures for electrical systems opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for waterproofing bridge decks with hot applied asphalt membrane opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for sign support structures opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents notice to users of opss num construction specification for modular bridge structures for temporary installations opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for formwork and falsework table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment not used num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment not used num basis of payment appendices numa commentary numb supplemental requirements for using opss num in municipal contracts num scope this specification covers the design and construction requirements for formwork falsework and temporary supports used in the construction and rehabilitation of structures .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num compacting opss num deep foundations opss num structural steel ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num aggregates base subbase selected subgrade and backfill material opss num concrete materials and production opss num corrugated steel pipe products page num rev .
date num opss num csa standards anum design of concrete structures gnum general requirements for rolled or welded structural quality steelstructural quality steel gnummnum hot dip galvanizing of irregularly shaped articles onummnum rnum engineering design in wood onum douglas fir plywood onum structural gluedlaminated timber snum steel structures for buildings snumsnum strength design in aluminumcommentary on csa snum strength design in aluminum snum rnum falsework for construction purposes snummnum rnum concrete formwork national research council nrc national building code of canadanum num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply bulkhead means the vertical form that supports the end width of a deck pour of concrete .
certificate of conformance means a document issued by the quality verification engineer confirming that the specified components of the work are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
culvert means a structure that provides an opening through an embankment and in which roadway loads are distributed to the structure through fill or that is designated as a culvert in the contract documents .
engineer means a professional engineer licensed by the professional engineers ontario to practice in the province of ontario .
exposed surface means all external formed surfaces not to be covered by backfill material .
falsework means any temporary structural support including bracing used to support all or part of the formwork or of the structure during its construction or rehabilitation until it becomes selfsupporting .
formwork means the mould into which the fresh concrete is placed .
foundation means the ground immediately below the mudsills that supports the falsework or that portion of ground supporting the falsework piles .
grade means a for steel the designation of the quality of the steel that can be determined by referring to the appropriate csa standard or by specimen testing .
b for wood the designation of the quality of a piece of wood that can be determined by referring to the appropriate csa standard .
hardwood means wood with a degree of hardness at least equal to a species such as hard maple oak or beech .
page num rev .
date num opss num joist means one of a series of horizontal members usually with narrow face up to which form material is fastened .
ledger means a horizontal flexural member usually supporting joists and resting on vertical supports .
mudsill means a mat of timbers or a small footing on the ground used as a base from which the remainder of the falsework structure is erected .
quality verification engineer qve means an engineer retained by the contractor qualified to provide the services specified in the contract documents .
shoring means a system of vertical or inclined supports for forms or structure components .
shoring may be wood or metal posts scaffoldtype frames or various patented members or other system of falsework .
stayinplace forms means forms that are not removed .
structure means any bridge culvert tunnel retaining wall wharf dock or guideway .
stud means one of a series of usually vertical members used in framing to support the plywood or formwork fastened to it .
timber means felled trees or logs suitable for conversion by sawing or otherwise or a piece of sawn lumber having a minimum nominal dimension greater than or equal to num mm .
wood means lumber and timber .
num design and submission requirements num design requirements num formwork design formwork design shall be according to cancsa snum .
num falsework design falsework design shall be according to csa snum and as specified herein .
the allowable stresses for wood design shall be according to csacannum .
the allowable stresses for structural steel design shall be according to csa snum except the stresses allowed may be increased by num for temporary loading .
deflection of beams shall be limited to lnum where l is the span .
the loading for deflection shall be the weight of concrete and formwork .
when deflection of a beam is num mm or more provision shall be made to compensate for deflection .
when provision is made to compensate for deflection the deflection of the beams shall be limited to lnum where l is the span .
the tolerance shall be num mm .
aluminum components shall be designed according to cannumsnum .
concrete components shall be designed according to csa anum .
page num rev .
date num opss num where scaffolding fabricated shoring or patented accessories are used the design shall be according to the manufacturers recommendations .
where another authority is involved any additional requirements specified by the authority shall also be satisfied .
num vertical loadings vertical loading shall be a the weight of the concrete being supported or num knmnum on the horizontal projected area of the formwork whichever is the greater .
b the weight of normal concrete as it is placed shall be considered as a liquid having a weight of num knmnum .
c the weight of the formwork supported by the falsework or num knmnum of the horizontal projected area whichever is greater .
d the weight of workers equipment and tools that is to be supported during the concrete placing and finishing operations or num knmnum of horizontal projected area of formwork whichever is greater .
when motorized placing equipment is used this minimum load shall be increased to num knmnum .
e load due to any special conditions of construction likely to occur .
f loads for temporary supports as specified .
num horizontal loading the horizontal loadings shall include the effects of environmental factors such as wind the rate of placing of concrete the temperature of the concrete the effect of vibration of the concrete the consistency of the mix and other pertinent factors .
wind pressures shall be based on those listed in the national building code of canada using num probability for falsework and num probability for formwork with a gust factor of num and a minimum wind pressure of num kpa .
notwithstanding the above a minimum transverse and longitudinal force of num of vertical loading or num knm of deck edge applied at the middepth of the deck whichever is greater shall be used .
num tower leg loads the vertical loads on the tower legs may be based on simple span assumptions .
the loads supported by a tower leg may be assumed to be those loads applied to the area immediately above the tower leg that is bounded by lines located one halfway between each of the bays adjacent to the tower leg being considered .
when locating towers the following criteria shall apply the maximum design load on one leg of a frame shall not exceed four times the design load on the other leg under full or partial loading conditions .
the maximum design load on one of the two frames making up a tower shall not exceed four times the design load on the opposite frame under any loading condition .
page num rev .
date num opss num num minimum bracing requirements the minimum bracing requirements are as follows a connections between joists and ledgers every fourth joist shall be connected to a ledger .
ledgers on top of frames shall be axially continuous across the shoring system to evenly distribute horizontal forces to individual scaffold towers below .
ledgers with a splice designed to take the axial load are considered axially continuous .
b bracing in the transverse direction when the shoring height is composed of three frames or the shoring height is more than three times the tower width or the total shoring height is more than num m one horizontal brace made continuous shall be installed on one face of each tower .
the brace shall be located at the midheight of a twoframe tower and at the top of the second frame for a threeframe tower .
when shoring towers are adequately braced against transverse movement by tying to an adjacent structure or adjacent tower the above heighttowidth restriction applies only to the tower grouping .
when the shoring height is composed of more than three frames at least one horizontal brace made continuous and one diagonal brace made continuous shall be attached to one transverse face of each tower for every three frames of shoring height .
in addition the maximum spacing of the horizontal brace shall be three times the tower width .
the horizontal brace shall be located near the top of a frame .
diagonal braces on adjacent towers shall be installed in opposite directions .
when superelevation is num or greater a horizontal transverse brace shall be attached to one tower face of the top frame in addition to the bracing required by the preceding paragraph .
when the shoring height is greater than num m guy wires shall be installed .
the spacing of the guy wires shall not be greater than num m horizontally .
c bracing in the longitudinal direction when the shoring height is composed of three frames or the total height is more than num m one horizontal brace made continuous shall be installed spaced horizontally not more than num m apart .
the brace shall be located at the top of the first frame of a twoframe tower and the top of the second frame of a threeframe tower .
when the shoring height is composed of four frames or more horizontal braces and diagonal braces made continuous shall be attached on a tower and spaced horizontally not more than num m apart .
the lowest brace shall be located no higher than the third frame and additional braces shall be spaced vertically at the top of every third frame thereafter .
when the bridge is on a longitudinal grade of num or greater braces parallel to the grade shall be attached to one tower face of the top frame and spaced not more than num m apart horizontally .
d tie back bracing falsework opening towers the falsework opening towers shall be longitudinally braced to two rows of scaffold towers behind them according to the bracing in the longitudinal direction requirements above regardless of the height and shall be continuously braced transversely .
page num rev .
date num opss num num mudsills the mudsills shall be designed such that the settlement of mudsills shall not exceed num mm .
num submission requirements num working drawings num general working drawings shall be submitted for all falsework used in the construction or rehabilitation of structures except for culverts less than num m in span .
working drawings are required for the following formwork a inside forms for posttensioned decks b bulkheads in posttensioned decks num m or greater in height c all columns and walls num m or greater in height of abutments piers and retaining walls .
working drawings for other formwork shall only be submitted when specified in the contract documents .
formwork and falsework shall not be supported by braced to or come in contact with another structure unless written permission is received from the owner of the other structure .
in order to obtain written permission num copies of working drawings shall be submitted to the owner of the other structure showing the support locations and imposed loads as they are applied to that structure and certify that the structure can safely support all the imposed loads from the contractors method of construction .
prior to a submission an engineers seal and signature shall be affixed on the working drawings verifying that the drawings are consistent with the contract documents .
during formwork and falsework construction the contractor shall have a copy of the working drawings at the site .
num falsework the contractor shall submit num sets of falsework working drawings to the contract administrator at least num day prior to commencement of erection of falsework for information purposes only .
prior to making a submission the seals and signatures of a design engineer and a designchecking engineer shall be affixed on the working drawings verifying that the drawings are consistent with the contract documents .
where multidiscipline engineering work is depicted on the same working drawing and the design or designchecking engineer or both are unable to seal and sign the working drawing for all aspects of the work the drawing shall be sealed and signed by as many additional design and designchecking engineers as necessary .
when other authorities are involved num set of working drawings shall be submitted for each authority at least num weeks prior to the commencement of falsework construction .
the working drawings for the falsework for each structure shall include all details of all falsework to be erected .
page num rev .
date num opss num falsework working drawings shall include at least the following a longitudinal lateral vertical live impact and anticipated construction loads used in the design .
b allowable bearing capacity of the soil beneath the mudsills .
c maximum column loads .
d deflection diagrams for beams having a deflection of num mm or more .
e the grade and actual size of all structural materials .
f posts connections bracing and welding sufficiently detailed to demonstrate compliance with the structural analysis and erection requirements .
g fully detailed frame shoring .
h type and mass of moving or stationary equipment to be supported by the falsework .
i sequence method and rate of concrete placement .
j all proprietary equipment sufficiently identified to demonstrate compliance with the structural analysis and erection requirements .
k full details and locations of all splices .
l method of maintaining rotational and lateral stability of bridge girders .
m vertical stiffening details and lateral restraint for ledgers and subledgers .
n lateral restraint details for falsework supporting beams spanning openings .
o fluid concrete loads assumed for design purposes .
p location of screed rail supports and design load .
q anticipated settlement of falsework including settlement of mudsill .
num formwork the contractor shall submit num sets of formwork working drawings to the contract administrator at least num day prior to commencement of erection of formwork for information purposes only .
prior to making a submission the seals and signatures of a design engineer and a designchecking engineer shall be affixed on the working drawings verifying that the drawings are consistent with the contract documents and sound engineering practices .
where multidiscipline engineering work is depicted on the same working drawing and the design or designchecking engineer or both are unable to seal and sign the working drawing for all aspects of the work the drawing shall be sealed and signed by as many additional design and designchecking engineers as necessary .
when other authorities are involved num set of working drawings shall be submitted for each authority at least num weeks prior to the commencement of falsework construction .
the working drawings shall show all necessary design and construction details including the grade and size of materials used and the pressure diagrams used in the design .
page num rev .
date num opss num num foundation information num falsework foundation design report three copies of a falsework foundation design report shall be submitted to the contract administrator .
the report shall bear the seal and signature of an engineer shall include the rationale used to determine the soil bearing capacity and shall include the following information a the soil bearing capacity .
b site preparation details .
a falsework foundation design report is not required when the mudsill bears on mass concrete poured directly on bedrock or when the mudsill bears on compacted granular a of depth num m or less placed directly on bedrock .
num interim inspection after construction of falsework foundation upon completion of the falsework foundation and prior to installation of falsework the quality verification engineer shall conduct an interim inspection of the work to verify that the falsework foundation has been constructed according to the falsework foundation design report and issue the contractor written permission to proceed with the work .
num proprietary shoring forms and accessories when proprietary shoring forms and accessories are used the manufacturers allowable loads with supporting test data shall be submitted with the working drawings .
num splices for stayinplace forms details of the method of joining round stayinplace forms shall be shown on the working drawings .
num revised submissions when falsework design considerations or field conditions necessitate amendments to the falsework revisions shall be resubmitted according to the working drawings clause .
num materials num general forms and falsework shall be constructed of wood metal or concrete .
num wood wood shall be according to csacannumonum .
num plywood plywood for formwork shall be num ply num mm minimum thickness exterior grade douglas fir plywood according to csa onum .
page num rev .
date num opss num for exposed surfaces the finish side shall be medium density overlay plywood however this finish is not required in the following locations a the underside of a deck between girders .
b the ends of decks .
c the face of ballast walls .
d the internal faces of a culvert .
num structural gluedlaminated timber structural gluedlaminated timber shall be exterior grade according to cancsa onum .
num metal structural steel shall be according to cancsa gnumgnum and be of the grade shown on the working drawings .
aluminum shall be according to csasnum and be of the alloy and temper shown on the working drawings .
used metal shall be in good condition .
all previous fabrication adversely affecting the required strength shall be corrected .
num concrete concrete shall be according to opss num .
num accessories all accessories used shall comply with the details shown on the working drawings or with the recommendations of the manufacturer of the specified accessory .
deck hangers and hardware left in place either exposed or embedded in concrete within num mm of its surface shall be hot dip galvanized .
all form ties left in place in barrier and parapet walls shall be hot dip galvanized coated with an approved material or noncorrodible .
where stainless steel reinforcement is used within the form all form ties left in place in barrier and parapet walls shall be of stainless steel type num .
the maximum diameter of plastic cones for form ties shall be num mm .
hot dip galvanizing shall be according to cancsa gnumm .
num void tubes corrugated steel pipe shall be according to opss num and need not be coated .
the thickness of the plate in the corrugated pipe shall be as follows a diameters equal to or less than num mm num mm thick .
b diameters over num mm to num mm num mm thick .
page num rev .
date num opss num steel void forms shall have an outside diameter top of corrugation to top of corrugation equal to the diameter of the voids shown on the working drawings .
paper fibre tubes shall be coated spiral wound wood fibre paperboard manufactured with waterproof glue .
num granular a granular a shall be according to opss num .
num construction num formwork num general forms shall be smooth clean free from warps splits holes and bulges and constructed and maintained to be mortar tight .
num exposed surfaces forms for exposed surfaces shall be new except that forms may be reused for exposed surfaces providing their condition is such as to produce a surface equal to one that would be attained using new materials .
where possible plywood used on exposed surfaces shall be in full sheets and except when used to form the underside of deck slabs for slabongirder construction shall be so arranged that the face grain is perpendicular to the studs or joists .
num studs joists and decking studs and joists shall be spaced not more than num mm on centres .
edges of abutting sheets shall be nailed to the same stud or joist with num mm nails at not more than num mm centres .
when used to form the underside of deck slabs in posttensioned slab and rigid frame bridges the joints between sheets abutting over joists shall be staggered a minimum of num mm .
when prefabricated form panels are used adjacent panels shall be placed such that the joints are maintained flush .
num form release oil nonstaining form release oil shall be applied to the faces of forms against which concrete is to be placed .
the form release oil shall be applied before placing reinforcement .
num ties when internal form ties are used concrete cover to any metal left upon removal of the forms shall be num mm minimum .
all ties securing stayinplace forms in position and extending below the deck soffit shall be loosened before any stressing commences .
holes left in the deck soffit after removal of hanger coil rods shall be left open .
num exposed corners all exposed corners on concrete work and the edges of the box void slabs on the soffit of the structure shall be chamfered .
the chamfer shall have a vertical and horizontal dimension of num mm .
page num rev .
date num opss num num stayinplace forms stayinplace forms shall only be used when specified in the contract documents or under the following conditions a round void tubes of metal in castinplace hollow prestressed concrete decks and round void tubes of metal or paper fibre in precast prestressed hollow slab deck units .
where round voids are used individual lengths shall be joined by an inner or outer sleeve or other method .
details of the method of joining shall be submitted to the contract administrator for information purposes only .
b box voids in precast concrete box girder deck units less than num m in depth .
num falsework num general sound adjustable falsework shall be built such that the structure remains true to line and grade after anticipated settlement .
mudsills shall not be placed until the contractor has a set of falsework working drawings on site .
the use of tack welds for hangers or other attachments to structural steel is not allowed except that tack welds may be used on shear studs where it is not detrimental to the connection between the stud and the structural steel .
all welding of structural steel shall be according to opss num .
num foundation work the falsework structure shall be supported on mudsills structure footings or piles .
where the existing ground is unable to take the applied loads piles driven according to opss num shall be used to support the falsework .
where a timber pile in a falsework bent is too short the contractor shall cut off all the piling in the bent to the same elevation and cap the bent .
an extension bent shall then be constructed .
a pile splice shall only be used with the approval of the contract administrator .
where steel piles are used in a falsework bent a splice designed and fabricated for num of the pile section may be used to make up the required length of any pile .
all caps shall be continuous for the entire length of the bent or sliced as approved by the contract administrator .
when splices in caps are approved they shall be located at the centreline of a pile .
for traffic openings a minimum horizontal space of num m shall be provided between the back face of the concrete barrier and the front edge of the mudsill .
a levelling pad consisting of a minimum of num mm of granular a compacted according to opss num or of poured in place concrete shall be placed under mudsills on bedrock to provide a level surface .
where the ground is sloped and the contractor elects to excavate steps the slopes between the horizontal steps shall not be steeper than numhnumv .
a minimum horizontal width of num mm shall be provided between the mudsill and the top edge of slope .
page num rev .
date num opss num reduction of the bearing capacity of existing ground or compacted fill due to water or ice shall be prevented by suitable drainage or protection .
num wooden shoring all wooden posts shall be solid not built up .
where splicing is necessary the posts shall be cut square and the two pieces shall be in full contact over the splice .
scabbing shall be provided on all four faces of a post to be spliced .
each post shall be braced in two directions both above and below the splice immediately adjacent to the scabbing .
splices on adjacent posts shall be staggered .
splicing of round posts shall not be permitted .
bracing material shall be at least num x num mm lumber except for cross bracing for side forms where num x num mm lumber may be used .
bracing shall be nailed to each post with at least two num mm nails for num x num mm lumber and two num mm nails for num x num mm lumber .
splicing of bracing shall not be permitted .
wedges used for purposes of falsework adjustment or to facilitate removal shall be hardwood .
num metal shoring erection of metal frame shoring shall be according to csa snum .
the maximum extension of jacks shall not exceed the lesser of the manufacturers recommendations or num mm .
shims used for levelling mudsills shall be fir plywood or solid lumber .
wedges used to provide full bearing in uheads shall be hardwood .
num temporary supports the construction of temporary supports shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num screed rail supports in slab on girder construction in slabongirder construction screed rail supports shall not be located outside the centreline of the web of the outside girders .
when screed rail supports are not located over the webs of girders a system of support shall be installed such that the deflection of the system under the load of the screed machine shall not exceed num mm .
num certificate of conformance certificates of conformance shall be submitted for all formwork and falsework for which working drawings are submitted .
a completed certificate of conformance shall be submitted to the contract administrator upon completion of formwork and falsework installation and before any concreting takes place .
the qualification verification engineers seal and signature shall be affixed on the completed certificate of conformance confirming that the formwork and falsework have been installed in general conformance with the working drawings and contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num removal of formwork falsework and temporary supports all formwork and falsework shall be removed .
when authorized by the contract administrator piles used for falsework may be left in place provided the top is num m below the finished grade or ground level or is at least num m below a streambed .
the method and sequence of removal of the formwork and falsework shall be such that it permits the concrete to take up the stresses gradually .
falsework shall not be removed from posttensioned structures until the posttensioning is completed .
when a component is not posttensioned falsework may be removed after the concrete has attained a minimum strength of num mpa .
formwork shall not be removed until the concrete has attained a minimum strength of num mpa however formwork for castinplace barrier walls and parapet walls may be removed num hours after completion of the placement .
where insulation is used the side forms may be slackened off num hours after concrete placement to help control temperature .
removal of temporary supports shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num basis of payment num formwork and falsework the contract price for the concrete tender item directly associated with formwork and falsework shall include full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
num temporary support item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents stayinplace forms .
num construction of temporary supports .
num removal of temporary supports .
num the design should determine if the following is required and if so it should be specified in the contract documents submissions of other formwork working drawings .
num opss num contains information written for provincial contracts .
to ensure completeness of municipal contract documents the designer should invoke appendix numb .
the appendix contains supplemental requirements that modify opss num so it can be used by a municipality in its contracts .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings opsd num deck girders concrete method of obtaining screed elevations opsd num deck girders steel method of obtaining screed elevations opsd num deck round voids form supports and tie downs opsd num deck round voids drains opsd num deck trapezoid voids drains opsd num deck drip channel opsd num falsework clearance to traffic lanes opsd num figures in concrete warning message layout opsd num figures in concrete warning message letters opsd num figures in concrete site number and date layout page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numb november num for use in municipal contracts when referenced in the contract documents note this is a nonmandatory additional information appendix intended to provide supplementary requirements for the ops specification in a municipal contract when the appendix is invoked by the owner .
it is written in mandatory language to permit invoking it by reference in the contract documents .
if the appendix has not been invoked by reference in the contract documents it does not apply .
supplemental requirements for using opss num in municipal contracts opss num formwork and falsework is amended as follows num definitions section num is amended by the deletion of the definitions for certificate of conformance and for quality verification engineer .
section num is amended by the addition of the following certificate of installation means a document issued by the design engineer or designchecking engineer confirming that the specified components of the work are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
num falsework the first paragraph of clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following the contractor shall submit num sets of working drawings to the contract administrator at least num days prior to commencement of the erection of falsework .
prior to making a submission the seals and signatures of a design engineer and a designchecking engineer shall be affixed on the working drawings verifying that the drawings are consistent with the contract documents .
num formwork the first paragraph of clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following the contractor shall submit num sets of working drawings to the contract administrator at least num days prior to commencement of the erection of formwork .
prior to making a submission the seals and signatures of a design engineer and a designchecking engineer shall be affixed on the working drawings verifying that the drawings are consistent with the contract documents .
num interim inspection after construction of falsework clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following upon completion of the falsework foundation and prior to installation of falsework the design engineer or the designchecking engineer shall conduct an interim inspection of the work to verify that the falsework foundation has been constructed according to the falsework foundation design report and issue the contractor written permission to proceed with the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numb num submission requirements subsection num is amended by the addition of the following num return of submissions two copies of each submission shall be returned as one of the following a stamped with the wording that allows for permission to construct .
in this case work can commence on receipt of the drawings by the contractor .
b stamped with the wording that allows for permission to construct as noted .
in this case work can start on receipt of the drawings by the contractor .
the drawings shall be updated as noted and shall be sealed and signed by the design engineer and the designchecking engineer stating the drawings have been revised according to the noted comments .
c showing only required changes .
in this case the drawings shall be updated as required and the submission process repeated .
num certificate of conformance clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following num certificate of installation certificates of installation shall be submitted for all formwork and falsework for which working drawings are submitted .
a completed certificate of installation shall be submitted to the contract administrator upon completion of the formwork and falsework installation prior to the placement of concrete .
the design engineer or designchecking engineers seal and signature shall be affixed on the completed certificate of installation confirming that the formwork and falsework have been installed in general conformance with the working drawings and contract documents .
the certificate of installation shall also certify that the interim milestone inspections have been completed as specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num notice to users of opss num construction specification for deck joint assemblies preformed seals joint fillers joint seals joint sealing compounds and waterstops structures opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented mto general conditions of contract and general construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented ops general conditions of contract and general construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num moved as part of revision number num volume num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for installation of bearings opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for structure rehabilitation concrete removal opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented mto general conditions of contract and general construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented ops general conditions of contract and general construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num moved num notice to users of opss num construction specification for abrasive blast cleaning concrete construction opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents opss num removed in revision number num num opss num removed in revision number num num notice to users of opss num construction specification for structure rehabilitation concrete patches and overlays opss num has been removed from this ops volume the provincial version of opss num is now in ops volume num provincialoriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.prov num the municipal version of opss num is now in ops volume num municipaloriented general and construction specifications and designated as opss.muni num use of either of the specifications is as specified in the contract documents ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for structure rehabilitation shotcrete table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment num construction num quality assurance num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for concrete structure rehabilitation using normal and silica fume shotcrete .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications .
ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num concrete structures opss num steel reinforcement for concrete opss num formwork and falsework opss num structure rehabilitation concrete removal opss num abrasive blast cleaning concrete construction opss num crack repair concrete ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num aggregates concrete opss num cementing materials opss num water opss num burlap opss num white pigmented curing compounds for concrete page num rev .
date num opss num ontario ministry of transportation publications mto laboratory testing manual lsnum method of test for bond strength by tensile load csa standards anumc num obtaining and testing drilled cores for compressive strength testing part of anumanum concrete materials and methods of concrete constructionmethods of test and standard practices for concrete astm international a numa nummnum zinc hotdip galvanized coatings on iron and steel products a numa nummnum zinc coating hotdip on iron and steel hardware a numa nummnum steel welded wire reinforcement plain for concrete c num standard test method for electrical indication of concretes ability to resist chloride ion penetration num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply cold weather means those conditions when the air temperature is at or below num c. it is also considered to exist when the air temperature is at or is likely to fall below num c within num hours after concrete placement .
temperature refers to shade air temperature .
drymix shotcrete means shotcrete in which the mixing water is added at the nozzle .
hot weather means those conditions when the air temperature is at or above num c. it is also considered to exist when the air temperature is at or is likely to rise above num c within num hours after concrete placement .
temperature refers to shade air temperature .
nozzle operator means the worker on the shotcrete crew who manipulates the nozzle controls consistency with the dry process and controls final placement of the material .
rehabilitation means any modification alteration or improvement to a structure or its components that is designed to correct defects or deficiencies .
structure means any bridge culvert tunnel retaining wall wharf dock guide way or any part thereof .
wetmix shotcrete means shotcrete in which all of the ingredients including water are mixed before introduction into the delivery hose .
compressed air is introduced to the material flow at the nozzle .
num design and submission requirements num submission requirements num mix design the mix proportions and the name of the supplier of the prebagged shotcrete mix shall be forwarded to the contract administrator for review at least num days prior to the application of shotcrete .
in addition the contractor shall submit with the mix design the following page num rev .
date num opss num a a certificate from the cement supplier stating that the cement is certified to be free from early stiffening tendencies according to the requirements of opss num. b performance test data from the manufacturer of the prebagged material or test data from another contract verifying that the material meets the requirements of this specification .
all supporting test data shall not be more than num months old at the time the mix design was submitted to the contract administrator .
num shotcrete equipment a list of equipment and accessories to be used including the following information shall be submitted to the contract administrator at least num days prior to the application of shotcrete a equipment type and capacity .
b nozzle type and size .
c continuous feed predampener details only when the dry mix process is used .
num nozzle operator the names of the nozzle operators and proof of their qualification shall be submitted to the contract administrator at least num days prior to the commencement of the shotcreting operation .
num cold weather protection details of the method to be used in the production of the shotcrete to control the shotcrete temperature shall be submitted to the contract administrator at least num days prior to the commencement of the shotcreting operation in cold weather .
the submission shall be accompanied by samples of insulation if requested by the contract administrator and shall contain the following information a weather conditions for which the description applies .
b type of insulation metric r value and number of layers to be used .
c description of housing and heating .
d method of withdrawal of protection to avoid sudden temperature change in the shotcrete .
e method of ensuring cold weather protection measures are maintained and effective when work requiring adjustment to the protective measure is being performed .
num hot weather shotcreting a description of the method to be used in the production of the shotcrete to control the shotcrete temperature shall be submitted to the contract administrator num days prior to the application of shotcrete in hot weather .
num curing a description of the methods to be used for fogmisting and curing including equipment and procedures shall be submitted to the contract administrator num days prior to the application of shotcrete .
page num rev .
date num opss num num return of submissions two copies of each submission shall be returned as one of the following a stamped with the wording reviewed .
in this case work can commence on receipt of the drawings by the contractor .
b stamped with the wording reviewed as noted .
in this case work can start on receipt of the reviewed submission by the contractor .
the submission shall be updated as noted and shall be sealed and signed by the design engineer and the designchecking engineer stating the submission has been revised according to the noted comments .
c showing only required changes .
in this case the submission shall be updated as required and the submission process repeated .
num materials num anchors anchors for the attachment of the welded steel wire fabric to the concrete surface shall be galvanized according to astm a numa numm and be of adequate length and strength to resist a pullout force of num kn .
num burlap burlap shall be according to opss num .
num cementing material cementing material shall be according to opss num .
num curing compound curing compound shall be according to opss num .
num fine aggregate fine aggregate shall be according to opss num .
num formwork formwork shall be according to opss num .
num proprietary patching materials proprietary patching materials shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num shotcrete num general the shotcrete mix shall be supplied prebagged .
the prebagged mix shall contain cementing materials and fine aggregate .
the bags shall be maintained in a dry condition up to the time of its use and shall be stored within a temperature range of num to num c. any bags that contain lumps of prehydrated shotcrete or appear to be frozen or otherwise damaged shall not be used in the contract .
page num rev .
date num opss num each bag shall be stamped with the name of the manufacturer mix identification and date of packaging .
the prebagged mix shall be used within num months of packaging .
num normal shotcrete the shotcrete shall have a minimum numday compressive strength of num mpa .
the water to cement ratio by mass shall not be greater than num when the wet mix process is used .
num silica fume shotcrete the silica fume shotcrete shall have a minimum numday compressive strength of num mpa and maximum rapid chloride permeability at num days of num coulombs .
the shotcrete mix shall contain num silica fume by mass of total cementing materials .
num tie wire coated tie wire according to opss num shall be used .
num water water shall be according to opss num .
num welded steel wire fabric welded steel wire fabric shall be welded galvanized steel of num x num mm mw num x mw num and shall be according to astm a numa numm .
galvanizing shall be according to astm a numa numm .
num equipment num compressor air blasting the compressor for air blasting shall have a minimum capacity of num mnummin .
the compressed air shall be free from oil and other contaminants .
num fog misting equipment the contractor shall provide fog misting equipment for curing of the shotcrete .
fog misting equipment shall include at least one hand held portable unit .
num hand finishing equipment where hand finishing is required only magnesium wood or sponge rubber floats shall be used .
num mixers num dry mix process a continuous feed predampener shall be used .
the predampening equipment shall be capable of bringing the dry bagged material to consistent and suitable moisture content and shall operate at sufficient capacity to allow work to proceed without delays .
the delivery equipment shall be capable of discharging the mixture into the delivery hose at a rate sufficient to ensure a continuous smooth stream of uniformly mixed shotcrete mixture being delivered to the nozzle at the velocity required .
page num rev .
date num opss num the discharge nozzle shall be equipped with a manually operated water injection system for directing an even distribution of liquid through the mixture .
the liquid valve shall be capable of ready adjustment to vary the quantity of liquid and shall be convenient for the nozzle operator .
the nozzle shall be capable of delivering a conical discharge stream with uniform appearance throughout .
the liquid pressure at the discharge nozzle shall be sufficiently greater than the operating air pressure to assure that the liquid is thoroughly mixed with the other materials .
the liquid pressure shall be uniform .
num wet mix process the mixing equipment shall be capable of thoroughly mixing the specified materials in sufficient quantity to maintain continuous placing .
the delivery equipment shall be capable of delivering the premixed materials accurately uniformly and continuously through the delivery hose .
the wet mix process shall not be used for silica fume shotcrete .
num straight edge the straight edge shall be num m long commercially made and metal .
num construction num general typical locations and areas of repair are as specified in the contract documents however the actual locations and extent of repair shall be as determined during the layout of the repair areas according to opss num and as directed by the contract administrator .
num operational constraints the contract administrator shall be notified of the intent to apply shotcrete num business days prior to the commencement of the shotcreting operation .
the application of shotcrete shall not proceed until the concrete surface preparation has been completed according to this specification and verified by the contract administrator .
prior to shotcreting the contractor shall demonstrate to the contract administrator that the substrate temperatures meet the requirements specified in the contract documents by measuring and recording the substrate temperatures using a contact thermometer or infrared thermometer .
shotcreting shall not be carried out when the air temperature or existing concrete surface temperature is below num c or is likely to fall below num c or is above num c or likely to rise above num c throughout the duration of the shotcreting operation unless protection is provided in accordance with the contractors submitted plan .
the air in contact with the repaired surfaces shall be maintained at temperatures above num c for at least num hours after the application of shotcrete .
the use of unvented heaters shall be prohibited .
shotcreting operations shall be suspended during adverse weather conditions unless protection is provided .
prior to seasonal shutdown operations shall be scheduled in such a manner to ensure that the shotcreting operations are completed in all areas where concrete removal has commenced .
no steel reinforcement shall be left exposed during seasonal shutdown .
page num rev .
date num opss num num access to work areas work platform and scaffolding adequate access shall be provided to facilitate inspection and measurement by the contract administrator .
num surface preparation all concrete surfaces against which shotcrete is to be placed shall be clean solid and free from loose or unsound fragments coatings and any other foreign substances or debris and shall be sufficiently rough to ensure that a full bond is developed with the new shotcrete .
all existing concrete surfaces to be covered by shotcrete shall be uniformly roughened by means of scabbling chipping or bush hammering .
a surface profile of num num mm shall be achieved by exposing the aggregates across the entire surface .
all concrete surfaces including areas num mm beyond the perimeter of the removal area and existing steel reinforcement to receive shotcrete shall be abrasive blast cleaned according to opss num prior to installation of welded steel wire fabric .
abrasive blast cleaned areas shall have shotcrete applied within num hours or shall be reblasted .
in areas requiring reblasting the contractor shall remove the welded steel wire fabric prior to abrasive blast cleaning and reinstall the wire fabric .
immediately prior to wetting the concrete all dust and loose material shall be removed from the prepared surface of the repair area by using compressed air .
the area to be shotcreted shall be maintained in a wet condition for a period of num hours prior to the application of the shotcrete .
prior to the shotcreting operation excess water shall be removed from the surface using compressed air .
num placement of welded steel wire fabric when welded steel wire fabric is specified in the contract documents it shall not be installed until after the concrete surface and exposed steel reinforcement in the repair area have been abrasive blast cleaned .
the wire fabric shall not be abrasive blast cleaned at any time .
the contractor shall install wire fabric in all repair areas greater than num mnum that have a minimum dimension of num mm .
the wire fabric shall be securely fastened to the exposed steel reinforcement by ties placed no further than num mm apart in a grid pattern .
when the exposed steel reinforcement is not capable of providing rigid support for the wire fabric anchors shall be used to support the wire fabric .
when there is no exposed steel reinforcement the wire fabric shall be fastened to the concrete with anchors placed no further than num mm apart in a grid pattern .
the minimum clearance between the wire fabric and the existing concrete shall be num mm .
the wire fabric shall be installed flat tight and at locations shown in the contract documents using spacers and anchors .
the edges of adjoining wire fabric sheets shall be overlapped by one wire spacing plus num mm .
the wire fabric shall be kept clean of any substance that may reduce the bond of the shotcrete to the wire surface .
num approval of nozzle operator shotcreting shall be carried out by a nozzle operator who has been certified by participation in the mto shotcrete nozzlemen certification program .
page num rev .
date num opss num num placing prior to the application of shotcrete the contractor shall protect all structural components not receiving shotcrete and appurtenances from the shotcreting operation .
repair areas being prepared to receive shotcrete shall also be protected .
when practical shotcrete shall be placed without the use of formwork .
when the requirements of this specification can not otherwise be met formwork may be used and shall be according to opss num .
formwork shall be adequately braced against excessive vibration and constructed to permit the escape of air and rebound during the shotcreting operation .
during the application of shotcrete a steady continuous flow of shotcrete shall be maintained .
any predampened mixture that is not used within one half hour shall not be incorporated into the work .
shotcrete shall be applied so that there is no sagging or separation of the material in place .
all rebound material shall be removed from the repair area as the work proceeds .
rebound or waste material shall not be worked back into construction or salvaged and reused .
the concrete surface surrounding the repair area shall be cleaned immediately after the application of shotcrete using suitable hand tools .
when shotcrete in a repair area can not be applied in a single operation or delays are experienced moist curing by means of continuous fog mist shall be applied according to the curing requirements of this specification .
if the previous layer has hardened the surface of the shotcrete shall be thoroughly cleaned of any laitance by wire brushing and wetted prior to application of an additional layer of shotcrete .
the shotcrete shall be placed level or slightly above the level of the original concrete surface to provide a minimum of num mm cover to the welded steel wire fabric or reinforcing steel unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
at the end of the shotcreting operation the shotcrete shall be terminated at a numhnumv slope .
before placing an adjacent section this sloped portion shall be thoroughly cleaned by wire brushing any laitance and wetted .
the total required depth of shotcrete shall be placed within the same working day .
num finishing unless otherwise specified in the contract documents when the final layer of shotcrete has attained its initial set the surface of the shotcrete shall be finished with hand finishing equipment .
when tested with a straight edge the maximum gap between the straight edge and any point on the surface shall be num mm .
num curing shotcrete shall be initially moist cured by continuous fog mist for a minimum period of num hours .
the curing shall commence as soon as the fog mist can be applied without deforming the surface of the shotcrete .
when an area of fresh shotcrete is exposed to direct sunlight or to wind the curing shall be applied immediately after the final application of shotcrete in that area .
after the initial num hour fog misting period moist curing shall continue for an additional period of num hours by means of fog mist or wet burlap .
page num rev .
date num opss num when wet burlap is used the burlap shall be placed in a manner to ensure that it is in full contact with the surface of the shotcrete for the full duration of the curing period .
the curing with burlap and water shall be according to opss num .
immediately after removal of moist curing the shotcrete surface shall be coated with a curing compound according to opss num .
num cold weather protection num general the contractor shall protect the shotcrete during cold weather .
the protection system shall be designed for the worst conditions that can be reasonably anticipated from local weather records forecasts site conditions and past experience for the time period during which the protection is required .
num control of temperature during cold weather the contractor shall for a minimum period of seven days following the shotcrete operation monitor and control the temperature of the shotcrete to ensure that the temperature does not fall below num c. the contractor shall take measures to ensure that the shotcrete temperature remains within the acceptable limits .
the contractor shall supply thermocouples wires and digital temperature indicators with an accuracy of numc to monitor the shade air temperature and shotcrete temperature .
the digital temperature indicators shall be left in place or provided upon request to the contract administrator to facilitate additional readings for verification purposes .
thermocouples shall be embedded near the shotcrete surface at a minimum of two locations for each day of shotcreting as directed by the contract administrator .
for cold weather conditions protection of concrete shall at least be according to table num .
num temperature records the contractor shall record the shade air temperature and shotcrete temperature at a minimum frequency of once every four hours for the first num hours after the shotcreting operation and then once every eight hours for the remainder of the curing and protection period and during the removal of the cold weather protection .
the contractor shall provide the contract administrator with the necessary access to the location and equipment to verify temperature readings .
temperature records shall be forwarded to the contract administrator at the end of every day .
at the end of the cold weather protection period the contractor shall submit to the contract administrator a complete temperature record consisting of a summary of the recorded temperatures and a graphical plot of temperature vs. time .
num coring and testing num general the cores shall be obtained according to csa anumc at random locations specified by the contract administrator .
the contractor shall locate all steel reinforcement in the area prior to taking any cores to avoid cutting steel reinforcement .
page num rev .
date num opss num testing shall not be required on a structure when the total measured vertical area of shotcrete on a structure is less than num mnum or the total measured horizontal area of shotcrete on a structure is less than num mnum .
num lot and sublot size a lot shall consist of the total quantity of normal shotcrete or silica fume shotcrete in the contract documents .
each lot shall be divided into sublots of approximately equal size and not greater than num mnum .
separate sublots are required for vertical and horizontal repairs .
separate sublots are required for individual structures .
the contract administrator shall determine the sublot size after discussion with the contractor and prior to the commencement of the shotcreting operation .
num compressive strength the contractor shall be responsible for all aspects of coring storage and transportation of cores to determine compressive strength .
for evaluation of compressive strength testing the contractor shall remove four cores from the hardened shotcrete when the shotcrete is between num to num days of age for each sublot .
the cores shall be num mm in diameter and at least num mm long .
cores may contain wire fabric but shall not contain reinforcing steel .
the contractor shall deliver the cores to the designated quality assurance laboratory as specified in the contract documents .
the cores shall be tested according to csa anumc at num days of age .
the forms on which the field data for the cores is recorded shall be submitted to the laboratory with the shotcrete cores .
test results shall be recorded on forms acceptable to the owner and forwarded to the contract administrator within num days from the date of testing .
num tensile bond strength the minimum tensile bond strength of the shotcrete shall be num mpa .
the tensile bond strength testing shall be carried out by the contractor in the presence of the contract administrator on num insitu cores taken within one metre of each other for each sublot .
the testing shall be carried out by technicians employed by a laboratory acceptable to the owner .
the cores shall be num mm in diameter and extend into the parent concrete to the depth specified in mto lsnum .
the testing shall be according to mto lsnum and shall be carried out when the shotcrete is num to num days of age .
the equipment used to measure the tensile bond strength shall be equipped with a maximum load indicator .
the contractor shall ensure that the epoxy adhesive is cured according to the manufacturers recommendations prior to carrying out the test .
if failure occurs in the epoxy adhesive and the specified strength of num mpa has not been reached the test shall be repeated within num mm of the original core location .
retesting is not required when the specified strength of num mpa has been achieved .
after the tensile bond strength testing is completed the cores shall be extracted for the full depth of the coring to demonstrate to the contract administrator that the depth of coring was adequate .
all individual tensile bond strength results obtained by the contractor and average shall be recorded on forms acceptable to the owner and forwarded to the contract administrator within num business days of the date of testing .
page num rev .
date num opss num num rapid chloride permeability silica fume shotcrete for evaluation of rapid chloride permeability the contractor shall remove cores from the hardened silica fume shotcrete and test cores according to astm c num .
testing shall be carried out by a laboratory that is acceptable to the owner .
two cores num mm in diameter and at least num mm long shall be removed from each sublot when the silica fume shotcrete is num to num days of age .
the portion of the core to be tested shall contain no reinforcing steel welded wire steel fabric or other embedments .
cores shall be delivered in a plastic bag sealed to avoid loss of moisture to a laboratory acceptable to the owner within num hours of coring .
the cores shall be stored at a temperature of num num c in a moist condition until time of testing .
a num mm thick slice shall be cut from the top of each core before testing .
testing shall be carried out according to astm c num when the shotcrete is num to num days of age .
rapid chloride permeability results obtained by the contractor shall be recorded and forwarded to the contract administrator within num days of application of shotcrete .
rapid chloride permeability core samples and original test record shall be retained by the contractor until final completion of the contract and shall be provided to the contract administrator upon request .
num filling of core holes all remnants of cores including ones that remain in place shall be completely removed and core holes filled immediately after coring .
prior to filling the inside surfaces of each core hole shall be cleaned of all laitance and other debris from the coring operation by wire brushing .
the core holes shall be cleaned using compressed air prewetted and filled with a proprietary patching material .
the patching material shall be comparable to the surrounding concrete in terms of strength and permeability .
the patching material shall be mixed and cured according to the manufacturers recommendations .
the patch shall be finished flush with the surface of the concrete and all excess material removed .
num remedial work if plastic shotcrete is rejected by the contract administrator the contractor shall stop the work and take all necessary measures to correct deficiencies while the shotcrete is in the plastic state .
the contractor shall notify the contract administrator in writing immediately if any of the defects or conditions listed in the quality assurance section are present in the work with an explanation of the cause and extent of the deficiencies .
these areas shall be repaired by the contractor .
a proposal for the remedial work for the above defects and conditions shall be submitted to the contract administrator for review .
the contractor shall not proceed with repairs until approval of the proposal has been received .
the contractor shall repair all cracks greater than or equal to num mm after the curing period has elapsed .
repair of cracks shall be according to opss num .
if the linear measurement of cracks greater than or equal to num mm in width per square metre is num m or greater the entire shotcrete in the repair area shall be removed and replaced .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num quality assurance num inspection num during shotcrete application the contract administrator shall inspect the plastic shotcrete during the application process and shall reject all or a portion of the work based on the presence of one or more of the defects identified below a failure to properly control and remove buildup of overspray and rebound .
b incomplete consolidation around steel reinforcement and anchors .
c excessive shotcrete rebound .
d incorporation of sand lenses excessive voids delaminations sags and sloughing .
e failure to apply shotcrete to the required line grade and tolerance .
num completed work the contract administrator shall inspect the completed work to determine if the work contains any of the following a debonding or hollowsounding areas .
b porous or rebound material visible in cores .
c areas that have visibly sagged in cores .
d cracks .
num acceptance or rejection the contract administrator shall have the authority to accept or reject shotcrete that does not conform to the contract requirements either during the shotcrete application process or on the basis of the completed work or if any of the defects identified in the inspection subsection are identified in any of the cores extracted .
num normal shotcrete for normal shotcrete the contract administrator shall reject all or a portion of the lot based on the presence of one or more of the defects identified in the inspection subsection or one or more of the following conditions a average compressive strength less than num mpa .
b an individual compressive strength result more than num mpa below the specified strength .
c average tensile bond strength less than num mpa .
d any work that does not conform to the requirements of this specification .
page num rev .
date num opss num num silica fume shotcrete for silica fume shotcrete the contract administrator shall reject all or a portion of the lot based on the presence of one or more of the defects identified in the inspection subsection or one or more of the following conditions a average compressive strength less than num mpa .
b an individual compressive strength result more than num mpa below the specified strength .
c average tensile bond strength less than num mpa .
d average rapid chloride permeability greater than num coulombs .
e any work that is not according to the requirements of this specification .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num normal shotcrete silica fume shotcrete measurement shall be by volume in cubic metres of the concrete removed according to the measurement for payment section of opss num except when the existing cover to steel reinforcement is less than num mm the depth used in calculating the volume shall be adjusted by adding the difference between the num mm required and the existing cover .
no measurement shall be made for areas of shotcrete that were removed according to the remedial work subsection .
no measurement shall be made for shotcrete required to patch areas of concrete removal when the removal was not approved by the contract administrator .
num basis of payment num normal shotcrete item silica fume shotcrete item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work including abrasive blast cleaning of the concrete surfaces .
payment for the work of abrasive blast cleaning of steel reinforcement shall be according to opss num .
when the contract does not contain a separate tender item for providing access to the work the contract price for the shotcrete items requiring the access shall include full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num table num minimum cold weather protective measures anticipated minimum air temperature c protective measure thickness of new shotcrete num m num to num pmnum num to num pmnum num to num pmnum less than num pmnum maximum allowable drop in concrete temperaturenum hours num c notes a .
protective measures pmnum cover concrete with insulation having an rvalue of num .
pmnum cover concrete with insulation having an rvalue of num .
pmnum cover concrete with insulation having an rvalue of num .
pmnum house and heat as specified in the housing and heating clause of opss num .
b .
all rvalues are metric .
c. the conversion factor from metric to imperial units is metric rvalue x num imperial rvalue .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents proprietary patching materials .
num location of the quality assurance laboratory .
num the designer should determine if the following is required and if so specify it in the contract documents welded steel wire fabric .
num the wire fabric shall not be used in repair areas on which a cathodic protection system is to be installed .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for crack repair concrete table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment num construction num quality assurance num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary num scope this specification covers the requirements for the pressure injection routing and sealing of cracks in concrete for the purpose of structural rehabilitation and water seepage control .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincial oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipal oriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num deck joint assemblies preformed seals joint fillers joint seals joint sealing compounds and waterstops structures opss num abrasive blast cleaning concrete construction ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num hot poured rubberized asphalt joint sealing compound opss num water astm international c num elastomeric joint sealants d num num test method for indicating oil or water in compressed air page num rev .
date num opss num num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply active crack means a crack in concrete with plane surfaces that are in a state of movement relative to each other .
crack depth means the distance that the crack extends from the injection surface into the concrete to the point where the crack is num mm wide .
effective pressure means the fluid grout pressure at point of entry at the injection port .
this shall be calculated as gauge pressure minus head losses in injection system .
engineer means a professional engineer licensed by the professional engineers ontario to practice in the province of ontario .
flushing means removing debris from the crack section by means of air or a liquid under pressure .
gauge pressure means the actual fluid grout pressure reading on the pump gauge .
injection port means a mechanical device that is firmly connected into the crack section for the purpose of providing access into a crack for the grouting material .
passive crack means a concrete crack in concrete with plane surfaces that are not moving relative to each other .
payment adjustment factor means a multiplier applied to the unit contract price to determine the actual unit payment price .
plural component pump means a grout pump that separately delivers the grout material components separately to a common static mixer .
pot life means the period of time during which the polyurethane or epoxy resin remains pumpable .
refusal criteria means zero flow of grout at the proposed effective pressure for a duration of num minutes .
regulated operating pressure means the maximum pressure measured at the pump discharge that the pump is capable of producing .
num design and submission requirements num submissions num crack repair work plan four copies of the crack repair work plan shall be submitted to the contract administrator at least num weeks prior to the commencement of the work .
the crack repair work plan shall bear the seal and signature of an engineer and include at least the following information .
a a description of the method of repair including the following minimum information i .
basis of selection .
ii .
proposed effective pressure .
page num rev .
date num opss num iii .
surface finishing .
iv .
location and size of injection ports .
v. surface treatment of the concrete prior to surface sealing .
vi .
method of storing and handling grouts cleaning solvents and waste materials .
b a list of the materials to be used for crack preparation and repair including the following minimum information i .
material specifications .
ii .
product data sheets with test data .
iii .
material safety data sheets .
iv .
pot life of the components to be used based on a sample size of num ml at num c and num c. c a certificate from the material supplier shall be submitted stating the material is suitable for the intended use in this contract .
d a list of the equipment and accessories to be used including the following minimum information i .
the operating pressure of each component .
ii .
the type of injection port and means of closure .
num return of submissions two copies of each submission shall be returned marked as one of the following a stamped with the wording that allows for permission to construct .
in this case work can commence upon receipt of the submission by the contractor .
a copy of the submission shall be available at the site prior to and during construction .
b stamped with the wording that allows for permission to construct as noted .
in this case work can start upon receipt of the submission by the contractor .
the submission shall be updated as noted and shall have a stamp affixed that is signed by an engineer stating the submission has been revised according to the noted comments .
a copy of the stamped updated submission shall be available at the site prior to and during construction .
c showing only required changes .
in this case the submission shall be updated as required and the submission process repeated .
num materials num grout num general material used for crack injection shall be polyurethane resins for active cracks and epoxy resins for passive cracks .
polyurethane and epoxy grout shall prevent the penetration of water and shall have sufficient flowability to fill the crack at least num of the depth of the crack using the proposed equipment and method of repair at the ambient and substrate temperatures existing at the time of grouting .
page num rev .
date num opss num num epoxy resin epoxy resin shall be moisture insensitive and num solids .
num polyurethane resin polyurethane resin shall be num solids .
num joint sealing compounds num hotpoured rubberized joint sealing compound the hotpoured rubberized joint sealing compound shall be according to opss num .
num coldapplied joint sealing compound coldapplied joint sealing compound shall be according to astm c num type s grade ns class num use tm .
type m sealant shall be used where the depth of a chase exceeds num mm or the manufacturers recommended depth for type s sealant whichever is less .
where the cold sealing compound is visible after completion of the work a grey colour material shall be used .
num water water shall be according to opss num .
num equipment num gauges in addition to the calibrated gauges required for use with the pumps and with the injection hose additional gauges shall be available on site to replace those that malfunction .
certificates of calibration from an organization accredited by the standards council of canada shall be supplied for each gauge certifying that the gauges are capable of measuring the pressure within a tolerance of num kpa .
num pumps equipment used for pressure injection shall be suitable for the intended use and compatible with the grout .
pumps shall be positive displacement type and shall be capable of delivering a minimum of two litres of grout per minute .
pumps shall be capable of developing a maximum regulated operating pressure at least equal to twice the effective pressure .
pumps shall be equipped with a calibrated gauge and shall be capable of accurately maintaining an effective operating pressure of num kpa or less .
plural component pumps shall be used when multicomponent solution grouts are used .
hand cartridge pumps shall not be used unless the volume of crack repair is less than one litre of resin for num mnum of gross repair area .
page num rev .
date num opss num num mixers num static inline mixers static inline mixers shall produce a homogeneous grout and shall be sized to accommodate the minimum and maximum anticipated flow rates .
static mixers shall have the manufacturers plate attached showing the following mixer information a size .
b type .
c maximum operating pressure .
num agitating mixer agitating mixers shall have a power driven paddle mixing head and produce a homogeneous component .
the speed of the mixers shall be variable to a maximum of num rpm .
num injection hoses injection hoses shall have a rated working pressure equal to or greater than the maximum pump operating pressure and shall be equipped with a calibrated gauge at the injection port end .
num injection ports injection ports shall be removable or nonmetallic insert type units .
the pressure capacity of the injection ports shall be at least equal to the maximum operating pressure of the pump .
all injection ports shall be equipped with a shutoff valve or other mechanical means of closure under pressure .
surface mounted injection ports shall not be used .
num air compressor compressed air shall be free from oil and water when tested according to astm d num .
num drills drilling of the injection holes shall be performed using a rotary percussion or rotary diamond type drill .
percussion drilling equipment shall not be used for drilling holes greater than num mm diameter and holes within num mm of any edge of concrete .
only holes num mm or less in diameter shall be drilled within num mm of any free edge of concrete .
num routing equipment routing equipment shall be any of the following a concrete router .
b handheld grinding wheel or a multibladed cutoff saw equipped with abrasive or diamond blades .
c multibladed floor saw cutting equipment equipped with diamond blades .
page num rev .
date num opss num num construction num general installation of all accessories and material shall be according to the manufacturers recommendations and as specified in the submitted work plan .
work shall only proceed when the temperature of the concrete is num c or greater .
num access adequate access shall be provided to facilitate a performance of work .
b inspection and measurement of the work by the contract administrator .
num crack identification prior to commencement of the work the cracks requiring repair as identified by the contract administrator shall be numbered physically marked as to their extent and measured in the presence of the contract administrator .
this information shall be recorded and a copy submitted to the contract administrator .
num crack injection num drilling for injection ports injection holes shall be drilled on each side of the crack at a num angle to the surface of the concrete .
the holes shall be located such that they intersect the crack section at approximately the midpoint and they shall extend through the crack section .
the holes shall be sized to accommodate the injection ports .
the spacing of the holes shall not exceed the depth of the crack or num mm and the holes shall be alternated from one side of the crack to the other .
prior to installation of the injection ports each hole shall be individually cleaned of all deleterious material by an airwater blast to completely remove all drill cuttings from the hole .
injection ports shall be inserted into the holes and sealed .
the inserted end of the injection port shall not extend beyond the point at which the drilled hole intersects the crack .
num cleaning and flushing after the injection ports have been inserted cracks shall be flushed with an airwater mixture or an alternating water and air flush to remove all deleterious material prior to the injection of grout .
the flushing material shall be injected through the injection port and continued until it exudes from the adjacent injection port and the crack is thoroughly cleaned .
this flushing shall proceed from one end of the crack to the other .
a final flush shall be made with air only to remove all of the free water .
num surface preparation and sealing surface opening of the cracks shall be sealed prior to injection .
page num rev .
date num opss num the surface of the concrete shall be mechanically cleaned for a distance of num mm each side of the crack sections to prepare a clean substrate for bonding of the surface sealing compound .
the surface preparation and sealing shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the surface sealing material .
the surface sealing material shall completely confine the injection grout to the crack section with only the injection ports providing access .
the surface sealing material shall withstand the maximum injection pressure without developing leakage along the crack section .
surface sealing of passive cracks shall not commence until at least one hour after the final air flush .
num injection of grout num general injection of grout shall proceed from the injection port at the lowest elevation of the crack and continue upwards along the crack on an injection port to injection port basis without interruption to the other end of the crack .
the injection nozzle shall not be moved to the adjacent injection port until grout is showing at the next higher adjacent injection port or refusal criteria is developed .
while under pressure each injection port shall be sealed immediately after completion of injection at that injection port .
when a maximum operating pressure greater than num mpa is required to inject the grout the injection operation shall cease until the contractor determines why this operating pressure is required .
num monitoring the volume of grout used within each five metres of crack length shall be recorded .
the pump gauge pressure shall be recorded every num minutes .
the volume of grout and pump pressure shall be related to the crack location .
the records shall indicate crack location and number injection port spacing and confirmation of grout showing or refusal .
a copy of the recorded information shall be submitted to the contract administrator at the end of each day .
num effective pressure when calculating the effective pressure the head losses shall be determined prior to commencement of injection .
head losses shall be determined in the presence of the contract administrator by performing a pressure flow test through the equipment for each equipment configuration used .
num ratio test plural component injection equipment proportioning shall be verified in the presence of the contract administrator by measuring the volume output of material in the pressure lines at least once for each two hours of operation .
when deviation from the manufacturers specified proportioning ratio exceeds num immediate adjustment or replacement of the equipment is required .
page num rev .
date num opss num num pot life determination prior to commencing the grouting operation a sample shall be taken from the material containers on site and manually proportioned to the specified component ratio in the presence of the contract administrator .
the total sample size shall be num ml and the same size container shall be used for each sample taken .
the temperature of the material at the time of mixing and the pot life of the mixed material shall be recorded .
the proportions of materials and pot life shall conform to those specified in the original submissions .
an additional sample shall be taken from the end of the injection hose and a further pot life determination performed .
during grouting material samples shall be taken on a frequency of at least one per hour of operation and the pot life recorded .
deviation from the proportions and pot life specified shall result in immediate discontinuance of use of the material .
all records shall be submitted to the contract administrator at the end of each working day .
num surface finishing surface finishing shall not proceed until the curing period as specified by the material supplier has elapsed .
surface finishing shall consist of removal of the injection ports and the surface sealant flush with the original concrete surface .
core holes and holes left after the removal of injection ports shall be filled with a cementbased nonshrink grout after the surface sealant has been removed .
where the crack is not completely filled to the injection surface the crack shall be filled with a compatible material acceptable to the contract administrator .
the material shall be applied according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num coring a num mm diameter test core shall be taken for each completed tenmetre increment of injected crack for the full depth of the crack within num to num hours after injection at locations specified by the contract administrator .
the tenmetre increment is the length of a continuous crack or a cumulative measurement of cracks of lesser length .
the cores shall be submitted to the contract administrator .
similar coring shall be done to check remedial work .
num filling of core holes following the extraction of cores all slurry and other debris shall be removed from the core holes .
the holes shall be blasted with compressed air and filled with nonshrink grout flush with the surface of the concrete .
surface preparation mixing installation and curing shall be according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num routing and sealing cracks cracks shall be routed to create a chase and then filled with a sealant .
the depth to width ratio of the chase shall be numhnumv with the crack located within the middle third of the chase .
the width of the chase shall be num mm num mm .
page num rev .
date num opss num the chase shall be abrasive blast cleaned according to opss num .
abrasive blast cleaned areas shall have the subsequent treatment applied within num hours or shall be reblasted .
immediately prior to placing the bond breaker the chase shall be blasted with compressed air to remove all dust dirt and loose material .
a bond breaker compatible with the joint sealing compound and concrete shall be placed at the bottom of the chase .
joint sealing compound shall be placed in the chase flush with the adjacent concrete surface unless it is subjected to vehicular traffic in which case it shall be recessed num mm num mm .
hotpoured rubberized joint sealing compounds shall only be used on horizontal surfaces .
coldapplied joint sealing compounds shall only be used on vertical surfaces or on horizontal surfaces that are not to be waterproofed .
coldapplied joint sealing compound shall be installed according to the manufacturers recommendations .
hotpoured rubberized joint sealing compound shall be installed according to opss num .
num remedial action the failure of the test cores to meet the requirements specified in the quality assurance section shall be sufficient cause for immediate review and adjustment of the method of injection .
the tenmetre increments represented by the failed test cores shall be repaired such that at least num of the crack depth is filled .
the method of repair shall be submitted to the contract administrator prior to the commencement of the work .
num management of excess material management of excess material shall be according to the contract documents .
num quality assurance num general when the repair operation is complete the contract administrator shall inspect the work to determine if the completed work contains defects .
num crack injection the num mm diameter test cores shall be examined for the percentage of the crack depth filled .
num ratio test the proportioning ratio of the injection material shall not deviate more than num from the manufacturers specified proportioning ratio stated in the work plan .
num pot life the proportion of material and pot life shall not deviate from that specified by the manufacturer in the work plan .
page num rev .
date num opss num num acceptance or rejection the contract administrator shall accept or reject material on the basis of the ratio testing and pot life determination results .
crack injection shall be accepted or rejected on the basis of the percentage of crack depth filled as determined by evaluating the test core taken in each tenmetre increment of length .
rejection of the tenmetre increment of crack shall be applied during the entire grouting operation .
where num or more of the crack depth is filled in the test core the tenmetre increment of crack length represented by the core shall be accepted .
where num to num of the crack depth is filled in the test core the work shall be accepted and a payment adjustment shall be applied to the tenmetre increment length of crack represented by that core .
where less than num of the crack depth is filled in the test core the tenmetre increment of crack length represented by the core shall be rejected .
num measurement for payment num actual measurement num crack injection measurement of crack injection shall be by length in metres of the accepted injected cracks .
the total length shall be the sum of individual increments represented by the accepted test cores taken within each increment .
cracks filled to less than num of the crack depth shall not be measured for payment .
num routing and sealing measurement of routing and sealing shall be by length in metres .
num basis of payment num crack injection item payment at the contract price for the above tender item shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
there shall be num payment of the contract price where num or more of the crack depth is filled .
there shall be no payment where less than num of the crack depth is filled .
there shall be a payment adjustment of the unit contract price for each tenmetre increment of crack filled to between num and num of the crack depth .
pa num numd x num num where pa payment adjustment factor d percentage of the crack depth filled rounded to the nearest num. and num d num page num rev .
date num opss num num routing and sealinghotpoured rubberized joint sealing compounditem routing and sealingcoldapplied joint sealing compounditem payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
page num rev .
date num opss num ontario provincial standard specification metric opss num november num construction specification for prestressed soil and rock anchors table of contents num scope num references num definitions num design and submission requirements num materials num equipment num construction num quality assurance not used num measurement for payment num basis of payment appendices numa commentary numb supplemental requirements for using opss num in municipal contracts num scope this specification covers the requirements for the design installation and testing of prestressed anchors in soil and rock .
num specification significance and use this specification has been developed for use in provincial and municipaloriented contracts .
the administration testing and payment policies procedures and practices reflected in this specification correspond to those used by many municipalities and the ontario ministry of transportation .
use of this specification or any other specification shall be according to the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num appendices significance and use appendices are not for use in provincial contracts as they are developed for municipal use and then only when invoked by the owner .
appendices are developed for the owners use only .
inclusion of an appendix as part of the contract documents is solely at the discretion of the owner .
appendices are not a mandatory part of this specification and only become part of the contract documents as the owner invokes them .
invoking a particular appendix does not obligate an owner to use all available appendices .
only invoked appendices form part of the contract documents .
the decision to use any appendix is determined by an owner after considering their contract requirements and their administrative payment and testing procedures policies and practices .
depending on these considerations an owner may not wish to invoke some or any of the available appendices .
num references when the contract documents indicate that provincialoriented specifications are to be used and there is a provincialoriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.prov unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding provincialoriented specification the references below shall be considered to be to the opss listed unless use of a municipaloriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when the contract documents indicate that municipaloriented specifications are to be used and there is a municipaloriented specification of the same number as those listed below references within this specification to an opss shall be deemed to mean opss.muni unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
when there is not a corresponding municipaloriented specification the references below shall be considered to be the opss listed unless use of a provincialoriented specification is specified in the contract documents .
this specification refers to the following specifications standards or publications ontario provincial standard specifications construction opss num deep foundations opss num concrete structures opss num structural steel for bridges ontario provincial standard specifications material opss num cementing materials opss num water opss num concrete materials and production opss num steel reinforcement for concrete csa standards anumanum concrete materials and methods of concrete constructionmethods of test and standard practices for concrete anum qualification code for concrete testing laboratories gnumgnum general requirements for rolled or welded structural quality steelstructural quality steels page num rev .
date num opss num astm international a numa nummnum pipe steel black and hotdipped zinccoated welded and seamless a numa nummnum steel strand uncoated sevenwire for prestressed concrete a numa nummnum coldformed welded and seamless carbon steel structural tubing in rounds and shapes a numa nummnum uncoated highstrength steel bars for prestressing concrete d numd nummnum standard test method for deep foundations under static axial compressive load d num polyethylene plastics extrusion materials for wire and cable d num rigid polyvinyl chloride pvc compounds and chlorinated polyvinyl chloride cpvc compounds d num polyethylene plastics pipe and fittings materials d num polypropylene injection and extrusion materials international organization for standardizationinternational electrotechnical commission isoiec num general requirements for the competence of the testing and calibration laboratories american petroleum institute api numa drilling fluid materials numth edition num rp numbnum standard procedure for field testing water based drilling fluids numth edition post tensioning institute pti recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors num definitions for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply alignment load means a nominal minimum load applied to an anchor during testing to keep the testing equipment positioned correctly .
anchor means a system used to transfer tensile loads to soil or rock that includes the prestressing steel anchorage corrosion protection sheathings spacers centralizers and grout .
anchorage means the combined system of anchor head bearing plate trumpet and anchorage corrosion protection that is used to transmit the prestressing force from the prestressing steel to the surface of the ground or the supported structure .
anchor head means the device by which the prestressing force is permanently transmitted from the prestressing steel to the bearing plate .
apparent free length means the length of tendon or bar that is apparently not bonded to the surrounding ground or grout as calculated from the elastic movement measured during the load test .
bond length means the length of the tendon that is bonded to the primary grout and capable of transmitting the applied tensile load to the surrounding soil or rock .
centralizer means a device to support and position the tendon and sleeves in the drill hole throughout the bond length of the tendon so that a minimum grout cover is achieved .
page num rev .
date num opss num certificate of conformance means a document issued by the quality verification engineer confirming that the specified components of the work are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
coupler means the method by which the prestressing force can be transmitted from one partial length of prestressing tendon to another .
design load means the anticipated final maximum effective load in the anchor after allowance for time dependent losses or gains .
the design load includes appropriate load factors to ensure that the overall structure has adequate capacity for its intended use .
engineer means a professional engineer licensed by the professional engineers ontario to practice in the province of ontario .
free stressing length means the designed length of the tendon that is not bonded to the surrounding ground or grout during stressing .
liftoff means checking the load in the tendon at any specified time with the use of a hydraulic jack at the moment of lifting of the anchor head off the bearing plate .
lockoff load means the prestressing force in an anchor immediately after transferring the load from the jack to the stressing anchorage .
log time cycle means one rotation of a log cycle of a semilogarithmic plot for the purpose of recording the measurement of movement and time .
permanent anchor means a prestressed anchor intended for permanent use .
performance test means cyclic and incremental loading and unloading of an anchor while recording the total movement of the pulling head in each cycle at each increment including the residual movement at alignment load .
postgrouting means regrouting an anchor after the primary grout has set .
preproduction test anchor means an anchor installed and then loaded to verify the design parameters prior to the installation of the production anchors .
prestressing steel means strands a group of strands combined to form a tendon or a high strength steel bar .
primary grout means portland cement based grout that is injected into the anchor hole prior to or after the installation of the anchor tendon to provide for the force transfer to the surrounding ground along the bond length of the tendon .
production anchor means an anchor installed and loaded that forms part of the final foundation support system .
production test anchor means an anchor installed and then loaded to verify the design parameters prior to the installation of the production anchors .
proof test means incremental loading of an anchor and recording the total movement of the anchor at each increment .
quality verification engineer means an engineer retained by the contractor qualified to provide the services specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num residual movement means the nonrecoverable movement of the pulling head measured at alignment load .
temporary anchor means a prestressed anchor intended for temporary use .
test load tl means the maximum load that the anchor is subjected during testing .
total movement means the total movement of the pulling head measured at maximum load in each cycle .
num design and submission requirements num design requirements num general except for owner designed anchors the contractor shall be responsible for the detailed design of the anchor including the determination of the applied loads design assumptions and installation procedures .
the contractor shall also be responsible for the design of the anchor testing equipment and reaction system .
the anchors shall be designed to safely withstand the applied loads specified in the preproduction test anchor clause and fulfill the acceptance criteria specified in the production anchor clause and perform satisfactorily at the design load through the required service life .
the design assumptions shall accurately represent the subsurface conditions prevalent at the site .
temporary anchors in a corrosive environment shall be designed as permanent anchors .
except as specified in this specification the anchors shall be designed according to the design recommendation of the recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors publication .
num submission requirements num working drawings the contractor shall submit num sets of working drawings to the contract administrator at least num weeks prior to the commencement of the work of prestressed rock and soil anchors for information purposes only .
prior to making a submission the seals and signatures of a design engineer and a designchecking engineer shall be affixed on the working drawings verifying that the drawings are consistent with the contract documents .
where multidiscipline engineering work is depicted on the same working drawing and the design or design checking engineer or both are unable to seal and sign the working drawing for all aspects of the work the drawing shall be sealed and signed by as many additional design and designchecking engineers as necessary .
information to be shown on the working drawings shall describe and illustrate the complete details of the anchor system anchor testing equipment and reaction system for the production anchors and when specified in the contract documents preproduction test anchors .
this information shall include as a minimum a plans elevations and sections i. anchor spacing .
ii .
orientation .
iii .
minimum total anchor length .
iv .
free stressing length .
v. design load .
page num rev .
date num opss num vi .
a unique identification number for each anchor .
vii .
anchor components and details .
b installation i .
construction methods .
ii .
work restrictions .
iii .
schedule .
iv .
sequence and coordination of work .
v. monitoring .
vi .
type and number of tests vii .
evaluation of test results .
c materials i .
physical properties of monobar and multistrand anchors .
ii .
primary grout materials and mix proportions .
iii .
post grouting materials and mix proportions .
iv .
free stressing length materials and mix proportions .
v. corrosion protection material physical and mechanical properties .
d anchor hole construction i .
method of constructing the anchor holes and maintaining the stability of the holes during the anchor installation .
the drilling equipment and materials including drill bit or auger diameter and lengths casing diameter and lengths and slurry material used to facilitate the construction of the anchor hole .
the method of verifying the hole length shall also be identified .
ii .
details for assembling the anchor in the anchor hole .
iii .
method of placing and centring the anchor tendons including the method used to maintain them in the centre of the hole over the design bond length .
iv .
bond zone primary grout placement .
grout mixing procedure and the method of installation including grout pressures .
the method to determine the surface of the hardened bond length grout shall be identified .
v. bond zone post grout placement .
grout mixing procedure and the method of installation including grout pressures .
vi .
free stressing zone grout placement .
grout mixing procedure and the method of installation including grout pressures .
vii .
waterproofing of holes drilled in rock for permanent anchors .
details of water tightness tests including setup water pressure method of applying pressure details of consolidation grouting redrilling and retesting .
e stressing information i. anchor stressing schedule that includes the working loads and test loads .
ii .
anchor stressing equipment and the method for testing the stressing of preproduction and production test anchors and production anchors .
details of the reaction system used to support the applied loads .
iii .
equipment including the calibration records of the gauges and jacks and procedure to monitor the applied loads and movements during anchor testing .
iv .
details of the reference system and equipment to monitor the movement .
f all design assumptions loads parameters and bond stresses used for preproduction and production test anchors and production anchors .
g testing records when testing has been done to determine bond stress .
h details of destressing and removal of temporary anchors .
page num rev .
date num opss num num slurry at least num days prior to commencement of the work the following information for the slurry shall be submitted to the contract administrator for information purposes only a the type source and physical and chemical properties of the bentonite or polymer .
b the source of water .
c method of mixing slurry .
d the water solids ratio and the mass and volumes of the constituent parts including any chemical admixtures or physical treatment employed to produce slurry with the required physical properties .
e details of procedure to be used for monitoring the quality of the slurry .
f a test report showing the properties of the slurry and certifying that the slurry meets the requirements of api numa .
g method of disposal of the slurry .
num couplers at least num days prior to commencement of the work a copy of the following shall be submitted to the contract administrator a manufacturers catalogue giving the complete data on the coupler material and installation procedures .
b test reports from the manufacturer certifying strength and fatigue requirements .
num prestressing steel num mill certificates one copy of the mill test certificates indicating that the steel meets the requirements of the contract documents shall be submitted to the contract administrator at the time the prestressing steel is delivered to the job site .
identification on the anchor tendon shall allow tracing of the prestressing steel to its heat or reel number .
where mill test certificates originate from a mill outside canada or the united states of america the contractor shall have the information on the mill certificate verified by testing by a canadian testing laboratory .
the laboratory shall be accredited by the standards council of canada as complying with the requirements of isoiec num for the specific tests or type of tests required by the material standard specified on the mill test certificate .
the mill test certificates shall be stamped with the name of the canadian testing laboratory and appropriate wording stating that the material is according to the contract documents .
the stamp shall include the appropriate material specification number testing date i.e .
yyyymmdd and signature of an authorized officer of the testing laboratory .
one copy of the stressstrain curves that are representative of the lots to be used shall be submitted to the contract administrator together with the mill certificates specified detailed in opss num .
page num rev .
date num opss num num prestressing steel bond capacity if not available from the prestressing steel manufacturer a prestressing strand bond capacity test shall be conducted on the strand according to appendix a of the recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors publication .
the test information shall be submitted to the contract administrator prior to commencement of work .
num milestone inspections the quality verification engineer shall witness the following interim inspections of the work a construction of anchor holes .
b anchor installation .
c primary grouting .
d post grouting .
e placement of slurry in free stressing length .
f anchorage installation .
g preproduction anchor testing .
h production anchor testing .
a written request for permission to proceed shall be submitted to the contract administrator prior to commencement of the successive operation .
num materials num permanent anchors num general tendons shall be manufactured from steel bars or strand either in single or multiple element tendons .
the permanent anchors shall be dywidag threadbar anchors bbr cona multistrand anchors vsl multi strand anchors or other approved equivalent anchors .
num anchorages the components of the anchorage shall be capable of developing at least num of the guaranteed minimum ultimate capacity of the tendon or bar .
the anchor head shall be wedges for prestressing strands and anchor nuts for prestressing bars .
the wedges shall be designed to uniformly engage the strand with no notch or pinching effects .
the bearing plate shall be fabricated from steel according to csa gnumgnum .
page num rev .
date num opss num the trumpet shall be fabricated from steel pipe according to astm a numm or tubing according to astm a numm .
the trumpet shall have a minimum wall thickness of num mm for diameters up to and including num mm and num mm for larger diameters .
the joint between the trumpet and the bearing plate and the joint between the trumpet and sheath shall be watertight .
the trumpet shall overlap the free stressing length corrosion protection by at least num mm .
the trumpet shall be long enough to accommodate movements of the structure and the tendon during stressing and testing .
the anchorage covers shall completely encapsulate the anchor head with a watertight seal between the cover and the bearing plate .
num prestressing steel prestressing steel shall be according to astm a numm and astm a numm .
bars shall be hightensile strength bars grade num mpa num mpa or num mpa .
strand shall be sevenwire uncoated stress relieved and low relaxation strand grade num mpa num mpa or num mpa .
the strand and bar shall meet the bond capacity test specified in the prestressing steel bond capacity subsection .
num couplers couplers for bars shall be as specified by the supplier of the anchor and shall develop at least num of the guaranteed minimum ultimate strength of the tendon .
strand tendons shall not be coupled .
num cement cement shall be according to opss num and shall be certified free of false set .
num water water shall be according to opss num .
num sheathing plastic sheathing shall be high density polyethylene according to astm d num type iii or polyvinyl chloride pvc according to astm d num class numb or equal .
the plastic sheathing shall be such that a bond of num mpa is developed when grout with a compressive strength of num mpa is used .
hot melt extruded plastic tubing made from polyethylene according to astm d num and astm d num shall have an average minimum wall thickness of num mm .
hot melt extruded plastic tubing from polypropylene according to astm d num shall have an average minimum wall thickness of num mm .
steel tubing or pipe shall have an average minimum wall thickness of num mm .
the materials for the sheathing accessories such as end caps grouting caps grout tubes and sealing caps shall have properties equal to the plastic sheathing .
num heat shrinkable sleeves heat shrinkable sleeves shall be fabricated from a radiation crosslinked polyolefin tube internally coated with an adhesive sealant .
page num rev .
date num opss num num grout tubes grout tubes shall have an adequate inside diameter to enable the grout to be pumped to the bottom of the drill hole .
they shall be able to withstand num mpa pressure .
postgrout tubes shall be strong enough to withstand the postgrouting pressure .
num bond breaker the bond breaker shall be fabricated from plastic tube or pipe made from medium to high density polyethylene according to astm d num or from polyvinyl chloride according to astm d num class numb or equivalent with a minimum wall thickness of num mm .
num centralizers and spacers centralizers and spacers shall be steel or plastic .
num grout the grout cube for high early strength grout shall be at least num mpa at num days and num mpa at num days .
the type of cement used shall be suitable for the required use of the grout .
accelerators shall not be used .
the grout shall bleed less than num when allowed to stand for num hour .
num corrosion inhibiting compound the corrosion inhibiting compound placed in either the free stressing length or the anchorage area shall be an organic compound grease or wax with appropriate polar moisture displacing and selfhealing properties and corrosion inhibiting additives .
the compound shall permanently stay viscous and be chemically stable and nonreactive with the prestressing steel sheathing material and anchor grout .
num corrosion protection the anchor shall be provided with class i encapsulated tendon double corrosion protection according to the recommendation for prestressed rock and soil anchors publication .
the tendon shall be fully encased within a corrugated pvc sheathing that is in turn encased within a smooth pvc sheathing over the length of the free stressing zone and protected with grout having the num and numday compressive strengths .
num temporary anchors the material for temporary anchors shall be the same as specified for the permanent anchors except the double protection system is not required .
num preproduction test anchors the material for the preproduction test anchors shall be the same as specified for the production anchor being evaluated .
num bentonite cement slurry bentonite and polymers shall meet the requirements of api numa .
the bentonite cement slurry shall consist of a stable mixture of cement and a colloidal suspension of pulverized solids or polymers thoroughly mixed with water .
the density viscosity sand content and ph of the slurry while being used during excavation shall be according to api rpnumbnum .
page num rev .
date num opss num num concrete concrete shall be according to opss num with a nominal numday compressive strength of num mpa .
the slump shall be num to num mm .
num equipment num general all equipment for the installation of the anchor anchor stressing anchor testing and monitoring of the anchor test shall be suitable for the intended purposes and capable of working on the site under the prevailing access and clearance conditions .
the equipment used shall not cause damage to the anchor tendon corrosion protection or retained structural members .
the equipment used shall be in according to those listed in the required submissions .
num grouting equipment mixers and pumps shall be of an adequate capacity and hoses shall be sized to allow continuous grouting of an individual anchor within one hour .
a colloidal mixer with a gauge to measure the water shall be used .
num temporary anchor concrete placement equipment continuous flight augers shall be used for the placement of concrete for temporary anchors up to a maximum ratio of hole diameter to length of num .
open hole concrete placement shall be limited to a minimum hole diameter of num mm and a maximum ratio of hole diameter to length of num .
num anchor testing equipment the rated capacity of the equipment shall not be exceeded when stressing the tendon to the maximum specified test load .
the pump shall be capable of applying each load increment in less than num seconds .
the equipment shall permit the tendon to be stressed in increments so that the load in the tendon can be increased or decreased according to the test specifications and to allow the anchor to be liftoff tested to confirm the lockoff load .
dial gauges shall have at least a num mm travel .
longer gauge stems or sufficient gauge blocks shall be provided to allow for greater travel where required .
gauges shall have precision of at least num mm .
dial gauges shall permit the measurement of total tendon movement to the nearest num mm at every load increment .
the gauge shall have sufficient travel to record the total anchor movement at test load without the need to reset at an interim point .
jacks used for stressing tendons shall have a minimum ram extension of num mm .
stressing equipment shall be calibrated within an accuracy of num immediately prior to use .
current calibration curves bearing the seal and signature of an engineer shall be provided for all gauges and jacks .
page num rev .
date num opss num num construction num general the contractor shall be responsible for the material fabrication installation testing and monitoring of pre production and production test anchors and production anchors .
in addition for nonowner designed anchors the contractor shall be responsible for the preparation of a soils report the determination of design parameters and the design of the anchors .
the anchor system shall be according to this specification and the working drawings .
concrete placement according to the concrete clause of the caisson piles subsection of opss num may be used for temporary anchors inclined a minimum of num degrees below the horizontal and having a minimum hole diameter of num mm .
num structural steel structural steel components shall be fabricated according to opss num .
num anchor fabrication anchors shall be either shop or field fabricated according to the working drawings and schedules by personnel trained and qualified for this work .
prestressing steel shall be cut with an abrasive saw or when approved by the prestressing steel supplier an oxyacetylene torch may be used .
all of the bond length shall be free of dirt manufacturers lubricants corrosioninhibiting coatings or other deleterious substances that may significantly affect the grouttotendon bond or the service life of the anchor .
when encapsulated anchors are pregrouted they shall be done on an inclined rigid frame or bed by injecting the grout from the low end of the tendon .
joints in the protection system shall be made watertight by use of an epoxy bonding agent .
num storage and handling upon delivery the fabricated anchors and the prestressing steel for fabrication of the tendons and all hardware shall be stored and handled in a manner that avoids mechanical damage corrosion and contamination with dirt or deleterious substances .
handling of the tendons shall not cause mechanical damage or contamination to the prestressing steel the corrosion protection or the epoxy coating .
rope or nylon slings shall be used .
cement and additives for grout shall be stored under cover and protected against moisture .
lifting of any pregrouted tendons shall not cause excessive bending that may debond the prestressing steel from the surrounding grout .
page num rev .
date num opss num num corrosion protection num anchorage protection the corrosion protection of the tendon in the vicinity of the anchorage shall ensure proper protection .
all stressing anchorages permanently exposed to the atmosphere or that has a concrete cover less than num mm shall be covered with a corrosion inhibiting compoundfilled or groutfilled cover .
on strand tendons the trumpet shall be long enough to enable the tendon to make a transition from the diameter of the tendon along the free stressing length to the diameter of the tendon at the wedge plate without damaging the encapsulation .
the trumpet shall be completely filled with a corrosion inhibiting compound or grout .
compounds may be placed any time during construction .
grout shall be placed after the anchor has been tested and stressed to the lockoff load .
corrosion inhibiting compoundfilled trumpets shall have a permanent seal between the trumpet and the free stressing length corrosion protection .
trumpets filled with grout shall have either a temporary seal between the trumpet and the free stressing length corrosion protection or the trumpet shall fit tightly over the free stressing length corrosion protection for a minimum of num m. num free stressing length protection the tendon shall be fully encased within a corrugated pvc sheathing that is in turn encased within a smooth pvc sheathing over the length of the free stressing zone and protected with grout .
corrosion protection of the free stressing length shall be provided by a sheath filled with a corrosion inhibiting compound or grout or a heat shrinkable tube internally coated with a mastic compound .
the corrosion inhibiting compound shall completely coat the tendon elements fill the void between them and the sheath and fill the interstices between the wires of numwire strands .
provisions shall be made to retain the compound within the sheath .
the corrosion protective sheath surrounding the free stressing length of the tendon shall be long enough to extend into the trumpet but shall not come into contact with the stressing anchorage during testing .
for pregrouted encapsulations a separate bond breaker shall be provided to prevent the tendon from bonding to the grout surrounding the free stressing length .
fusion bonded epoxy may be used to provide an additional layer of protection to the prestressing steel .
num free stressing length and bond length transition the transition between the corrosion protection for the bonded and free stressing lengths shall be designed and fabricated to ensure continuous protection from corrosion .
the corrosion protection surrounding the free stressing length of the tendon shall not contact the bearing plate or anchor head .
page num rev .
date num opss num num coupler protection on encapsulated bar tendons the coupler and any exposed bar section next to it shall be covered with a corrosion proof compound or wax impregnated cloth tape .
the coupler area shall be covered by a smooth plastic tube overlapping the adjacent sheathed tendon by at least num mm .
the two joints shall be sealed each by a coated heat shrink sleeve of at least num mm length or approved equivalent .
the corrosion proof compound shall completely fill the space inside the cover tube .
num construction of anchor holes num general the anchor holes shall be constructed to the diameter orientation and length specified in the contract documents and detailed on the working drawings .
a drilling method that establishes a stable anchor hole within the tolerances specified in the contract documents shall be used .
the sides and end of the completed anchor holes shall be maintained in a stable condition .
the anchor hole entry shall be located within num mm of its plan location .
the deviation of the anchor hole entry angle from its inclination as specified the contract documents shall be no greater than num degrees .
open anchor holes and drilled casings shall be cleaned upon completion of drilling .
anchor holes open for longer than eight hours shall be recleaned prior to insertion of the tendon and primary grouting .
the following information shall be recorded for each anchor hole and submitted to the contract administrator a identification number .
b anchor hole diameter .
c anchor hole length .
d drilling procedure .
e soil rock and ground water conditions encountered .
f time required to drill the anchor hole .
g problems encountered .
num waterproofing anchor holes waterproofing of anchor holes shall be done when specified in the contract documents and according to the working drawings procedures and equipment .
if during the water tightness test the leakage from an anchor hole over a tenminute period exceeds num l the anchor hole shall be consolidation grouted redrilled and retested .
redrilling shall be done when the grout strength is considerably less than the strength of the surrounding rock .
page num rev .
date num opss num num anchor installation the anchors shall be installed as specified in this specification and detailed on the working drawings .
care shall be taken to ensure the sheathing corrosion protection and grout tubes are not damaged during installation of the anchors .
damaged anchors that can not be repaired to the satisfaction of the contract administrator shall be replaced .
method of repair shall be submitted to the contract administrator for approval .
the prestressing steel in the tendon bond length shall be protected with a grout filled corrugated plastic encapsulation .
centralizers shall be used to ensure a grout cover of at least num mm over the encapsulation .
the centralizers shall be maintained in position during installation .
the centralizer shall support the tendon in the drill hole and position the tendon so a minimum grout cover of num mm is achieved .
centralizers used inside a sheath shall provide a nominal grout cover of num mm over the prestressing steel .
all centralizers shall be designed to permit grout to flow freely around the tendon and up the drill hole .
the contractor shall determine the number of centralizers required however one unit shall be placed within num m of the bottom of the hole and another at the bond length and free stressing length interface .
the centralizers shall not interfere with the placement of grout .
spacers shall be used in multiple element tendons to separate the strands or bars individually or into small groups .
num primary grouting of anchors the grout shall be placed as specified in this specification and as detailed on the working drawings .
the grout shall entirely fill the annular space between the anchor and the borehole wall in the bond length .
anchors shall be grouted as soon as practical after installation .
the stressing tails of prestressing steel strands shall be aligned prior to initial set of the grout .
after grouting the anchor shall remain undisturbed until the grout has reached the strength specified in the contract documents .
the following information shall be recorded for each anchor and submitted to the contract administrator a identification number .
b type of grout .
c grout pressure .
d volume of grout used .
e location of the top of the bond length grout .
num postgrouting of bond length when specified in the contract documents postgrouting of the bond length shall be done according to the submitted procedures and equipment .
page num rev .
date num opss num the information required to be recorded for primary grouting shall be recorded for post grouting .
ground movement shall be monitored and if excess movement is observed the grouting shall be terminated and the situation reported to the contract administrator .
the contract administrator shall be notified prior to the commencement of postgrouting of both permanent and temporary anchors .
num placing of the cement bentonite slurry in the freestressing length the method of placing the cement bentonite slurry shall be as specified in this specification and as detailed on the working drawings .
the cement bentonite slurry for the free stressing length shall completely fill the annular space between the prestressing steel and the borehole wall and shall prevent any transfer of the anchor load to the free stressing zone .
num installation of anchorage the anchor bearing plate and the anchor head or nut shall be installed perpendicular to the tendon within num degrees and centred on the bearing plate without bending or kinking of the prestressing steel elements .
wedge holes and wedges shall be free of rust grout and dirt .
special care shall be exercised to obtain the continuity of corrosion protection in the vicinity of the anchorage as described in the corrosion protection subsection .
the stressing tail shall be cleaned and protected from damage until final testing and lockoff .
the tendon stressing tail shall be cut to its final length according to the tendon manufacturers recommendations after the anchor is accepted by the contract administrator .
anchorages permanently exposed to the atmosphere shall be covered with a corrosion inhibiting compound filled or grout filled cover num testing num general testing shall be carried out as detailed on the working drawings and as specified in this specification .
the maximum anchor load shall not exceed num of the guaranteed minimum ultimate strength of the tendon .
stressing shall not commence until the grout has reached its numday strength .
anchor tests shall be conducted at a time mutually acceptable to the contractor and contract administrator .
the quality verification engineer shall witness the testing .
num reaction system the reaction system shall be shall be installed as detailed on the working drawings .
num reference system and testing equipment the layout of the reference systems and testing equipment required for testing shall be as detailed on the working drawings and as specified in this specification .
page num rev .
date num opss num all reference beams shall be independently supported with the support firmly embedded in the ground at a distance of not less than num m from the anchor .
reference beams and their supports shall be sufficiently rigid to support instrumentation and to prevent movement relative to the test anchor as a result of stressing or other construction activity during testing .
dial gauges shall bear on the pulling head of the jack and their stems shall be coaxial with the tendon direction .
the jacks shall be secured with chains to provide adequate protection to personnel in the event of breakage of the anchor or stressing system .
num reference system enclosures suitable enclosures shall be constructed to provide complete protection for personnel equipment and instruments from variations in the weather conditions and disturbances during the test program .
these provisions shall meet the approval of the contract administrator and include the following specific requirements a the test enclosures shall be weatherproof and adequately lighted and have consistent and controllable heat in order to eliminate temperature variations .
b the test enclosure shall be provided with a level dry floor .
c a field office equipped with tables chairs heating and lighting shall be provided adjacent to the test anchors .
num preproduction test anchors num general preproduction tests shall be conducted to determine the bond stress when a a bond stress is not specified in the contract documents .
b a higher bond stress than specified in the contract documents is used in the design .
c to establish the adequacy of other components of the anchor in advance of the production anchors .
for contractor designed anchors at least one preproduction test anchor shall be installed and tested in each significantly different ground condition .
for owner designed anchors the number of preproduction test anchors shall be as specified in the contract documents .
the test anchor shall be constructed using the materials methods and procedures specified in this specification and as detailed on the working drawings .
preproduction test anchors shall not be incorporated into the permanent or temporary work unless approved by the contract administrator .
num preproduction test procedures and measurements the preproduction anchor test shall be carried out generally in accordance with the prevailing requirements of astm d numm superseded where applicable by the procedure specified in this specification .
when the preproduction test anchor is to be incorporated into the work the load in the anchor shall be adjusted to lockoff load in the final cycle .
page num rev .
date num opss num the preproduction test shall be conducted by cyclically and incrementally loading and unloading the anchor according to the schedule below or until the anchor fails .
al num dl al al num dl num dl al al num dl num dl num dl al al num dl num dl num dl num dl al al num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl al al num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl al al num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl al al num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl al al num dl where al alignment load dl design load of anchor at num dl the load shall be maintained for num hours .
each load shall be maintained for a minimum of num minutes or until the rate of displacement is not greater than num mm per hour .
vertical and horizontal movement of the reaction system and tendon elongation shall be recorded with respect to an independent fixed reference point .
a record of the test enclosure temperature is also required .
during the load hold periods the anchor load shall not be allowed to deviate from the test pressure by more than num mpa .
when required repumping back to test load shall be done to compensate for small movements hydraulic oil seepage and changes in temperature of the hydraulic oil .
the load shall always be returned to the specified test load prior to taking the movement reading at the specified interval .
the test load shall not be exceeded during the period of observation .
num removal of preproduction test anchors the test anchors not approved to be incorporated into the work shall be removed flush with the surrounding ground and the test site restored to its pretest conditions .
the test anchorages shall not be removed until the contract administrator has given permission in writing to remove them .
num production anchors num general every temporary and permanent anchor shall be tested according to the proof test permanent anchors or proof test temporary anchors clause as appropriate .
num proof test permanent anchors the following proof test shall be applied to the anchorages after preloading the anchor to num dl for num minutes the proof test shall be conducted by incrementally loading and unloading the anchor according to the following schedule or until the anchorage fails as determined by the contract administrator .
the acceptance criteria apply to only the peak loading .
page num rev .
date num opss num loads shall be applied as follows num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl where dl specified working load of anchorage at num dl the load shall be maintained for a minimum of num minutes .
measurement shall be recorded according to the following time increment schedule .
num min num min num min num min num min num min num min num min num min num min .
if the acceptance criteria as specified herein are met the anchorage shall be prestressed to num dl then shall be lockedoff at the transfer load of num dl .
if the acceptance criteria as specified herein are not met in the numminute period the test shall be extended as required with readings at numminute increments up to num minutes .
if the acceptance criteria as specified herein are not met the provisions of the unacceptable stressing results clause shall apply .
num proof test temporary anchors the proof test shall be conducted by incrementally loading the anchor according to the following schedule al num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl al and adjust to lockoff load where al alignment load dl specified working load of anchorage at the test load of num dl the load shall remain constant for num minutes and the total movement shall be recorded at num num num num num num and num minutes .
if the difference between the total movements at num minute and num minutes exceeds num mm the test load shall be maintained for an additional num minutes and the movements readings shall be recorded at num num num num and num minutes .
the anchor shall be returned to al after holding the load at test load for num minutes and the residual movement recorded .
the hydraulic pressure during the load hold period shall not deviate by more than num mpa and the load shall be returned to the test load prior to taking the movement reading .
the total movements at each load increment shall be recorded .
num lockoff procedure after testing has been completed the load in the tendon shall be such that after seating losses wedge seating the specified lockoff load has been applied to the anchor tendon .
the magnitude of the lockoff load shall be num dl or as specified by the contract administrator and shall not exceed num of the ultimate load of the tendon or bar fpu .
the wedges shall be seated at a minimum load of num of fpu .
if the lockoff load is less than num shims shall be used under the wedge plate and the wedges seated at num of fpu .
the shims shall then be removed to reduce the load in the tendon to the desired lockoff load .
bar tendons may be locked off at any load less than num of fpu .
page num rev .
date num opss num num liftoff tests a minimum of three liftoff tests shall be conducted at each site .
the location of the anchor to be tested and the time of test shall be as determined by the quality verification engineer .
the liftoff test shall not be performed until num hours has elapsed after transferring the lockoff load .
the method of testing shall be as detailed on the working drawings .
the liftoff test shall be performed after transferring the load to the anchor and prior to removing the jack from its location .
the liftoff load shall be determined by reapplying the load to the tendon or bar to lift off the wedge plate or anchor nut without unseating the wedges or turning the anchor nut .
num acceptance criteria an anchor shall be considered acceptable when all three of the following acceptance test criteria are satisfied a the total creep movement at test load during the last log time cycle is less than num mm .
b the apparent free stressing length based on the elastic movement at the test load is not less than num of the designed free stressing length .
c the load measured during the liftoff test is within num of the designed lockoff load .
num unacceptable stressing results for the anchorages that do not meet the acceptance criteria for the performance test or the proof test the contractor shall submit one of the following alternatives as a proposal to the contract administrator for approval a abandon the deficient anchor and install a new anchor .
b lockoff the anchors at no more than num of the accepted test load sustained during test or as determined by the contract administrator and install an additional anchor to compensate for the deficiency .
c post grout the anchor at a grouting pressure not exceeding num mpa or as recommended by the contract administrator and then conduct a proof test and apply the acceptance criteria to the test results .
the post grouting shall be terminated immediately if any distress on the ground surface is observed during grouting .
d readjust the transfer load to num dl for an anchor that does not meet the liftoff criteria and repeat the test after a minimum of num hours .
if the anchor does not meet the liftoff test criteria after completing this procedure it shall be considered unacceptable .
num quality control num general in addition to the quality control procedures initiated by the contractor the following work shall also be done .
num quality of grout mixture num general the contractor shall be responsible for testing of bleeding preparation and initial storage of grout cubes for determination of compressive strength and delivery of the grout cubes to a testing laboratory designated by the owner .
page num rev .
date num opss num the contractor shall employ staff from a testing company certified according to csa anum certification for additional tests numb by an organization accredited by the standards council of canada to carry out testing for bleeding making and curing of grout cubes and early strength determination .
grout cubes for compressive strength test and testing of bleeding shall be made on a level vibration free surface .
num testing for bleeding the testing for bleeding of the grout shall be according to csa anumb .
prior to the grouting operation in the presence of the contract administrator a trial batch shall be mixed and the grout tested for bleeding to ensure that the grout meets the requirements of this specification .
the trial batch of grout shall not be used in the actual grouting operation .
during the grouting operation bleeding measurements shall be performed on the grout sampled at the mixer .
the measurements shall be performed at least once a day and as requested by the contract administrator .
the bleeding test results shall be submitted to the contract administrator in writing .
the test results that indicate the grout is not meeting the requirements of the contract documents shall be reported immediately to the contract administrator and the grouting operation halted until the cause of the problem is identified and corrected .
num making curing and transportation of cubes for compressive strength tests grout cubes shall be prepared as follows on site from the grout pumped into the anchor body a one set of grout cubes consisting of three cubes shall be made each day the grouting operations are carried out .
b the grout cubes shall be prepared according to csa anumb and stored at a temperature between num and num c and shall not be moved prior to demoulding .
c the grout cubes shall be demoulded and transported to the laboratory designated by the owner within num hours .
d the grout cubes shall be transported in a sealed white opaque plastic bag containing at least num ml of water and maintained at a temperature between num and num c. num early strength determination the contractor shall prepare and test additional grout cubes to determine when the grout has attained a strength of num mpa .
the laboratory conducting the test shall be certified as specified in this specification .
num certificate of conformance a completed certificate of conformance shall be submitted to the contract administrator upon completion of the anchor installation and stressing operations .
the qualification verification engineers seal and signature shall be affixed on the completed certificate of conformance confirming that the anchors have been supplied installed and stressed in general conformance with the working drawings .
the certificate of conformance shall also certify that the interim milestone inspections have been completed as specified .
num management of excess materials management of excess material shall be as specified in the contract documents .
page num rev .
date num opss num num measurement for payment num actual measurement num preproduction test anchors and production anchors measurement of preproduction test anchors and production anchors shall be by length in metres along the actual length of the anchor from the anchor plate to the tip .
num postgrouting of bond length measurement of postgrouting of bond length shall be by mass in kilograms of mixed grout used .
num basis of payment num preproduction test anchors item production anchor item postgrouting of bond length item payment at the contract price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to do the work .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numa november num for use while designing municipal contracts note this is a nonmandatory commentary appendix intended to provide information to a designer during the design stage of a contract on the use of the ops specification in a municipal contract .
this appendix does not form part of the standard specification .
actions and considerations discussed in this appendix are for information purposes only and do not supersede an owners design decisions and methodology .
designer actionconsiderations the designer should specify the following in the contract documents anchor hole diameter orientation and length tolerances and inclination .
num grout strength .
num number of preproduction test anchors for owner designed systems .
num grout testing laboratory .
num the designer should determine if the following are required and if so they should be specify in the contract documents waterproofing anchor holes .
num postgrouting of bond length of anchors .
num bond stress .
num opss num contains information written for provincial contracts .
to ensure completeness of municipal contract documents the designer should invoke appendix numb .
the appendix contains supplemental requirements that modify opss num so it can be used by a municipality in its contracts .
the designer should ensure that the general conditions of contract and the num series general specifications are included in the contract documents .
related ontario provincial standard drawings no information provided here .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numb november num for use in municipal contracts when referenced in the contract documents note this is a nonmandatory additional information appendix intended to provide supplementary requirements for the ops specification in a municipal contract when the appendix is invoked by the owner .
it is written in mandatory language to permit invoking it by reference in the contract documents .
if the appendix has not been invoked by reference in the contract documents it does not apply .
supplemental requirements for using opss num in municipal contracts opss num prestressed soil and rock anchors is amended as follows num definitions section num is amended by the deletion of the definitions for certificate of conformance and for quality verification engineer .
section num is amended by the addition of the following certificate of installation means a document issued by the design engineer or designchecking engineer confirming that the specified components of the work are in general conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
num working drawings the first paragraph of clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following the contractor shall submit num sets of working drawings to the contract administrator at least num weeks prior to commencement of the work for the prestressed soil and rock anchor installation .
prior to making a submission the seals and signatures of a design engineer and a designchecking engineer shall be affixed on the working drawings verifying that the drawings are consistent with the contract documents .
clause num is amended by the addition of the following num return of submissions two copies of each submission shall be returned as one of the following a stamped with the wording that allows for permission to construct .
in this case work can commence on receipt of the drawings by the contractor .
b stamped with the wording that allows for permission to construct as noted .
in this case work can start on receipt of the drawings by the contractor .
the drawings shall be updated as noted and shall be sealed and signed by the design engineer and the designchecking engineer stating the drawings have been revised according to the noted comments .
c showing only required changes .
in this case the drawings shall be updated as required and the submission process repeated .
the contractor shall have a copy of the stamped updated or accepted drawings at the site prior to the commencement of the work of the prestressed soil and rock anchors .
page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numb num slurry the first sentence of clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following at least num days prior to the commencement of the work the following information for the slurry shall be submitted to the contract administrator .
num milestone inspections the first sentence of clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following the design engineer or the designchecking engineer shall witness interim inspections of the following work num general the last paragraph of clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following anchor tests shall be conducted at a time mutually acceptable to the contractor and contract administrator .
the design engineer or the designchecking engineer shall witness the testing .
num liftoff tests the first paragraph of clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following a minimum of three liftoff tests shall be conducted at each site .
the location of the anchor to be tested and the time of test shall be as determined by the design engineer or designchecking engineer .
the liftoff test shall not be performed until num hours has elapsed after transferring the lockoff load .
the method of testing shall be as detailed on the working drawings .
num certificate of conformance clause num is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following num certificate of installation a completed certificate of installation shall be submitted to the contract administrator upon completion of the anchor installation and stressing operations .
the design engineer or designchecking engineers seal and signature shall be affixed on the completed certificate of installation confirming that the anchors have been supplied installed and stressed in general conformance with the working drawings .
the certificate of installation shall also certify that the interim milestone inspections have been completed as specified .
num construction section num is amended by the addition of the following num as built drawings as built drawings shall be prepared by the contractor for the soil and rock anchor installations as follows page num rev .
date num opss num appendix numb a for all work incorporated in the completed structure that required the submission of working drawings .
for all changes to the original contract document requirements .
the as built drawings shall be submitted to the contract administrator prior to the final acceptance of the work in a reproducible format specified by the owner .
the submission of as built drawings shall be accompanied by a letter bearing the seal and signature of an engineer stating the as built drawings contain all the changes to the work .
the as built drawings shall bear the seal and signature of an engineer .
page num rev .
date num opss num
