manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendment february num num series num site clearance contents clause title page num num general num num num clearing num num num existing trees bushes and hedges numf num num explosives and blasting numf num num hazardous materials numf volume num series num specification for highway works site clearance amendment february num num site clearance num num general num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num num clearing num num the contractor shall demolish break up and remove buildings and structures as described in contract specific appendix num and superficial obstructions on the site in the way of or otherwise affected by the permanent works .
the extent of any partial demolition of structures shall be as described in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall clear each part of the site at times and to the extent indicated on the drawings .
the contractor shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num with respect to ecological or other environmental site clearance measures or restrictions .
the contractor shall ensure that individual trees shrubs and other features and areas stated on the drawings to be preserved are suitably identified and protected .
the contractor shall prepare a method statement describing the approach for such works and their operation .
this shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation for acceptance prior to the commencement of site clearance works .
should any trees shrubs and other planting features and planting areas which it is intended to preserve be killed removed or damaged by the contractor during the course of the works they shall be replaced by the contractor with plants of the same species and equal in size to those killed removed or damaged all in accordance with series num or made good by arboricultural work in accordance with clause num or as directed by the overseeing organisation or replaced or made good to the satisfaction of the overseeing organisation .
such work shall be carried out at the contractors own expense .
num num where the line of an existing fence hedge or wall is cut by the site boundary the severance shall be made good unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num either by the continuation of the fence hedge or wall in a different direction or by its termination .
in the case of a strained wire or chain link fence a straining post shall be installed and the fence restrained .
num num underground structures chambers and foundations described in contract specific appendix num shall be demolished to the depths prescribed properly cleaned out and filled .
to permit free drainage holes shall be made at num mm centres over the whole area of slabs basements etc which are not removed and which are liable to form a barrier to water .
num num disused soil and surface water drains sewers cables and ducts together with any bed or haunch or surround within num m of formation level shall be removed and over num m below formation shall be left unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
the ends of existing drains and sewers no longer required because of alterations to the drainage layout shall be sealed in accordance with clause num .
all trenches shall be backfilled in accordance with clause num unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor subject to any instructions or contrary directions in accordance with the contract shall take all measures required by any statutory undertaker the management of other publicly owned services or owners of privately owned services or supplies for disconnection and proper sealing off of all redundant drains services and supplies .
num num all materials arising from site clearance which are not required or unacceptable for use in the permanent works and not included in contract specific appendix num shall become the property of the contractor and shall be disposed of by him .
volume num series num specification for highway works site clearance amendment february num numf materials included in contract specific appendix num shall be carefully dismantled taken up or taken down cleaned and retained for reuse stacked labeled and protected or loaded and transported to store as described in contract specific appendix num and items damaged in this operation shall be replaced .
all replacements shall be of equivalent quality to the original materials .
when required in contract specific appendix num voids left by items that have been removed shall be backfilled immediately in accordance with the appropriate clauses in series num .
num num topsoil excavated to enable parapet or boundary walls to be set back to new lines or to be erected on the boundaries of the site shall be reserved for reuse .
after erection of the walls the topsoil shall be spread over the disturbed ground any surplus being disposed of as described in clause num .
num num all existing road markings and road studs on carriageways open to traffic shall be removed as soon as they become superfluous or a hazard to traffic and the carriageway reinstated in accordance with the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
road markings shall be removed in accordance with clause num .
num num existing tensioned safety barriers shall be detensioned to ensure safe removal .
num num existing trees bushes and hedges num num unless otherwise required in contract specific appendix num trees bushes and hedges shall be uprooted or cut down as near to ground level as possible .
all felled timber shall be disposed of by the contractor unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
num num stumps and roots from trees bushes and hedges shall be grubbed up or blasted in accordance with clause num and disposed of by the contractor .
holes left by removal of the stumps or roots shall within one week be filled with acceptable material as defined in clause num and table num and be compacted in compliance with clause num and table num .
num num unless otherwise required in contract specific appendix num where shown on the drawings existing trees bushes and hedges shall be cut back to the lines shown on the drawings in accordance with clause num .
for the purposes of this subclause trees shall be defined as a woody plant greater than numm in height and a bush shall be defined as a woody plant of numm height or less .
num num explosives and blasting num num blasting for site clearance shall comply with clause num except that references in that clause to contract specific appendix num shall be deleted and replaced by reference to contract specific appendix num and such blasting shall be confined to the locations and be within the limits stated therein .
num num hazardous materials num num the treatment of hazardous materials encountered in site clearance shall comply with any specific requirements stated in contract specific appendix num as well as relevant legislation and any other health and safety measures .
manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendment may num num series num fencing contents clause title page num num general num num requirements for temporary and permanent fences num num temporary fencing num num num timber quality num num num fittings num num num permanent fencing num num permanent fencing for accommodation works num num gates and stiles num num removing and reerecting existing fences and gates num num not used num num num preservation of timber num num painting of timber fences gates stiles and posts num volume num series num specification for highway works fencing fencing num num general num temporary and permanent fences shall comply with this series and the quality management schemes detailed in appendix a .
num num organisations involved in fencing works for highway schemes shall comply with this series and the associated quality management schemes detailed in appendix a .
num requirements for temporary and permanent fences num num as soon as the contractor is placed in possession of any part of the site he shall immediately erect fencing on the boundaries of the land as shown on the drawings .
in places where permanent fencing can not be erected immediately or where none is required the contractor shall erect and when and where necessary reerect and maintain temporary fencing and subsequently take down and remove as necessary .
the type of temporary fencing shall be chosen by the contractor unless otherwise described in appendix num and may be selected from the four standard types for highway works described in clause num taking into account the usage of the adjoining land .
unless otherwise described in appendix num the contractor shall not use barbed wire in areas accessible to the general public .
access shall be made in temporary fencing as necessary for the use of the occupiers of adjacent lands .
num temporary fencing shall remain in position either until it is replaced by permanent fencing or until its removal on completion of the works unless otherwise described in appendix num .
num when concrete for post footings is required it shall comply with clause num .
num temporary fencing num num temporary fencing shall be appropriate to the usage of the adjoining land and unless otherwise described in appendix num may be selected from the following types i post and wire fencing type sw num complying with bs num part num in accordance with hcd drawing number hnum with at least two of the wires being barbed .
ii post and wire fencing as subclause i above but with no barbed wires .
iii cleft chestnut pale fencing type cw num complying with bs num part num in accordance with hcd drawing number hnum .
iv wooden post and wire fence type cnum complying with bs num part num in accordance with hcd drawing number hnum .
num if temporary fencing is removed temporarily for the execution of any part of the works it shall be reinstated as soon as possible and in the meantime the gap in the fencing shall be patrolled so that no unauthorised entry on to adjoining land takes place and no stock escapes from the adjoining land .
num unless otherwise described in appendix num timber for temporary fencing need not have preservation treatment .
num num timber quality num num timber for use in permanent works shall be either of appropriate natural durability or be treated with wood preservatives in compliance with clause num .
where natural durability is used as the criterion the timber shall be of class num if used in ground contact e.g .
fence posts and of class num or better if used out of ground contact e.g .
fence rails according to the classification given in bs en num .
num num if any sapwood is present in the timber irrespective of the natural durability of the heartwood the timber shall be treated with preservative num num unless otherwise described in this specification and in appendix num timber for permanent fencing shall comply with bs num timber for field gates and posts shall comply with bs num and timber for stiles bridle gates and kissing gates shall comply with bs num .
num num all timber for permanent fencing field gates and posts stiles bridle gates and kissing gates shall be of sawn timber conforming to bs num annex a .
non structural timber in environmental barriers shall comply with the requirements of subclause num .
structural timber in environmental barriers shall be stress graded and marked to comply with bs en num and where appropriate bs num bs num or bs en num or other grading rules accepted in bs num and bs en num .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works fencing num num for checking compliance with strength requirements samples shall be taken by the manufacturer or supplier in accordance with the suggested sampling plan in annex b of bs num .
num num all timber and wood contained in products supplied or used for fences including field gates and posts stiles bridle gates kissing gates and environmental barriers shall comply with sustainability criteria described in clause num .
num num fittings num num bolts screws and nuts shall comply with bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num for bs en iso num property class num or num unless otherwise described in appendix num .
washers shall comply with bs num .
nails shall comply with bs num .
bolts washers and nails shall be galvanised to comply with bs en iso num unless they are stainless steel .
num num permanent fencing num num permanent fencing shall comply with this clause and the additional requirements described in appendix num .
all permanent fencing unless otherwise described in appendix num shall be erected to present a flowing alignment both in plan and elevation following approximately the level of the ground and the contractor shall trim the ground along the line of the fence when required in appendix num .
where the ground is uneven or undulating the contractor shall provide extra posts stakes and ground anchors as necessary to ensure that the bottom line wire in planting works fencing does not rise more than num mm above ground level .
the fencing shall be neatly and effectively joined to existing hedges fences and to other structures to comply with hcd drawing number hnum and chapter num of td num dmrb num unless otherwise described in appendix num .
planting works fencing shall be joined to existing boundaries providing a secure joint capable of withstanding entry by rabbits or larger animals .
num timber fencing for motorways shall be wooden post and rail fence with four rails type spr num complying with bs num part num to dimensions shown on hcd drawing number hnum .
both ends of posts and rails shall be cross cut at right angles to the length of the piece .
the timber species and preservation treatment shall comply with clause num and any additional stockproofing required shall be as described in appendix num .
painting if required in appendix num shall comply with clause num and concrete surround to posts if required in appendix num shall comply with subclause num .
amendment may num num num wire dropper fences for motorways shall be as shown on hcd drawing numbers hnum hnum hnum and hnum .
they shall comply with bs num part num sections num and num with the following clauses amended as below and with any additional requirements described in appendix num .
on completion of the tensioning of the line wires all fittings droppers and connections shall be painted with plastic paint of the same colour as the fence posts and wire within num hours of erection when required in appendix num .
clause num delete text and insert high tensile wire zinc and plastic coated complying with clause num shall be used unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
appendix b clause b.num delete text and insert steel posts and struts shall be galvanized and plastic coated to comply with clause num .
clause num add only dowelled ends to straining and intermediate posts and struts shall be used .
turning posts shall be provided and fitted with num mm x num mm x num mm thrust plates complying with clause num .
as an alternative to being holed a steel fillet may be welded to the straining post to allow for bolting the strut and post together .
clause num add fence post rivets and wire vices shall be as described in appendix num .
clause num delete text and insert concrete for surrounding the base of posts and struts shall comply with clause num .
table num .
add turning posts length m section chs mm x mm num num x num num num x num num num x num volume num series num specification for highway works fencing clause num delete paragraphs num to num and insert all posts and struts shall be set in concrete and the concrete surround shall be filled to within num mm of the ground level .
clause num add turning posts and fittings shall be provided as described in appendix num .
clause num amend numnd sentence to read the interval between a dropper and a post or between adjacent droppers shall be as shown on hcd drawing numbers hnum hnum and hnum .
planting works fencing num fencing for the protection of planted areas shall be one of the following types required as described in appendix num i hexagonal wire netting fencing complying with bs num part num section num and in accordance with hcd drawing number hnum .
ii rectangular wire mesh and hexagonal wire netting fencing complying with bs num part num section num and in accordance with hcd drawing number hnum .
iii wooden post and four rail fencing type spr num complying with bs num part num and in accordance with hcd drawing number hnum .
iv wooden driven post fencing in accordance with hcd drawing number hnum .
num the turned out portion of the hexagonal wire netting of rabbitproof fencing shall be treated in accordance with one of the methods given below as described in appendix num i num mm of netting buried vertically into the ground beneath the fence with a further num mm turned out towards the rabbit harbourage .
the excavation shall be backfilled and rammed .
ii num mm of netting turned out towards the rabbit harbourage laid flat to the ground contours and pegged at num mm centres with num mm long x num mm diameter galvanised wire pins bent hairpin pattern .
iii num mm of netting buried vertically into the ground beneath the fence with a further num mm of netting turned out towards the rabbit harbourage and covered with turves .
the contractor shall cut and lift sections of turf at least num mm thick from the inside of the planting area and transfer them to cover the whole of the turned out portion of the netting .
iv the netting shall be buried vertically to a depth of num mm below existing ground level .
the excavation shall be backfilled and rammed .
wire mesh to permanent or existing fencing num where required in appendix num wire mesh shall be attached to permanent or existing fencing in accordance with hcd drawing numbers hnum hnum and hnum .
num the contractor shall check the condition of the lengths of existing fencing to which mesh is to be attached before commencing work .
where there is damage to the existing fencing the contractor shall report this to the overseeing organisation before commencing attachment of the mesh .
fenced tree guards num where required in appendix num fenced tree guards shall be provided in accordance with hcd drawing number hnum .
num permanent fencing for accommodation works num permanent fencing shall be provided for accommodation works and shall comply with this series and the particular requirements described in appendix num .
num gates and stiles num field gates and posts shall comply with bs num and clauses num and num .
they shall be provided to the dimensions shown on hcd drawing numbers hnum to hnum .
painting if required in appendix num shall comply with clause num .
fittings for field gates shall be as shown on hcd drawing numbers hnumhnum .
num num stiles bridle gates kissing gates and gates in planting works fencing shall comply with bs num and clauses num and num .
they shall be provided to the dimensions shown on hcd drawing numbers hnum hnum hnum hnum hnum hnum and hnum .
num concrete for post foundations shall comply with clause num .
num any additional stockproofing required to gates and stiles shall be as described in appendix num .
amendment november num num volume num series num specification for highway works fencing num num where access gates are to be provided in a length of fencing that incorporates wildlife mesh the underside of the gate shall include the measures described in appendix num .
badger gates num num where required in appendix num badger gates shall be provided in accordance with hcd drawing number hnum .
marine ply timber shall comply with bs num and bs num .
num removing and reerecting existing fences and gates num where required in appendix num existing fences gates and stiles with posts shall be carefully taken down laid aside removed or later reerected in compliance with clauses num num and num as specified in subclause num .
num num fences gates stiles and posts which are to be reerected shall have any existing paint removed and shall be prepared and treated to comply with clause num .
num num if any posts rails or lengths of fencing are removed to facilitate repairs or renewal of existing fences the gap in the fencing shall be patrolled or closed with appropriate temporary fencing in accordance with clause num together with any existing wildlife mesh attachments .
num not used num num preservation of timber num prior to preservation treatment and when the moisture content is num or below determined in accordance with bs en num or bs en num the timber quality shall comply with clause num .
defects unaffected by moisture content shall not be accepted at any time .
num num the preservation of timber shall be specified in accordance with the system described in bs en num and shall comply with national highways sector schemes for quality management in highway works sector scheme num preservative treatment of timber .
i num unless otherwise specified in appendix num the preservative used shall be one which can be used in accordance with bs num for use classes num and num for a desired service life of num years as described in ii iii and iv below .
ii num for timber used out of ground contact the retention and penetration requirements of the preservative shall be in accordance with the relevant provisions of bs num num year specification .
assessment for compliance with these requirements shall be carried out using the scheme described in v and vi below .
iii num for timber used in ground contact where the preservative is a creosote preservative complying with bs en num the penetration and retention requirements shall be in accordance with the relevant provisions in bs num num year specification with the exception of douglas fir .
douglas fir treated with creosote shall comply with penetration class pnum of bs en num i.e .
complete sapwood penetration and the preservative retention in the analytical zone shall be not less than num kgmnum .
assessment for compliance with these requirements shall be carried out using the scheme described in v and vi below .
iv num for timber used in ground contact where the preservative is any other acceptable type of formulation the penetration requirements for all timber species shall be in accordance with the relevant provisions in bs num num year specification .
the preservative retention shall be derived from bsnum num years specification and num years ground contact field test data for example bs num interpreted according to the principles in bs en num .
assessment for compliance with these requirements shall be carried out using the scheme described in v and vi below .
v num to demonstrate that the required penetration has been achieved the sampling scheme recommended in bs en num for direct testing shall be followed .
the number of units to be sampled at random from the treated batch shall be determined using general inspection level ii as defined in iso num .
penetration shall be determined for each selected unit from sub samples e.g .
core borings taken as recommended in bs en num .
to determine whether the treated batch has achieved the required penetration an acceptable quality level aql of num for permeable timbers e.g .
scots pine and an aql of num for resistant timbers e.g .
douglas fir shall be used to establish passfail criteria from iso num .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works fencing a certificate of treatment showing the basis of compliance with the specification shall accompany each batch or part batch delivered to site .
vi num compliance with the retention requirement within a batch of treated timber shall be calculated from the chemical analysis of the combined analytical zones of the sub samples taken to determine penetration .
the retention shall be equal to or greater than the appropriate value derived as described in ii iii and iv above .
num painting of timber fences gates stiles and posts general num painting shall be carried out in accordance with the recommendations in the code of practice bs num .
num all timber fabricated into units before delivery to the site and which is required to be painted shall be primed at the works .
priming num num surfaces of wood shall be clean and dry before being primed .
priming paint shall comply with either type c primer to bs num or ready mixed aluminium priming paint complying with bs num .
undercoats and finishing coats num after erection all exposed primed surfaces shall be painted with one coat of undercoat as described in appendix num .
num two finishing coats of the colour and type described in appendix num shall be applied .
coloured woodstain num num coloured woodstains shall be applied as described in appendix num .
amendment may num numf manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendment may num num series num road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian contents clause title page num num road restraint systems general num vehicle restraint systems general requirements num num vehicle restraint systems general num num num components for maintenance and repair of legacy vehicle restraint systems num safety barriers terminals transitions removable barrier sections and crash cushions num num installation of safety barriers except vehicle parapets terminals transitions removable barrier sections and crash cushions overall requirements num num num site testing num num num temporary safety barriers num vehicle parapets num num general num num num anchorages and attachment systems for vehicle parapets num num num amendments and additions to bs num num num num inspection and testing of vehicle parapet posts num num num site tests on anchorages in drilled holes for vehicle parapets num pedestrian restraint systems num num pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails num antiglare screens num num antiglare screens num num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works num amendment may num volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian amendment may num num road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian num num road restraint systems general num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num num road restraint systems rrs shall be able to achieve the specified performance at the temperatures described in the national annex na to bs en num figures na.num and na.num and determined in accordance with figure num of bs en num and the na .
additionally the recommended differences in the note to clause num of bs en num shall be taken into account to determine the most severe temperature effect assuming the rail of a parapet to be equivalent to a structural element in num num note .
vehicle restraint systems general requirements num num vehicle restraint systems general num num vehicle restraint systems vrs shall conform to this series and the requirements stated in contract specific appendix num .
vrs other than the following shall conform to bs en num and be ce marked maintenance of legacy systems as described in subclause num transitions terminals barrier gates removable barrier sections and vehicle parapets and combined vehiclepedestrian parapets constructed as bespoke .
these systems shall conform to the requirements stated in paragraphs i to iv below .
i maintenance of legacy systems as described in subclause num shall conform to clauses num and num. ii transitions to and between safety barriers including vehicle parapets shall conform to the requirements of dd env num. iii terminals shall conform to the requirements of dd env num. iv barrier gates removable barrier sections shall conform to the requirements of dd env num. v vehicle parapets and combined vehicle pedestrian parapets constructed as bespoke shall conform to clause num .
num num the minimum performance class requirements containment level impact severity level isl working width class w vehicle intrusion vi performance level redirection zone class z permanent lateral displacement zone class d performance class p permanent lateral displacement zone d. y. x .
exit box classz and other requirements such as the length of need as defined in tdnum dmrb num the setback as defined in td num the minimum height of parapets requirement for pedestrian provision and the maximum height of the road restraint that allows the required visibility shall be as described in contract specific appendix num .
num acceptance of proposals num num details of the vehicle restraint systems proposed by the contractor for both new installations or for maintenance of existing systems shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation at least four weeks before volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian num amendment may num the commencement of vehicle restraint system work for acceptance with the following supporting information demonstrating compliance with this specification and the requirements set out in contract specific appendix num .
where a declaration of performance is required to be submitted this is as required by the construction products regulation eu no .
num cpr and the relevant harmonised standard .
i for safety barriers excluding vehicle parapets a a declaration of performance demonstrating compliance with the contract requirements for the essential characteristics plus additional information as necessary to demonstrate that the chosen systems meets the location specific design criteria as stated in the contract specific specification .
ii for vehicle parapets a a declaration of performance demonstrating compliance with the contract requirements for the essential characteristics plus additional information as necessary to demonstrate that the chosen systems meets the location specific design criteria as stated in the contract specific specification .
b when required in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall provide evidence that demonstrates the following that the declared performance was achieved in testing in accordance with bs en num parts num and num and that the test vehicle did not in any way touch or take advantage of structures which will not be present on the final bridge installation that is if the vehicle dropped down behind the bridge installation it did not touch soil or other supporting devices or any other feature .
iii for crash cushions a declaration of performance demonstrating compliance with the contract requirements for the essential characteristics plus additional information as necessary to demonstrate that the chosen systems meets the location specific design criteria as stated in the contract specific specification .
iv for the maintenance and repair of legacy safety barriers as described in subclause num a documentation showing compliance with and operation of the quality management requirements of clause num and associated quality management schemes listed in appendix a .
this shall include the quality plans required in subclause num which shall make specific reference to the management of the vehicle restraint operations and all associated operations .
the documentation shall identify quality management procedures for each vehicle restraint activity for each system included in the works .
b for legacy systems documentation showing compliance with the safety barrier systems drawings such as those detailed in the non proprietary safety barrier systems rev num drawings or outwith the highways england network guidance should be sort from the appropriate overseeing organisation .
v for vehicle parapets and combined vehicle pedestrian parapets constructed as bespoke .
a documentation showing compliance with bs num as amended by this series and td num dmrb num. vi for combined vehiclepedestrian parapets a declaration of performance demonstrating vehicle containment achieves compliance with the contract requirements for the essential characteristics plus additional information as necessary to demonstrate that the chosen systems meets the location specific design criteria as stated in the contract specific specification .
b for maintenance of legacy systems as described in subclause num documentation showing compliance with bs num as amended by this series num and td num dmrb num for pedestrian containment .
c for the pedestrian containment aspects documentation as per the requirements of subclause num .
where such documentation has previously been submitted to the overseeing organisation and the volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian amendment may num num system has been listed as described in subclause num further submission of this documentation may not be necessary .
where the contractor proposes to use such systems the contractor shall confirm the relaxation of these documentation requirements with the overseeing organisation .
d when required in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall provide evidence that demonstrates the following that the declared performance was achieved in testing in accordance with bs en num parts num and num and that the test vehicle did not in any way touch or take advantage of structures which will not be present on the final bridge installation that is if the vehicle dropped down behind the bridge installation it did not touch soil or other supporting devices or any other feature .
vii for transitions between vehicle restraint systems a documentation showing compliance with and operation of the quality management requirements of clause num and associated quality management schemes listed in appendix a as required in subclause num paragraph iva .
b documentation demonstrating compliance with dd env num and the contract performance requirements .
c documentation as per the requirements of subclause num .
where such documentation has previously been submitted to the overseeing organisation and the system has been listed as described in subclause num further submission of this documentation may not be necessary .
where the contractor proposes to use such systems the contractor shall confirm the relaxation of these documentation requirements with the overseeing organisation .
viii for terminals to vehicle restraint systems a documentation showing compliance with and operation of the quality management requirements of clause num and associated quality management schemes listed in appendix a as required in subclause num paragraph iva .
b documentation demonstrating compliance with dd env num and the contract performance requirements .
c documentation as per the requirements of subclause num .
where such documentation has previously been submitted to the overseeing organisation and the system has been listed as described in subclause num further submission of this documentation may not be necessary .
where the contractor proposes to use such systems the contractor shall confirm the relaxation of these documentation requirements with the overseeing organisation .
num num where specified in subclause num the following information shall be provided to the overseeing organisation .
where required the contractor shall complete the proforma included in contract specific appendix num. i test report in accordance with either bs ennum annex a or bs en num annex a or dd env num clause num. ii videohigh speed film of test annotated showing date test number and performance class .
iii still photographs of complete installation including anchorage points .
iv still photographs of vehicle before and after impact .
v full drawings of tested items .
vi certification from the manufacturer that the item tested complies with the drawings supplied .
vii certificate from a test house accredited in accordance with the requirements of subclause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian num amendment may num num durability num num safety barriers vehicle parapets terminals transitions removable barrier sections and crash cushions shall conform to the following .
i all components shall be designed to achieve a serviceable life of not less than a num years for metal safety barriers terminals transitions removable barrier sections and crash cushions b num years for concrete safety barrier systems except for temporary safety barriers where the serviceable life shall be not less than num years c num years for metal vehicle parapets and metal components of combined metal and concrete vehicle parapets and d num years for concrete vehicle parapets and concrete components of combined metal and concrete vehicle parapets and ii for metal vehicle parapets and metal components of combined metal and concrete parapets the serviceable life shall except where stated in contract specific appendix num be obtained without the requirement for any maintenance other than that resulting from accidental damage .
in addition metal components of combined metal and concrete parapets shall be capable of replacement without damage to the concrete components .
num information required to be provided by the contractor prior to installation num num the following information shall be provided by the contractor to the overseeing organisation all documentation shall be in english .
for all proposed road restraint systems i information as required in subclause num. ii installation drawings .
iii manufacturers installation instructions or installation manual including foundation requirements and test methods to verify their performance .
iv manufacturers repair and maintenance manual .
v for each organisation undertaking vehicle restraint system work certificates of registration to the relevant national highways sector schemes listed in appendix a .
the certificates of registration shall include in the scope of registration installation of the vehicle restraint systems being installed .
vi where contract specific appendix num specifies requirements for loads imposed by road restraint systems on foundations or structures the nominal loads direct forces moments and coexistent shears that will be transferred from the barrier or parapet to the structure or foundation shall be provided .
num information required to be provided by the contractor after installation num num the contractor shall provide to the overseeing organisation asbuilt drawings which shall include plans and details of the constructed system .
the contractor shall also provide to the overseeing organisation for each proprietary system installed a certificate certifying that it has been installed fully in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num marking num num all components of systems that fall within the scope of the construction products regulation eu no .
num cpr shall be marked in accordance with the requirements of the cpr and the relevant harmonised standard .
volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian amendment may num num num handling and storage num num all components shall be protected from damage and handled and stacked in such a way that permanent damage is not caused particularly to threaded components .
means shall be provided to avoid damage to galvanized coatings and any damage that does occur shall be repaired in accordance with bs en iso num .
num installation instructions num num the contractor shall ensure that the installation instructions or installation manual as required by bs en num for a proposed system includes all the information necessary to install the road restraint system in the locations shown on the drawings such that the system will meet its declared performance .
num num installation instructions shall be appropriate to the road restraint system being installed and its location .
the use of the system relative to different ground and other conditions of installation and use including limitations e.g .
permitted temperature range shall be defined in the installation manual .
the installation manual shall also include the following information and any additional information appropriate to the system proposed and its proposed location .
i erection a assembly drawings of the product tested including tolerances anchorages end parts where relevant installation height above pavement andor ground levels other installation details appropriate to the installation for the specific locations including changes relevant to different set backs from the edge of carriageway etc .
b description of the installation works including equipment and specific details for installation on a curve with minimum allowed radius on a convex curve and concave curve c procedures for installation erection assembly foundations anchorages and bolt torques when relevant etc .
d all tools required to perform a proper installation of the system e ambient temperature and humidity at time of installation if relevant and how installation should be adjusted for the ambient conditions at the time of installation f details of tensioning if relevant g particular conditions applicable to the use of the product e.g .
provisions for use under certain conditions h description of the soil pavement andor foundations characteristics and conditions suitable for the system and information about conditions which can influence the behaviour of the product i details of any testing of the installation or other on installation specific testing e.g .
post push tests to prove the proposed foundation system j any other relevant recycling information details of toxic or dangerous materials present in the works .
ii maintenance and inspection a provisions for repair inspection and maintenance including indications for disassembling and reassembling or reconstruction of damaged system b in service tolerances including for installation height .
iii the following information is applicable specifically to safety barriers a recommended range of length of the safety barrier minimum maximum curve radius etc .
b provisions for installing lengths above the minimum volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian num amendment may num c recommended arrangements for dealing with exposed rail ends e.g .
flaring terminals etc .
d recommended soils slopes possibility of plinth installation and specific instructions e recommended arrangements for drainage through andor in front of the safety barrier f other safety barrier types which can easily be connected with the product .
iv the following information is applicable specifically to terminals safety barrier types which can be connected to the product .
num further installation requirements num num all vrs shall be installed refurbished repaired and maintained by operatives that have been trained under the relevant national highway sector schemes listed in appendix a or equivalent as stated in sub clause num .
the contractor shall in accordance with subclause num provide evidence to the overseeing organisation to demonstrate that the operatives accreditation to the relevant schemes is current and valid .
any nonconformances with the relevant sector scheme shall be notified to the sector scheme advisory committee secretary .
a copy of this shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation .
num num components for maintenance and repair of legacy vehicle restraint systems num num legacy systems are vrs that are currently on the road network that are not ce marked .
the requirements given in this series with respect to legacy systems are for the maintenance and repair of such systems .
all new vrs shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
num num for the purpose of vehicle parapet requirements this clause shall also be read in conjunction with clause num .
num materials num num materials and fabrication of components and fittings shall be as described and detailed on the drawings submitted by the contractor in compliance with clause num subclause num and other requirements of this series .
it shall be demonstrated that the materials are within the limits of statistical variation for the specified material and for the material of the prototype tested system .
materials significantly exceeding the original specified strength shall not be accepted .
num num structural concrete reinforcement workmanship and other requirements shall conform to the relevant requirements of series num and appendices num to num .
standardised prescribed concrete shall conform to clause num and contract specific appendix num .
num protection against corrosion num num protection against corrosion shall be as described in the manufacturers specification and the following i all steel components except stainless steel items concrete foundation reinforcing rings and reinforcing bars that will be permanently embedded in concrete shall be galvanized after shop fabrication as described in clause num and ii where required in contract specific appendix num the surface preparation and protection against corrosion of all steel vehicle parapets and steel components of combined metal and concrete vehicle parapets shall comply with series num .
num tolerances num num fabrication tolerances including tolerance on hole diameters shall be as shown and described on the drawings submitted by the contractor in accordance with subclauses numiv and num .
components which are to be galvanized or metal coated shall be measured before galvanizing or metal coating .
volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian amendment may num num num welding num i num general arc welding of ferritic steels shall conform to bs en num and bs en num .
weld symbols shown on the drawings submitted by the contractor in accordance with subclause num and num shall be as described in bs en num .
welding shall not be used except as where detailed on the drawings submitted by the contractor in accordance with subclause num and num .
arc welding of stainless steels shall conform to bs en num .
arc welding of aluminium alloys shall conform to bs en num and bs en num. ii procedures written welding procedures shall be used with testing to bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num for steel and bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num for aluminium alloys and shall apply to all production and repair procedures .
these shall be subject to reapproval after a period of seven years .
when applying bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num the welding consumables and procedures used shall be such that the mechanical properties of deposited weld metal shall not be less than the respective minimum specified values of the parent metal being welded .
weld testing shall be undertaken by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subclause num .
approval shall be by an independent inspecting authority using registered welding engineers or registered welding quality engineers or equivalent .
welding procedures shall be approved in accordance with bs en iso num .
preproduction test pieces shall represent the main assembly types .
iii welder qualification all welders shall hold certificates of approval to bs en num and bs en num for steel and bs en iso num for aluminium alloys .
the tests shall include in addition an application test on transverse butt welds in beams .
welders carrying out fillet welds only may be approved to bs num .
certificates of approval shall be by an independent inspecting authority using registered welding engineers registered welding quality engineers or welding inspectors certified by the certification scheme for weldment inspection personnel cswip or equivalent .
weld testing shall be undertaken by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subclause num. iv production inspection and testing the manufacturer shall provide suitable personnel to carry out inspection of production welds in a to c below .
personnel conducting visual inspection shall be certified by the certification scheme for weldment inspection personnel cswip or equivalent at a competency level appropriate to the type of weld inspected .
personnel conducting nondestructive testing ndt shall be certified by the certification scheme for weldment inspection personnel cswip or equivalent appropriate to the equipment used and the weld groups inspected all in accordance with bs en iso num .
evidence of training and qualification shall be retained and made available for examination when required .
the results of all weld inspections shall be recorded .
a visual inspection all welded joints shall be subject to visual inspection in accordance with bs en iso num prior to any ndt and galvanizing .
weld surfaces shall be free of slag residues and sharp edges .
all surfaces shall be free of traces of weld splatter arc strikes and contaminants .
the apparent throat dimensions of butt welds and the apparent leg length and apparent throat dimensions of fillet welds as measured by a welding gauge taking into account any known lack of fit shall not be less than those specified except that local shortfalls up to num mm may be accepted provided the average over any num mm length is not less than the specified dimension .
all welds to be free of cold lap .
the surface of all welds shall be free from cracks lack of fusion including overlap and slag .
isolated discontinuous porosity may be accepted provided it is not detrimental to the galvanising process .
undercut shall not result in a section loss of more than num over any num mm length of joint nor shall its depth exceed num mm or num of the thickness whichever is the less .
b magnetic particle inspection mpi and liquid penetrant inspection lpi mpi shall be applied in accordance with bs en iso num to joints selected in accordance with d below where any of the material thickness exceeds num mm .
notwithstanding the requirements of d below mpi or lpi in accordance with bs en num shall be applied as appropriate where on visual inspection volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian num amendment may num the presence of cracking or lack of fusion may be suspected .
to aid inspection the profile of the weld may be dressed by burr grinding provided that the specified throat size and leg length is still maintained .
the surface of the weld shall be free of cracks lack of fusion and slag .
c ultrasonic testing all butt joints in material num mm thick or greater selected in accordance with d below shall be ultrasonically tested in accordance with bs en iso num .
the weld shall be free of cracks .
the height of buried slag lack of fusion or lack of penetration shall not exceed num mm and within num mm of the outer surface their individual lengths shall not exceed num mm .
the resulting net throat area loss over any num mm length of weld shall not exceed num of the specified throat area .
d frequency of ndt joints shall be selected as follows all joints of each type up to a batch size of num components and num of additional components thereafter .
if non conformances are found the scope of ndt shall be doubled .
if further non conformances are found the whole batch shall be tested .
e reporting inspection records for production welds shall be retained by the manufacturer for three years and those covering the production periods relating to the components supplied shall be made available for examination .
v destructive testing copies of certified reports of destructive tests on components supplied under earlier contracts with the overseeing organisation shall be provided .
vi frequency of destructive testing the contractor shall supply components or sample joints cut from components for destructive testing as selected on behalf of the overseeing organisation .
the basis of selection shall be as follows a for batches of less than num beam assemblies with transverse butt welds num sample joint shall be supplied unless an identical sample joint from the same works has been destructively tested within the previous four weeks .
for batches exceeding num or more num sample joint shall be supplied for each subsequent sampling lot not exceeding num. b welded adjuster brackets shall be supplied at a rate of num for each sampling lot not exceeding num. c each type of post shall be supplied at a rate of num post for each sampling lot not exceeding num. d each type of surface mounted post shall be supplied at the rate of num post for each sampling lot not exceeding num. e for batches of up to num vehicle parapet posts no test required provided that records certified by a representative of the overseeing organisation are produced of successful testing carried out on posts of the same weld group within the previous num months .
if no satisfactory record is available one post to be tested .
for batches of num to num vehicle parapet posts one post to be tested .
for batches exceeding num vehicle parapet posts two posts to be tested .
f each type of anchor frame vehicle parapet connection and connection piece shall be supplied at an interval not exceeding num months for each manufacturers works .
g for batches of up to num welded vehicle parapet splices one splice shall be supplied for testing unless successful testing has been carried out within the previous num months on a similar splices where the splice to be tested was selected by the overseeing organisations representative and the welding is to be carried out by the same personnel .
for batches greater than num welded vehicle parapet splices two splices shall be tested .
h other welded components shall be supplied at an interval not exceeding num months for each manufacturers works .
volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian amendment may num num vii acceptance criteria the acceptance criteria shall be as specified in subclause numiv except that in subclause numiva the throat and leg dimension of the weld shall apply to the true rather than apparent dimension .
viii nonconformance in the event that there is a nonconformance arising from a deviation in materials preparation assembly or welding procedure the batch concerned shall be rejected and further production of the components affected stopped until such time as the fault has been corrected .
a minor noncompliance shall only be accepted on the basis that further sampling and testing shows that the fault is not repetitive and will not in that instance impair structural integrity .
if the problem can be traced to a particular manufacturing period operator piece of equipment or batch of material and if proper traceability to individual batches of components can be assured only those batches affected may be subjected to rejection .
ix test report the destruction test reports shall be retained by the contractor and recorded in a register for a period of three years .
the destructive test samples shall be retained for a period of num months .
these shall be made available for examination on future contracts with the overseeing organisation .
x remedial work welds which do not conform to the specification may be repaired to an approved procedure as described in subclause numii .
welds in aluminium alloys shall not be repaired more than once .
num marking num num all components excluding fasteners reinforcing rings and bars shall be clearly and durably marked with the manufacturers identification mark and digits indicating month and year of manufacture .
in addition to the marking requirements of bs en iso num fasteners shall be clearly marked with the following i safety barrier terminal transition crash cushion manufacturers identification mark and ii fastener number as referenced on the manufacturers construction drawings .
num workmanship and testing num num all components shall be manufactured so as to permit the construction of the accepted systems within the tolerances described in subclauses num and num and in accordance with the accepted drawings submitted by the contractor .
changes in material properties outside those used in the type tests of the systems shall not be permitted .
num num unless otherwise indicated on the accepted drawings submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation all fabrication of components shall be completed before the surface protection is applied .
num num the contractor shall provide the overseeing organisation with evidence that the manufacturer has arranged for tensile tests to destruction to be carried out by a testing laboratory accredited in accordance with sub clause num annually and whenever the production technique is changed .
num quality management num num parapet legacy system components used for repair and maintenance shall be manufactured by an organisation registered to national highways sector scheme numa for the manufacture of parapets for road restraint systems .
the contractor shall submit a certificate of registration to the overseeing organisation .
the scope of registration shall include the components being installed .
volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian num amendment may num num safety barriers terminals transitions removable barrier sections and crash cushions num num installation of safety barriers except vehicle parapets terminals transitions removable barrier sections and crash cushions overall requirements num layout num num the overall layout and location of safety barriers terminals transitions removable barrier sections rbs and crash cushions shall be as indicated on the contract drawings and described in contract specific appendix num .
num num all safety barriers terminals transitions and rbs shall be erected to present a flowing alignment .
unless a requirement is given in the manufacturers installation instructions or installation manual all safety barriers terminals and transitions shall be erected in accordance with the following i the overall alignment on plan shall not depart from the prescribed alignment by the more onerous requirements of either a the manufacturers drawings or b more than num mm nor deviate in any num m length from the straight or required radius by more than num mm .
ii vertical alignment this shall be in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions or installation manual except for works in relation to existing legacy safety barrier systems where the installation heights shall be as given on the installation drawings for those products .
num excavation for concrete foundations and anchor blocks num num excavations for concrete foundations and anchor blocks shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions or installation manual or for legacy systems to the detailed drawings submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation .
num num where the sides of the excavations can not be maintained vertical until concrete is placed suitable permanent or temporary formwork shall be used .
the formwork shall be installed immediately after excavation and any lateral overbreak of the excavation shall be filled with concrete conforming to bs num or the accepted manufacturers instructions or installation manual submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation as appropriate .
num num impermeable plastic sheeting num gauge thick shall be laid at the base of an insitu concrete foundation located in filter drains .
num concrete in foundations and anchor blocks num num concrete in foundations and anchor blocks shall be in accordance with the relevant clauses of this series and the manufacturers instructions or for maintenance and repair works related to existing legacy systems to the nonproprietary safety barrier system drawings rev num submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation .
num num the contractor shall ensure that any concrete which constitutes part of the road restraint system has reached the specified strength stated on the accepted drawings prior to any tensioning of the road restraint system taking place .
num beams num num notwithstanding the manufacturing tolerances permitted for individual beams the cumulative length tolerance shall be such that beams and posts can be positioned in their prescribed location and the requirements of subclauses num and num can be met .
with the exception of any special closure pieces necessary to complete lengths of safety barriers terminals transitions or rbs beam lengths shall not differ from those described on the accepted drawings submitted by the contractor in accordance with subclause num and num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian amendment may num num num posts num num where applicable posts foundations and post sockets shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions or for legacy systems to the detailed drawings submitted by the contractor in accordance with sub clause num and num .
num num where posts are mounted in cast in post sockets these shall be protected to prevent the collection of detritus in the socket voids .
num num when steel posts are driven into the ground this shall be carried out without damage to the post and the protective coating .
any superficial damage to the galvanising shall be treated in accordance with bs en iso num unless the manufacturers instructions require more comprehensive repairs .
num cutting of components num num no drilling cutting including flame cutting or welding of beams and posts shall be permitted after the corrosion protection to the system has been applied .
num num special closure pieces shall be fabricated before corrosion protection is applied .
num assembly num num direct contact between dissimilar metals shall be avoided .
where necessary to prevent direct contact this shall be achieved by interposing a dielectric separator in accordance with the manufacturers instructions or for legacy systems to the detailed drawings submitted by the contractor .
num anchorages and attachment systems for surface mounted posts num num unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall submit to the overseeing organisation at least num weeks before installation well attested and documented evidence that proposed anchorages and attachment systems in drilled holes are capable of resisting the ultimate tensile loads resulting from failure of the proposed safety barrier terminal transition rbs or crash cushion system .
where the ultimate capacity of a safety barrier terminal transition rbs or crash cushion system is governed by the failure of the attachment system the evidence shall demonstrate that the anchorages in drilled holes are capable of resisting the ultimate tensile loads resulting from failure of the attached system .
anchorages of an expanding type other than undercut anchorages shall not be permitted .
num num unless otherwise specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers instructions or installation manual submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation steel anchorages and attachment systems shall be used for securing surface mounted posts to a concrete or steel base .
num num unless otherwise specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers instructions or installation manual submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation where surface mounted posts are to be installed on a highway structure the anchorages shall include an internally threaded component to receive the attachment system .
all parts of anchorages on bridge decks and other structures where the anchorage is within nummm of the upper surface of the supporting concrete or where the anchorage parts are threaded to receive the holding down bolt shall be of stainless steel designation num num num or num to bs en num .
holding down bolts studs and nuts on bridge decks and other structures shall be stainless steel grade anum to bs en iso num and bs en iso num .
washers on bridge decks and other structures shall conform to bs num and be made from stainless steel strip designation num or num to bs en num bs en num bs en numand bs en iso num .
unless specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers instructions submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation direct metal to metal contact between dissimilar materials within the attachment system and anchorage shall be prevented by the use of non conductive sleeves washers or coatings to prevent bimetallic corrosion .
num num unless specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers instructions or installation manual submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation or where surface mounted posts are attached to a steel base the base plate shall be bedded on mortar conforming with clause num and contract specific appendix num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian num amendment may num the bedding mortar shall have a minimum thickness of num mm and a maximum thickness of num mm .
an additional allowance may be made for longitudinal falls .
num num for anchorages in drilled holes each hole location shall be checked to ensure that the hole will be clear of reinforcement before drilling is carried out .
where it is not possible to locate drilled holes without encountering reinforcement the contractor shall provide a specialists report to the overseeing organisation on the consequences of drilling through or cutting the reinforcement .
no drilling or cutting shall take place without the prior written acceptance of the overseeing organisation .
num num before installation of anchorages in drilled holes each hole shall be sound clean and dry and the tolerance of the hole shall be within the values given by the anchorage manufacturer .
num num attachment systems shall be tightened to the specified torque and have not less than the minimum thread engagement specified by the manufacturer of the system .
num num stainless steel bolts screws and nuts shall conform to bs en iso num and bs en iso num grade anum .
the dimensions and tolerances of the bolts screws and nuts shall conform to bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num .
num num stainless steel washers shall conform to bs num and be made from stainless steel strip designation num or num to bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en iso num .
num num unless expressly prohibited by the manufacturers instructions or installation manual the threads of steel anchorages shall be lined with grease having a high resistance to creep and being suitable for hot or cold smearing .
num num voids shall be sealed with a durable nonstructural and impermeable filler to prevent ingress of moisture and deleterious substances .
sealing of voids in anchorages attachment systems and base plates with a nonstructural impermeable durable filler is important to prevent water ingress and to avoid corrosion and damage .
fillers may be derived from polymers or elastomers but shall exclude acrylic or polyester based materials .
num num site testing for contract compliance num anchorages in drilled holes for safety barriers terminals transitions and crash cushions num num the contractor shall carry out onsite tensile load tests on anchorages in drilled holes .
for the purpose of this subclause the types of fixing referred to in clause num of bs num shall include anchorages .
unless more onerous or alternative testing is proposed in the manufacturers installation manual accepted by the overseeing organisation the following testing methodology shall be applied .
i where anchorages are tested they shall be loaded incrementally in tension in accordance with bs num except that they shall be capable of resisting a test load equal to num per cent above the nominal tensile load applied to the anchorage at failure of the safety barrier terminal transition or crash cushion system in lieu of testing to failure .
ii the nominal tensile load shall be determined by the manufacturer of the safety barrier terminal transition rbs or crash cushion system .
where the failure of the attachment system e.g .
the holding down bolt is the prescribed failure mode of the safety barrier terminal transition rbs or crash cushion system the test load shall be num per cent of the yield load of the attachment system .
incremental loads shall be held for not less than half a minute and the test load for not less than five minutes .
readings shall be taken immediately after applying load and at the end of the interval stated above .
iii the total movement of the anchorage shall not exceed num mm during the test .
any evidence of slip during loading as demonstrated by a significant change in the slope of the loadextension curve shall constitute failure .
iv the testing frequency shall be in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
in addition testing shall comply with any special requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian amendment may num num num post foundations num num the contractor shall provide the test equipment and carry out loading tests on post foundations to ascertain compliance with the manufacturers specification or installation manual for the proposed safety barrier terminal transition rbs and crash cushion system .
the tests shall be carried out and the results submitted to the overseeing organisation at least one week prior to installation of the relevant lengths of safety barrier terminal transition rbs and crash cushion system .
the testing frequency shall be in accordance with contract specific appendix num or the manufacturers installation manual if this stipulates a more onerous testing regime .
num num where stated in contract specific appendix num the overseeing organisation shall provide the test equipment and carry out loading tests on post foundations installed by the contractor for that purpose .
the contractor shall make available a vehicle of not less than num tonnes for the overseeing organisations use while carrying out the tests .
num num the contractor shall install test posts and foundations after completion of the finished ground .
num num on completion of loading tests the contractor shall remove the test posts and foundations and reinstate the finished ground to meet the requirements of the contract .
num num temporary safety barriers num num where required in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall provide install and maintain temporary safety barriers terminals and transitions and on completion of the works remove them to the locations stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num where temporary safety barriers terminals and transitions are to be provided by the overseeing organisation the contractor shall remove them from the location stated in contract specific appendix num and install and maintain them .
on completion of the works the contractor shall remove the temporary safety barriers terminals and transitions to the locations stated in contract specific appendix num .
num vehicle parapets including vehicle pedestrian parapets num num general num num unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num vehicle parapets shall be in accordance with the following requirements except where these conflict with bs en num in which event bs en num shall take precedence i td num dmrb num ii clause num contract specific appendix num and contract specific appendix num iii clauses num to num .
legacy systems as described in subclause num shall be in accordance with clause num and bs num .
vehicle parapets and combined vehicle pedestrian parapets constructed as bespoke in concrete shall be in accordance with bs num .
num aesthetic requirements num num vehicle parapets shall comply with the aesthetic requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
num layout num num the overall layout and location of vehicle parapets shall be as indicated on the contract drawings and described in contract specific appendix num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian num amendment may num num maintenance and repair num num components used for maintenance and repair of parapets shall match the performance characteristics of the existing parapet and shall comply with the requirements stated in contract specific appendix num.components are to be of identical design detail specification and geometry to the parapet components originally installed and are to be installed such that the completed repair is like for like .
except that in addition the requirements and standards current at the time of manufacture of the original parapet shall apply subject to such revisions and modifications applicable to the parapet type during the period of original manufacture the capacity of the components shall be comparable to that of the original components as tested .
num the maintenance andor repair of ce marked parapets shall be undertaken in accordance with the manufacturers installation manual and requirements for the parapet using components which are identical in design specification and geometry to the parapet components originally installed .
num steel parapets shall be galvanised but not painted unless required for aesthetic reasons .
num num anchorages and attachment systems for vehicle parapets num num unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num the design fabrication and installation of the anchorage and attachment system shall conform to the manufacturers drawings and specifications the requirements of bs en num this series num and td num dmrb num .
num num unless otherwise covered under the ce marked systems declaration of performance and its supporting documentation or described in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall submit to the overseeing organisation at least num weeks before installation well attested and documented evidence that the proposed fixings including all cradles anchorages and attachment systems are capable of resisting the applied load effects resulting from collision with the proposed vehicle parapet system .
where the ultimate capacity of a vehicle parapet system is governed by the failure of the attachment system the evidence shall demonstrate that anchorages in drilled holes are capable of resisting the ultimate tensile loads resulting from the failure of the attachment system so that an anchorage is able to be reused in the event of the need to replace a parapet that has suffered collision damage .
num num anchorages of an expanding type shall not be permitted .
num num unless otherwise specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers drawings submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation anchorages shall include an internally threaded component to receive the attachment system .
num num where the anchorage is within nummm of the upper surface of the supporting concrete or where the anchorage part is threaded to receive the holding down bolt all parts of the anchorage shall be of stainless steel designation num num num or num to bs en num .
num num holding down bolts studs and nuts shall be in stainless steel grade anum to bs en iso num and bs en iso num .
num num unless specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers drawings submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation direct metal to metal contact between dissimilar materials within the attachment system and anchorage shall be prevented by the use of nonconducting sleeves washers or coatings to prevent bimetallic corrosion .
num num unless specifically indicated in the manufacturers installation manual submitted by the contractor and accepted by the overseeing organisation or where the vehicle parapet posts are attached to a steel base the posts shall be bedded on mortar complying with clause num and contract specific appendix num .
the bedding mortar shall have a minimum thickness of num mm and a maximum thickness of num mm .
an additional allowance may be made for longitudinal falls .
num num for anchorages in drilled holes each hole location shall be checked to ensure that the hole will be clear of reinforcement before drilling is carried out .
where it is not possible to locate drilled holes without encountering reinforcement the contractor shall provide a specialists report to the overseeing organisation on the volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian amendment may num num consequences of drilling through or cutting the reinforcement .
no drilling or cutting shall take place without the prior written acceptance of the overseeing organisation .
num num before installation of anchorages in drilled holes each hole shall be sound clean and dry and the tolerance of the hole shall be within the values given by the anchorage manufacturer .
num num attachment systems shall be tightened to the torque given in the manufacturers installation manual and have not less than the minimum thread engagement specified by the manufacturer of the system .
num num stainless steel bolts screws and nuts shall comply with bs en iso num and bs en iso num grade anum .
the dimensions and tolerances of the bolts screws and nuts shall comply with bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num .
num num stainless steel washers shall comply with bs num and be made from stainless steel strip designation num or num to bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en iso num .
num num unless expressly prohibited by the manufacturers drawings and to facilitate removal of holding down bolts for maintenance or repair the threads of steel anchorages shall be coated with antiseize compound having a high resistance to creep intended for use with the materials that form both component thread faces and being suitable for hot or cold smearing .
num num all voids in anchorages attachment systems and base plates shall be filled with a nonsetting passive filler to prevent the ingress of moisture .
num num amendments and additions to bs num num num bs num num amd .
no .
num num march num i clause num a clause num first paragraph third line delete num and replace with num. ii clause num a table num designation of vehicle parapets item a delete the existing text under designation and clause and insert as prescribed in bs en num bs en num and dd env num num. iii clause num a clause num levels of containment delete clause num to clause num and insert as prescribed in bs en num bs en num and dd env num num b clause num delete the note and following text c clause num delete paragraphs d and e d clause num delete last paragraph of note num i.e .
details of approved connections .. proved in service e clause num main structure replace department of transport standard bd num with bs en num clause num and the national annex to bs en num and f clause num end of note num insert the tensile strength of concrete shall be ignored in the calculation .
iv clause num a clause num notch toughness replace department of transport standard bd num with bd num dmrb num volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian num amendment may num b table num materials of construction for steel parapets delete and insert as follows delete insert bs num bs en num bs num bs en num bs num bs en num bs num bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en num bs num bs num bs num bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en iso num bs num bs en num bs num bs en num to bs en num inclusive and bs en num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs num bs en iso num and bs en iso num bs num bs en num c table num materials of construction for aluminium alloy parapets delete and insert as follows delete insert bs num alloys num num num numa and num bs en num bs en num bs en num to bs en num inclusive bs en num and bs en num alloys en awnum en awnum en awnum en awnuma and en awnum bs num alloys num num and num bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en num alloys en awnum en awnum and en awnum bs num alloy num bs en num to bs en num inclusive alloy en awnum bs en num bs en num bs num alloys lmnum and lmnum bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en num alloys en acnum en acnum and en acnum bs num bs num bs num num grades num snum and num snum bs en num bs en num bs en numand bs en iso num designation num or num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian amendment may num num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs en num bs en iso num bs num bs en iso num and bs en iso num v clause num a clause num note delete last sentence .
vi clause num a clause num delete last sentence from first paragraph b clause num table num values of fk and m delete and insert as follows delete insert bs num bs en iso num and bs en iso num bs num bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en iso num bs num bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en num c clause num delete laminar defects from title and clause text insert internal discontinuities d clause num welding delete subclauses num to num inclusive and e clause num delete whole text .
vii clause num a clause num delete last sentence as follows currently approved systems as listed in annex f are exempt from this requirement .
and b clause num insert additional paragraph as follows the designer or manufacturer shall arrange for third party certification that the new vehicle parapet design complies with the requirements of bs en num bs en num and series num mchw num .
the certification shall be undertaken by a body or testing laboratory in any member state of the european economic area offering suitable and satisfactory evidence of technical and professional competence and independence .
the overseeing organisation is likely to require to examine the full record of testing .
num num bs num num i clause num delete first sentence and replace with the specification requirements are based upon the results of tests on panels of num m and num m lengths and it is considered reasonable to extrapolate to include panel lengths from num m to num m. ii clause num a clause num note num delete british rail and insert railway or tramway operator .
iii clause num a clause num main structure replace department of transport standard bd num with bs en num clause num and the national annex to bs en num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian num amendment may num iv table num delete title of table and replace with table num equivalent static nominal loads for in situ and precast concrete parapets applicable to panel lengths l num m to num m. v clause num a clause num delete bs num and insert bs en num and bs en num. vi clause num a clause num delete initial paragraph and replace with concrete parapets are likely to be directly affected by deicing salts traffic fumes and other corrosive elements therefore they shall be constructed in accordance with specification for highway works series num .
in particular they shall comply with the following b clause num a .
note delete the note in its entirety c clauses numa b and c delete and replace with a concrete exposure classes shall be in accordance with bs num .
the minimum allowable concrete exposure classes shall be xcnum xdnum xfnum .
exposure classes xs and xa shall be suitable for the site conditions .
b the minimum grade of concrete shall be cnum as specified in bs num. c the nominal cover to reinforcement shall be as specified in bs num see also num. d clause num d delete bs num and insert bs en iso num and bs en iso num delete bs num and insert bs en iso num. vii clause num a clause num delete bs num and insert bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en num b clause num delete bs num and insert bs en iso num and bs en iso num delete bs num and insert bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en iso num. viii table num values of fk and m a anchorage and attachment system numrd column delete bs num and insert bs en iso num and bs en iso num delete bs num and insert bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en iso num. ix clause num a delete and shall not be less than num m and replace with and shall not be less than num m. x clause num a clause num delete note for more information on safety fences see bs num and b clause num delete note num and note num completely .
xi figure num a top right hand side delete grade num s num to bs num part num and insert designation num or num to bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en iso num .
num num inspection and testing of vehicle parapet components num num inspection and testing of vehicle parapet posts shall be carried out by the contractor as per the manufacturers installation manual .
volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian amendment may num num num num when required in contract specific appendix num components of legacy systems shall comply with the following .
i the components for parapet posts and all completed parapet posts shall conform to the acceptance criteria described in clauses num and num of bs num. ii the contractor shall only supply vehicle parapet posts of a type which have certification for static destructive testing in accordance with clause num of bs num .
num num site tests on anchorages in drilled holes for vehicle parapets for contract compliance num num the contractor shall carry out onsite tensile load tests on anchorages in drilled holes .
for the purpose of this subclause the types of fixing referred to in clause num of bs num shall include anchorages .
where anchorages are tested they shall be loaded incrementally in tension in accordance with bs num except that they shall be capable of resisting a test load equal to num per cent above the nominal tensile load applied to the anchorage at failure of the vehicle parapet in lieu of testing to failure .
the nominal tensile load shall be determined by the vehicle parapet manufacturer .
where the failure of the attachment system e.g .
the holding down bolt is the prescribed failure mode of the vehicle parapet the test load shall be num per cent of the yield load of the attachment system .
incremental loads shall be held for not less than half a minute and the test load for not less than five minutes .
readings shall be taken immediately after applying load and at the end of the time intervals stated above .
num num unless specifically indicated on the accepted manufacturers instructions submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation the total movement of the anchorage shall not exceed nummm during the test .
any evidence of slip during loading up to the test load as demonstrated by a significant change in the slope of the load extension curve shall constitute failure .
num num the contractor shall test the anchorages at the frequency given in contract specific appendix num and in accordance with any requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
pedestrian restraint systems num num pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails num general num num pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails shall conform to the requirements of this clause contract specific appendix num td num dmrb num and the following .
i pedestrian parapets or guardrails assembled from factory manufactured parts and assembled on site a bs num. ii bespoke pedestrian parapets manufactured from concrete on site a in accordance with the loading described in bs num table num class cnum x and bs en num .
num durability num num pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails shall conform to the following .
i all components of pedestrian parapets and guardrails shall be designed to achieve a serviceable life of not less than a metal pedestrian parapets and metal components of combined metal and concrete pedestrian parapets num years b concrete pedestrian parapets and concrete components of combined metal and concrete pedestrian parapets num years and volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian num amendment may num c pedestrian guardrails num years .
ii for metal pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails and metal components of combined metal and concrete pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails the serviceable life shall except where stated in contract specific appendix num be obtained without the requirement for any maintenance other than that resulting from accidental damage .
num num protection against corrosion for pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails shall be as described in the manufacturers specification and the following i all components of steel pedestrian parapets and pedestrian guardrails except stainless steel items shall be surface protected after shop fabrication as described in clause num and ii where required in contract specific appendix num the surface preparation and protection against corrosion of all steel pedestrian parapets and steel components of combined metal and concrete pedestrian parapets shall comply with series num .
num aesthetic requirements num num the design of pedestrian parapets shall comply with the aesthetic requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
num information required to be provided by the contractor prior to installation num num the following information shall be provided by the contactor to the overseeing organisation for acceptance .
all documents shall be in english .
i manufacturers specification .
ii installation drawings .
iii manufacturers installation instructions or installation manual including foundation requirements and test methods to verify their performance .
iv manufacturers repair and maintenance manual .
v a certificate of registration to national highways sector scheme numa for the design andor supply installation and repair of fences for infrastructure works .
num workmanship and testing num num all components shall be manufactured so as to permit the construction of the accepted systems within the tolerances described in subclause num and in accordance with the manufacturers drawings .
num num unless otherwise indicated on the manufacturers drawings submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation all fabrication of components shall be completed before the surface protection is applied .
num num the contractor shall provide the overseeing organisation with evidence that the manufacturer has arranged for tensile tests to destruction and analysis of composition to be carried out by a testing laboratory accredited in accordance with subclause num annually and whenever the source of material or the production technique is changed .
the testing shall include at least the determination of the yieldproof strength of the material ultimate strength and the extension at break .
it shall be demonstrated that the materials are within the limits of statistical variation for the specified material and for the material of the prototype tested system .
materials significantly exceeding the original specified strength shall not be accepted .
num handling num num all components shall be protected from damage and handled and stacked in such a way that permanent damage is not caused particularly to threaded components .
means shall be provided to avoid damage to galvanized coatings and any damage that does occur shall be repaired in accordance with bs en iso num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian amendment may num num num information required to be provided by the contractor after installation num num the contractor shall provide to the overseeing organisation asbuilt drawings which shall include plans and details of the constructed system .
antiglare screens num num antiglare screens num num antiglare screen systems shall conform to bs en num and bs en num and the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall supply the declaration of performance which shall demonstrate that the antiglare screen system meets the performance requirements stated in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall provide information to the overseeing organisation in english to demonstrate that the screens are compatible with the vehicle restraint system on which the screens are proposed to be mounted and do not adversely affect the performance of the vehicle restraint system .
volume num series num specification for highway works road restraint systems vehicle and pedestrian amendment may num numf series num drainage and service ducts contents clause title page num numpipesfordrainageand serviceducts num num excavationforpipesand chambers num num numbeddinglayingand surroundingofpipes num num jointingofpipes num num backfillingoftrenchesand filterdrains num num connectingtoexistingdrains chambersandchannels num num numchambers num num gulliesandpipejunctions num num testingandcleaning num num surfacewaterchannelsand drainagechannelblocks num num landdrains num num backfillingtopipebaysand vergesonbridges num num permeablebackingtoearth retainingstructures num num findrains num num narrowfilterdrains num num combineddrainageandkerb systems num num lineardrainagechannelsystems num num numthermoplastics structuredwallpipesand fittings num num numconcretebagwork num num numthecleaningofexisting drainagesystems num num numlowpressurehighvolume jettingofdrainagesystems num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendmentnovembernum num national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland northern ireland clause title page numni gulliesandpipejunctions nnum denotesaclauseorsampleappendixwhichhasasubstitute nationalclauseorsampleappendixforoneormoreofthe overseeingorganisationsofscotlandwalesornorthern ireland .
volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts drainage and service ducts num num pipes for drainage and for service ducts general num numwherethetermdrainisusedinthisseriesit shallbedeemedtoincludethetermssewerandpiped culvert .
thecontractorshalldesignthepipedculvertslistedin appendixnuminaccordancewiththerequirementsof clausenum .
seriesnummchwnumappliestotheinstallationby trenchlesstechniquesofhighwaydrainageservice ductssleevesandculvertswithinternaldiametersupto andincludingnummmnominalinternaldiameteror width .
num numalldrainsconstructedofpipesaswellas pipedculvertsuptoandincludingnummminternal diametershallcomplywiththisseriesandany additionalrequirementsinappendixnum.drains constructedusingpipesexceedingnummminternal diameteraswellasboxandpipedculvertsshallcomply withseriesnum.unlessotherwisedescribedin appendixnumonlyonetypeofpipeshallbeusedwithin anyindividualdrainorserviceductbetween consecutivechambers.thecontractorshallensurethat plasticspipesarenotsubjecttodeteriorationdueto sunlightduringtheperiodbetweenmanufactureand installationintheground .
pipes for drainage num pipesfordrainageshallbeselectedfromthe alternativesintablenumandshallcomplywiththe standardsandparticularrequirementstherein.the contractorshallshowthatthepipesheselectshave hydraulicflowcapacityequaltothatadoptedinthe hydraulicdesignofthesystemasdescribedin appendixnum.pipesandfittingsotherthanthose includedintablenumshallbepermittedprovidedthat theyholdacurrentbritishboardofagrmentroads andbridgescertificateorequivalentstatingthatthey areasuitablealternativefortheusagespecifiedin tablenum.oncompletionofthewholeofthedrainage worksthecontractorshallprovidetheoverseeing organisationwithascheduleshowingdetailsofallpipe typesusedincludingqualityjointsandnameof manufacturer .
corrugated steel pipes num corrugatedsteelpipesshallbemanufacturedfrom either i boltedsegmentalplatepipescomplyingwith subclausenumofthisclauseandhavingplate thicknessesasdescribedinappendixnumor ii numgalvanizedsteelsheetsuitableforlock seamfabricationcomplyingwith bsennumgradedxnumdznumor aluminiumcoatedsteelsheetcomplyingwith aashtospecificationmnum .
corrugatedsteelpipescomplyingwithiiaboveshall bemanufacturedfromsteelofminimumthickness nummmunlessotherwisedescribedinappendixnum .
num numwheredescribedinappendixnumcorrugated steelpipesshallbeprovidedwithadditionalprotection ofhotappliedbitumencomplyingwithaashto specificationmnumoranequivalentcoating system .
num boltedsegmentalplatepipesshallmeetthe followinumngrequirements i numsteelfortheplatesshallcomplywith bsnumpartnumgradenumorgradenum conditionhr .
ii afterformingthedepthofthecorrugations shallbewithinatoleranceofnumandthe pitchofthecorrugationswithinatolerance ofnumofthenominaldimensions.plates shallhaveaminimumlipofnummmbeyond eachendcrest.cutedgesshallbefreefrom notchesgougesrustorburrs .
iii numboltsandnutsforconnectingplates shallcomplywithbsenisonum bsennumandbsenisonumfor bsenisonumandbsennum isonumpropertyclassnumnominalsize mnumorwithbsnumpartnumnominalsize mnumorwithbsenisonumand bsennumisonumpropertyclass num. iv whenalltheplateshavebeenassembledthe nutsshallbetightenedagainstadomed washer.thetighteningshallberepeatedif necessarytoachievethetorque recommendedbythemanufacturer .
amendmentnovembernum num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts v steelplateshallbegalvanizedincompliance withclausenum.platesshallbegalvanized afterformingthecorrugationsand completingallnecessarycuttingpunching anddrilling.unitsinwhichthezinccoating hasbeenburnedbyweldingorotherwise damagedinfabricationtransportorhandling atsiteshallbemadegoodincompliance withclausesnumandnum.boltsandnuts shallbegalvanizedincompliancewith clausenum .
amendmentmaynum num table numpipes for drainage material usage standard particular requirements vitrifiedclay fouldrains bsnumor bsennum normalpipesasdefinedinbsnum surfacewaterdrains bsnumor bsennum normalorsurfacewaterpipesas definedinbsnum filterdrains bsnum bsennum unperforatednotexceedingnumminlength withspigotandsocketopenjoints or perforatedwithflexiblemechanicaljoints concretewithportlandcement orsulfateresistingcementwhen requiredinappendixnum .
supersulfatedcementshallnot beused foulsurfacewaterdrains notexceedingnummm internaldiameter bsnumand bsennumordinary reinforcedor unreinforced bsnum surfacewaterdrainsnot exceedingnummminternal diameter bsnum forusewithjointscomplyingwith subclausenum filterdrains bsnumporous withogeeorrebated joints bsnum unperforatednotexceedingnumminlength withopenjointsorcastellatedrebatedjoints withthetotalslotareabetweencastellations beingatleastnummmpermetrelengthof pipe or perforatedwithcircularholesnotgreater thannummmnorlessthannummmindiameter glassreinforcedplasticsgrp foulsurfacewaterdrains bsnum classtobeasspecifiedinappendixnum iron foulsurfacewaterdrains bsnumcastiron bsennumductile iron volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts table num num pipes for drainage continued material usage standard particular requirements thermoplasticssolidwallpipes andfittingsnotexceeding nummmdiameter unplasticisedpolyvinylchloride pvcu polypropylenepp polyethylenepe foulsurfacewater drains bsnumorbsnum orbsennum pvcu bsennumpp bsennumpe seetheuknationalforwardtotherelevantbs en.thegradeappropriateforusewithout structuralcalculationsshallbeusedi.e.snnumfor pppeandsnnumsdrnumforpvcu filterdrains bsnumor bsnumor bsennumpvcu bsennumpp bsennumpe perforatedwithnotlessthannummmofholes permetrelengthofpipe.theperforationsshall notreducethepipestiffnessbymorethannum .
circularperforationsnotgreaterthannummmnor lessthannummmindiameterorrectangularslots notgreaterthannummmnorlessthannummmin width thermoplasticsstructuredwall pipeandfittingsnotexceeding nummmdiameter surfacewaterdrains clausenum unperforatedwithwatertightjointsandwitha pipestiffnessclasscreepratioandimpact resistanceasdescribedin appendixnum filterdrains clausenum perforatedwithnotlessthannummmnumofholes permetrelengthofpipe.theperforationsshall notreducethepiperingstiffnessbymorethan num.circularperforationsnotgreaterthannum mmnorlessthannummmindiameteror rectangularslotsnotgreaterthannummmnorless thannummminwidth subsoilfielddrains bsnumor clausenum corrugatedsteel surfacewaterdrainsfilter drainsnotexceeding nummminternaldiameter aashto specification mnummnumexceptas otherwiserequiredin subclausesnum numandnum alldrainsexceedingnummminternaldiametershallcomplywithseriesnum .
pipes for service ducts amendmentnovembernum num num numpipesforserviceductsexcludingthosein useinmotorwaycommunicationsinstallationsshallbe selectedfromthealternativesintablenumandshall complywiththestandardsandparticularrequirements therein.pipesforuseinmotorwaycommunications installationsshallcomplywithseriesnum.pipesfor otherserviceductsinstalledusingtrenchlessmethods shallconformtoseriesnummchwnum.pipesfor serviceductsshallhaveasmoothinternalborewithout anysharpedgestotheendsofpipes.theyshallcomply withanyadditionalrequirementsdescribedin appendixnumandbeofnummminternaldiameter unlessotherwisedescribedtherein.theiralignment shallbetestedinaccordancewithsubclausenum .
theuseofpipesandfittingsotherthanthoseincluded intablenumshallbepermittedprovidedthattheyholda currentbritishboardofagrmentroadsandbridges certificateorequivalentstatingthattheyareasuitable alternativetothoselistedintablenum .
num eachductshallbefittedwithapigmentedstranded polypropyleneorequivalentrotproofmaterialdraw ropeofnumknbreakingloadandhavingadesignlifeof notlessthannumyearstheendsofwhichshallbeeither madefasttomarkerblocksasshownonhcddrawing numberinumorsecuredinsidechambers.theendsofa ductshallbeeithersealedbyremovablestoppers immediatelyithasbeenlaidorterminatedinchambers ofthetypespecifiedinappendixnum .
volume num specification for highway works series num drainage and service ducts num table num num pipes for ducts material standard particular requirements vitrified clay bs num or plainended selfaligning flexible sleeve jointed with internal ends bs en num radiused to num mm minimum iron bs en num ductile iron glass reinforced plastics bs num class to be as specified in appendix num thermoplastics solid wall bs num or when pipes bs num class c are used joints shall comply with bs num or bs en num to num as appropriate unplasticised polyvinylchloride bs num class c or pvcu bs en num bs en num to num as appropriate class pnnum .
polypropylene pp bs en num pp polyethylene pe bs en num pe thermoplastics single wall bs en num ducts to bs en num shall be classified as normal duty corrugated have a degree of protection against ingress of foreign objects restricted to ducts buried a classification rating of num or num and a degree of protection against minimum of num mm below the ingress of water classification rating of num .
appendix num shall state surface the resistance to bending requirements .
thermoplastics structured wall bs en num and ducts to bs en num shall be classified as normal duty clause num have a degree of protection against ingress of foreign objects classification rating of num or num and a degree of protection against ingress of water classification rating of num .
appendix num shall state the resistance to bending requirements .
pipes for use in motorway communications installations shall comply with series num num excavation for pipes and chambers num excavation shall comply with clause num and with the following i num soft spots existing below the bottom of an excavation shall be removed and the resulting voids backfilled with type num unbound mixture for subbase complying with clause num or pipe bedding material complying with clause num both well compacted or stnum concrete in compliance to clause num ii any additional excavation below the bottom of an excavation that is required because the contractor has allowed the bottom to become soft or otherwise unacceptable for the construction of the pipeline or chambers shall be made good as described in subclause numi of this clause iii any excavation greater than the net volume required for the permanent works below the level of any pipe surround shall be made good as described in i above .
num unless otherwise described in appendix num all pipes in or under new embankments shall be laid only when the embankment has been formed and compacted to formation level under paved areas to finished earthworks level in other areas or to a level which will give a minimum cover of num m to the pipes whichever is the lowest .
num num bedding laying and surrounding of pipes num immediately following the excavation of the trench the pipes shall be laid and jointed on the pipe bed .
pipes shall be laid so that each one is in contact with the bed throughout the length of its barrel .
the pipes shall be laid at the level and gradients shown on the drawings and schedules .
the deviation in level from that specified at any point shall not exceed num mm and in addition the algebraic difference of the deviation in level at any two points on each pipe shall not exceed num mm .
in the case of socketed or sleeve jointed pipes the bed shall be cut away and removed at each socket or sleeve to give a clearance of at least num mm or num mm for trenches in material designated as hard material so amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num drainage and service ducts num that the socket or sleeve does not bear on the bed .
pipes shall be laid on setting blocks only where a concrete bed or cradle is used .
pipes and fittings shall be examined for damage and the joint surfaces and components shall be cleaned immediately before laying .
measures shall be taken to prevent soil or other material from entering pipes and to anchor each pipe to prevent movement before the work is complete .
num pipes complying with bs num num which are corrugated coilable perforated pipes shall unless otherwise permitted in appendix num be laid only by automatic single pass drain laying machines .
num num drainage pipe and bedding combinations shall be selected from the alternatives described in appendix num .
the granular material shall consist of natural andor recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate complying with bs en num .
where recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate is used in this clause it shall have been tested in accordance with clause num and shall not contain more than num other materials class x .
pipe bedding haunching and surrounding material shall be as shown on hcd drawing numbers fnum and fnum and shall comply with the following i num for pipes on beds shown on hcd drawing number fnum as types b f and s the aggregate shall have a num geometrical requirements in accordance with table num b num a resistance to fragmentation in category lanum in accordance with bs en num clause num and table num c num a watersoluble sulfate content of less than num of sulfate as sonum when tested in accordance with bs en num clause num d num all other requirements in category nr .
ii num for pipes on beds shown on hcd drawing number fnum as types n and t the aggregate shall comply with the geometrical requirements of either table num or with table num and with the fragmentation water soluble sulfate content and other requirements of i above .
table num num bs en num coarse aggregate for pipe bedding haunching and surrounding material bs en num coarse aggregate clause num category for general grading gcnum requirements category for tolerances at gtnr no requirements midsize sieves category for maximum values of gravel fnum fines content crushed rock recycled aggregate fnum aggregate size mm nominal pipe diameter mm graded single sized not exceeding num num exceeding num but not num or num num num or exceeding num num exceeding num num num num num or num num or num table num num bs en num fine and allin aggregated for pipe bedding haunching and surrounding material bs en num fine and allin aggregate clause num fine allin category for general grading category category ganum requirements gfnum category for tolerances on gtfnr gtanr manufacturers declared no requirement no requirement typical grading category for maximum gravel fnum values of fines content crushed rock recycled aggregate fnum aggregate size mm nominal pipe diameter mm fine allin not exceeding num num exceeding num but not num num num num or num exceeding num or num exceeding num num num or num iii num for pipes on beds shown on hcd drawing number fnum as types a and z concrete shall be stnum and stnum in compliance to clause num respectively .
backfilling shall not be carried out until after the concrete has cured .
amendment november num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts iv exceptforfilterdrainsafurthersurround abovethebedhaunchandsurround describedaboveshallbeprovidedtoaheight ofnummmabovethetopofthepipe consistingofclassnumlowertrenchfill materialasdescribedintablenumandin compliancewithseriesnum .
v unlessotherwisedescribedinappendixnum thematerialsusedforthebeddinghaunching andsurroundingoffilterdrainsshallcomply withtheappropriatebeddinghaunchingand surroundingmaterialsspecifiedinsub clausesnum.itonum.ivandwiththe requirementsforbackfillingspecifiedin subclausenum .
num nummaterialforbeddinghaunchingand surroundingpipesshallnotbedepositedwithin nummmoranyotherdistancesdescribedin appendixnumofconcretecementboundmaterials othercementitiousmaterialsorstabilisedcapping formingpartofthepermanentworksifwhentestedin accordancewithtrlreportnumeither i numthewatersolublesulfatewscontent exceedsnummgofsulfateassonumperlitre testno.numor ii numtheoxidisablesulfidesoscontent exceedsnumofsulfateassonumtestno.num andtestno.numor iii numthenumwatertosoilextractprepared forthedeterminationofwatersolublesulfate inihasaphvalueoflessthannumwhen testedusingtheelectrometricmethodofph determinationinaccordancewithbsnum .
numatleastfivesamplesofeachmaterialshallbe testedforwsosandphvalue.themeanofthe highesttwovaluesshallbeusedforcomparisonwith thelimitingvalues.thisalsoappliesifsixtonine resultsareavailable.iftenormoreresultsareavailable themeanofthehighestnumoftheresultsshallbeused forcomparisonwiththelimitingvalues .
num nummaterialforbeddinghaunchingand surroundingpipesshallnotbedepositedwithin nummmoranyotherdistancesdescribedin appendixnumofmetallicstructuralelementsforming partofthepermanentworksifwhentestedin accordancewithtrlreportnumeither i numthewatersolublesulfatewscontent exceedsnummgofsulfateassonumperlitre testno.numor ii theoxidisablesulfidesoscontentexceeds numofsulfateassonumtestno.numandtest no.num .
numatleastfivesamplesofeachmaterialshallbe testedforwsandos.themeanofthehighesttwo valuesshallbeusedforcomparisonwiththelimiting values.thisalsoappliesifsixtonineresultsare available.iftenormoreresultsareavailablethemean ofthehighestnumoftheresultsshallbeusedfor comparisonwiththelimitingvalues .
numtherequirementsiniandiiaboveshallnot applytometallicitemsprotectedbyconcreteand ancillarymetallicitemssuchasthetopsofchambers andgullies .
num numexceptwherethepipelineistobetestedin compliancewithclausenumbeforebackfillingthe completionofthebeddinghaunchingandsurrounding ofthepipesistobecarriedoutimmediatelyafter jointing.thebedhaunchandsurroundshallbebrought upequallyonbothsidesofthepipeensuringthatitisin contactwiththeundersideofthepipebarrelandbe carefullycompactedinlayersnotexceedingnummm thicknessensuringfullcompactionnexttothetrench walls.pipesshallbemaintainedtolineandlevelduring thebeddinghaunchingandsurroundingoperations .
wherepipelinesaretobetestedbeforebeingcovered thebeddinghaunchingandsurroundingmaterialshall onlybebroughtupsufficientlytosupportthepipeline andthejointsshallbeleftexposeduntilthetestis completedsatisfactorily .
num numductconstructionshallcomplywiththe requirementsofappendixnum .
num jointing of pipes num rigidjointsshallmeanjointsmadesolidby caulkingthesocketsorboltingtogetherflangesintegral withthepipes.flexiblejointsshallmeanjointsmade withdeformableringsorgasketsheldbetweenpipe spigotsandsocketssleevesorcollars .
num jointsinsurfacewaterdrainsshallbewatertight complyingwithsubclausenumofthisclauseorpartly watertightcomplyingwithsubclausenumofthisclause asdescribedinappendixnum.fouldrainsshallhave watertightjoints.filterdrainsshallhavejoints complyingwithsubclausenumofthisclause.ductsneed nothavewatertightjointsunlessotherwisedescribedin appendixnum .
num numwatertightjointsshallcomplywiththe appropriatebritishstandardsthemanufacturers instructionsandthefollowing amendmentnovembernum num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts i rigidjointsshallbeusedonlywhere permittedinappendixnum.spigotsand socketsofrigidjointsmaybecaulkedwith tarredropeyarnorequivalentandthesocket completelyfilledwithmortardesignationi complyingwithclausenumexcludinglime afilletofmortarbeingworkedaroundthe socketextendingforalengthofnotlessthan nummmfromthefaceofthesocket.ironpipes withopensocketsshallhaverigidjoints caulkedwithleadwoolorequivalent .
ii jointsinpvcupipesshallnotbemadewith plasticsolvent .
iii flexiblemechanicaljointsmaybeusedwith surfacewaterpipescomplyingwithbsnum .
iv numjointsforcastironpipestobsnum shallcomplywithbsennum .
v jointsinthermoplasticsstructuredwallpipe shallcomplywithclausenum .
num numpartlywatertightjointsforsurfacewater drainsshallbetestedinaccordancewithsubclause numandshallbebritishstandardjointsornonbritish standardjoints.pushfitjointsshallhavearegisterto ensurethatthepipeisfullypushedintothejoint .
corrugatedsteelpipesoflockseamfabricationnot exceedingnummminternaldiametershallbejoinedin accordancewiththemanufacturersinstructions.bolted segmentalplatepipearchesorcircularpipesnot exceedingnummminternaldiametershallbejoinedin accordancewithsubclausenumivandthe manufacturersinstructions .
num whereaconcretebedcradlearchorsurroundis usedwithrigidpipeshavingflexiblejointsjointfiller boardcomplyingwithclausenumshallbeplacedin contactwiththeendofthesocketatapipejointand shallextendthroughthefullthicknessoftheconcretein contactwiththepipe.suchjointsintheconcretebed haunchorsurroundshallbeatintervalsnotexceeding nummetresexceptwherethespacingofjointsinthepipe exceedsnummetreswhentheyshallbeateachpipejoint .
num numjointsinpipesforfilterdrainsshallcomply withtheappropriatebritishstandardandwiththe following i nonporousandunperforatedconcreteand claypipeswithspigotandsocketrebatedor ogeejointsshallbelaidwithunsealedjoints andwithagapofnummmbetweentheendof thepipeandtheinnerendofthesocketor rebate.thepipesshallbesupportedwith tarredropeyarnorequivalentflexible jointingmaterialwithinthesocketsoverthe lowerthirdofthecircumferencesothatthere arenoverticalstepsbetweenonepipeand another.suchpipesshallonlybeusedwith typebfiltermaterialasdescribedin clausenum .
ii theendsofperforatedcastellatedorporous concretepipeswithrebatedjointsand perforatedclaywarepipeswithrebatedor withflexiblesleevejointsshallbepushed tightlytogether.thewidthofslotsmeasured alongthelengthofthepipelineformedby jointingcastellatedpipesshallnotexceed nummm .
iii perforatedorslottedthermoplasticspipes withspigotsandsocketsorsleevesmaybe dryjointedorjointedasdescribedin subclausesnumandnumofthisclause .
iv otherperforatedpipesshallbejointedas unperforatedpipesofthesamematerial .
num jointsinpipesforserviceductsshallcomplywith theappropriatebritishstandardandwiththefollowing i pipesforductsshallbejointedsothatnosilt gritgroutorconcretesurroundisableto entertheduct.pipeswithpushfitjointsshall havearegistertoensurethatthepipeisfully pushedintothejoint .
ii numjointsinpipestobsnumshall complywithbsennumtonumas appropriate .
num backfilling of trenches and filter drains num backfillingshallbeundertakenimmediatelyafter therequiredoperationsprecedingithavebeen completed .
num exceptwhereotherwisedescribedinappendixnum trenchesotherthanfilterdraintrenchesshallbe backfilledabovethepipesurroundmaterialdescribedin clausenumwithclassnumornumgeneralfillmaterial complyingwithseriesnum .
num numfilterdrainsshallbebackfilledasdescribed inappendixnumwithtypeatypebortypecfilter materialwhichshallconsistofnaturalorrecycled coarseaggregateorrecycledconcreteaggregate complyingwithbsennumandthefollowing i fortypeaandcgradingrequirementsfor unboundmixturesinaccordancewith tablenumandbsennum ii fortypebgeometricalrequirementsin accordancewithtablenumand bsennum amendmentnovembernum num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts iii aresistancetofragmentationincategory lanuminaccordancewithbsennum clausenumandtablenum iv numawatersolublesulfatecontentofless thannumofsulfateassonumwhentestedin accordancewithbsennumclausenum v allotherrequirementsincategorynr amendmentnovembernum num vi benonplasticwhentestedinaccordance withbsnumpartnum .
whererecycledcoarseaggregateorrecycledconcrete aggregateisusedinaccordancewiththisclauseitshall havebeentestedinaccordancewithclausenumandshall notcontainmorethannumothermaterialsclassx .
table numgrading and geometrical requirements for filter drain material type a type b type c standard bsennum bsennum bsennum sizemm num num asdescribedin appendixnum gradingandoversizecategories gfwithan additionalsieve gcnum oversizecategory ocnum categoryfortolerancesatmidsizesieves gtnr norequirement categoryformaximumfines ufnum fnr norequirement summarygradingrequirements sievesizemm percentagebymasspassing num num asdescribedin appendixnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num insizefraction num num num num filtermaterialswhentestedinaccordancewith subclausenumshallhavepermeabilityrequirements asdescribedinappendixnum .
whentypeamaterialisusedwithpipesotherthan porouspipesatleastnumofthematerialshallbelarger thanthediameterofholeorlargerthannumtimesthe widthofslotinthepipe .
num nummaterialforbackfillingtrenchesandfilter drainsshallnotbedepositedwithinnummmorany otherdistancesdescribedinappendixnumofconcrete boundmaterialsothercementitiousmaterialsor stabilisedcappingformingpartofthepermanentworks ifwhentestedinaccordancewithtrlreportnum either i numthewatersolublesulfatewscontent exceedsnummgofsulfateassonumperlitre testno.numor volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts ii numtheoxidisablesulfidesoscontent exceedsnumofsulfateassonumtestno.num andtestno.numor iii numthenumwatertosoilextractprepared forthedeterminationofwatersolublesulfate inihasaphvalueoflessthannumwhen testedusingtheelectrometricmethodofph determinationinaccordancewithbsnum .
numatleastfivesamplesofeachmaterialshallbe testedforwsosandphvalue.themeanofthe highesttwovaluesshallbeusedforcomparisonwith thelimitingvalues.thisalsoappliesifsixtonine resultsareavailable.iftenormoreresultsareavailable themeanofthehighestnumoftheresultsshallbeused forcomparisonwiththelimitingvalues .
num nummaterialforbackfillingtrenchesandfilter drainsshallnotbedepositedwithinnummmorany otherdistancesdescribedinappendixnumofmetallic structuralelementsformingpartofthepermanent worksifwhentestedinaccordancewithtrlreport numeither i numthewatersolublesulfatewscontent exceedsnummgofsulfateassonumperlitre testno.numor ii theoxidisablesulfidesoscontentexceeds numofsulfateassonumtestno.numandtest no.num .
numatleastfivesamplesofeachmaterialshallbe testedforwsandos.themeanofthehighesttwo valuesshallbeusedforcomparisonwiththelimiting values.thisalsoappliesifsixtonineresultsare available.iftenormoreresultsareavailablethemean ofthehighestnumoftheresultsshallbeusedfor comparisonwiththelimitingvalues .
numtherequirementsiniandiiaboveshallnot applytometallicstructuralelementsprotectedby concreteandancilliaryitemssuchasthetopsof chambersandgullies .
num numbackfillingshallbedepositedandcompacted incompliancewithclausenum.filtermaterialforfilter drainsshallbedepositedinlayersnotexceeding nummmloosedeptheachlayerbeingcompactedin compliancewithtablenummethodnum .
num nummaterialshallbedepositedinevenlayers andshallnotbeheapedinthetrenchbeforebeing spread.spreadingandcompactionshallbecarriedout evenlywithoutdislodgingdistortingordamagingthe pipe.powerrammersshallnotbeusedwithinnummm ofanypartofthepipeorjoint .
num numexceptincarriagewaysotherpavedareas andlocationsdescribedinappendixnumbackfillof trenchesshallbebroughtuptogroundlevel.where topsoilisatthesurfaceonthelineofthetrenchthe uppersectionofthebackfillshallbetopsoilofthe thicknessdescribedinappendixnumorofthesame thicknessandqualityoftopsoilasthesurrounding groundwherenothicknessisspecified.fortrenchesin carriagewaysorotherpavedareasthebackfillshallbe broughtuptoformationlevelorsubformationlevel wherecappingisrequiredunlessalowerlevelis describedinappendixnum.sheetingandother excavationsupportsshallberemovedasthefilling proceedsunlessotherwisedescribedinappendixnum .
num numthepositionofserviceductsshallbemarked whenthetrenchesarebackfilledandpermanentmarker blocksandlocationpostsprovidedasdescribedin appendixnum .
num connecting to existing drains chambers and channels num wheredescribedinappendixnumexistingdrains shallbeextendedconnectedandjointedtonewdrains chambersorchannels.allsuchconnectionsshallbe madeduringtheconstructionofthenewdrainorother workandtheirpositionsrecordedbythecontractorwho shallhandtotheoverseeingorganisationacopyofthe recordoftheconnectionsmadethepreviousday.where pipeconnectionsaremadetoexistingbrickconcreteor stonedrainschambersorchannelsthepipesshallbe wellandtightlybuiltintotheconcretebrickormasonry workandbesoplacedastodischargeatananglenot greaterthannumtothedirectionofflowofthedrainor channelandwiththeendofthepipecarefullycuttothe necessaryangle.wheretheconnectionsarebetween pipedrainsspecialconnectingpipesshallbelaidand jointedasdescribedinappendixnum .
num beforeenteringorbreakingintoanexistingsewer ordrainthecontractorshallgivenoticeofhisintention todosototheauthorityresponsibleforthepipelineto whichtheconnectionistobemade .
num numexistingdrainsnolongerrequiredshallas requiredbyappendixnumbesealedwithstnumconcrete incompliancetoclausenumorremovedandreplaced withgeneralfillmaterialcomplyingwithclausenum andtablenumandcompactedincompliancewith clausenumorgroutedwithanumcementpfamix .
thegroutshallusetheminimumquantityofwaterto ensurethefluiditynecessarytorenderitcapableof beingpumpedtotheendsofthepipe.itshallbeused withinonehourofmixingbutwhenthemixcontainsa retardingadmixturethistimemaybeextendedin accordancewiththemanufacturersinstructions.the cementshallcomplywithbsnumandthepulverised fuelashpfawithbsnumpartnumfinenesstozoneb andsulfatecontentnotexceedingnum .
amendmentnovembernum num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts num num chambers num numchambersotherthanthoseusedin motorwaycommunicationsinstallationsshallinclude manholescatchpitsinspectionchambersdrawpitsand walledsoakaways.chambersshallbeofthetype specifiedinappendixnumconstructedinaccordance withhcddrawingnumbersfnumtofnumandfnumtofnum asappropriatetothattype.chambersforusein motorwaycommunicationsinstallationsshallcomply withseriesnum.allstconcretereferredtointhis clauseshallcomplywithclausenumunlessotherwise describedinappendixnum .
num numfoundationstochambersshallbeofstnum concrete.channelsforchambersshallbeformedand finishedsmoothinthefoundationconcreteor constructedofpreformedhalfcirclechannelswithsides benchedinstnumconcreteormortardesignationi complyingwithclausenumexcludinglime .
alternativelyforinspectionchambersnotexceeding nummetresindepthtoinvertcompleteplasticsunitsor otherunitsinequivalentmaterialsurroundedby nummmofstnumconcretemaybeused .
num brickworkshallcomplywithseriesnumandbe builtwithmortardesignationiinenglishbond.the jointsofbrickworkwhereexposedshallbefinishedas specifiedforunpointedjointsinclausenum.theends ofallpipesshallbeneatlybuiltintothebrickworkand finishedflushwithmortardesignationi .
num numprecastconcretechambersshallcomplywith bsnumandbsennumandtheparticular requirementsdescribedinappendixnum.castinsitu concretechambersshallbeconstructedofstnumconcrete complyingwithclausenumandtheparticular requirementsdescribedinappendixnum .
num numcorrugatedgalvanizedsteelchambersshall complywithclausenumwithinsitustnumconcrete invertsandprecastconcretecoverslabscomplyingwith bsnumandbsennumandtheparticular requirementsdescribedinappendixnum.theyshallbe surroundedwithwellgradedgranularmaterialclassnumm asdescribedintablenumcompactedinaccordancewith clausenum .
num numwherethedepthofinvertofchambers excludinginspectionchambersexceedsnummmbelow thefinishedsurfaceofthecarriagewayortheadjacent groundmanholestepscomplyingwithbsennum shallbebuiltinaccordancewithrelevantseriesfhcd drawings.steelworkusedforladdershandholdsand otherfittingsshallcomplywithbsnumpartnumandbe galvanizedincompliancewithclausenumafter fabrication.threadedcomponentsshallbegalvanizedin compliancewithclausenum .
num numexcavationaroundchambersexceptthose describedinsubclausenumofthisclauseshallbe backfilledwithgeneralfillmaterialasdescribedin tablenumandcompactedincompliancewith clausenum.wheremechanicalcompactionis impracticabletheexcavationshallbebackfilledwith stnumconcrete.wherethereareprecastconcreteaccess shaftstoprecastconcretechamberstheshaftsshallbe surroundedbyaminimumthicknessofnummmofstnum concreteandtheremainingexcavationbackfilledwith generalfillmaterialasdescribedintablenumcompacted incompliancewithclausenum .
num chambersforfouldrainsshallbetestedfor watertightnessasandwhererequiredinappendixnum .
num numchambercoversgratingsandframesshall beasdescribedinappendixnumandshallcomplywith bsennumandsubclausesnumandnumofthisclause .
thecovershallbeofsuitablematerialdesignand constructiontoachieveaninserviceskidslipresistance potentialsuitablefortheconditionsofuse.thisshallbe determinedbytheacceleratedpolishtestmethod describedinbsnum.thepsrvshallbeasstatedin appendixnum .
num classdnumunitsandaboveshallincorporatea permanentnonrockfeatureeithertriangularpoint suspensionormachinedfaces .
num numboltssuppliedforlooselycouplingseparate sectionsofcoversandgratingsshallbesteelhexagon headedcomplyingwiththerequirementof bsenisonumbsenisonumand bsenisonumandbegalvanizedincompliancewith clausenum.theyshallnotbelessthansizemnum completewithhexagonnutandshallbeprovidedwith meanstopreventunduetighteningofunitsections .
num unlessotherwisespecifiedinappendixnumall coversgratingsandframesshallbesuppliedinafine castuncoatedcondition.whereacoatingisspecified inappendixnumthecoatingshallonlybeappliedwhen thesurfacesofthecastingarecleanfreefromrustand dry .
num requirementsforspecialdutycoversforusein carriagewaysshallbeasdescribedinappendixnum .
num gratingsforcatchpitchambersshallhavea minimumwaterwayareaasdescribedinappendixnum .
num twosetsofliftingkeysshallbedeliveredtothe overseeingorganisationforeachtypeofcover supplied.atleasttwokeywaysasdetailedonhcd drawingno.fnumshallbeprovidedineachcomplete coveroneineachsegmentforsegmentalcovers.a recessforaprisingbarshallbeincorporatedinmanhole coversunlessothermeansoflooseningthecoverfrom theframeareprovided .
amendmentnovembernum num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts num framesforchambercoversandgratingsshallbeset incementmortardesignationicomplyingwith clausenumoraproprietaryquicksettingmortarof equivalentstrength .
num forallpipelinesexceptthoseconstructedwith corrugatedpipesthenearestjointtoanychambershall benotmorethannummmfromtheinnerfaceofthe wallandshallnotberestrictedbyanyconcrete .
betweenthisandthenextjointthelengthofthe articulatedpipeshallbeinaccordancewithtablenum .
table num length of articulated pipe nominal pipe diameter mm length of pipe mm numandless numtonum greaterthannum numtonum num wheretheadjustmentorreplacementofexisting framesandcoversorgratingsisrequiredtheunitsshall betakenupandrefixedorremovedandreplacedwith newunitscomplyingwithsubclausesnumtonumofthis clauseorasdescribedinappendixnum.ontakingup orremovaloftheunitanyconcreteormortarbedding shallbebrokenoutandthesurfaceprepared.where existingframesandcoversorgratingsaretobe adjustedthecontractorshalltakeuptheunitandclean itforreuse.theadjustedorreplacedunitsshallbelaid onamortarbedcomplyingwithsubclausenumofthis clause.thefinishedthicknessofthemortarbedshall bebetweennummmandnummm.whererequiredin appendixnumcoversandgratingsshallbebeddedusing aproprietaryquicksettinghighstrengthmortar.details ofsuchmortarshallbetotheapprovalofthe overseeingorganisation.unlessotherwisedescribedin appendixnumadjustedorreplacedframesandcoversor gratingsshallbesetflushwiththenewsurface.any additionaladjustmentsshallbebymodifyingthe brickworkincompliancewithsubclausenumorby usingaframeofasuitabledepth.oncompletionofthe workseachcovershallbeliftedandtheframeand seatingcleaned .
num gullies and pipe junctions num numgulliesshallbetrappeduntrappedor sumplessasdescribedinappendixnumandbein accordancewithhcddrawingnumbersfnumandfnum .
allstconcretereferredtointhisclauseshallcomply withclausenumunlessotherwisedescribedin appendixnum .
num gulliesshallbeconstructedsothatnopartofthe spoutortraphasacrosssectionalarealessthannumrd thatoftheoutlet.thedepthofwatersealintrapped gulliesshallbenotlessthannummm .
num numprecastconcretegulliesshallcomplywith bsnumandclaygullieswithbsennum.insitu concretegulliesshallbeasdescribedinappendixnum andconstructedofstnumconcreteofnummmminimum thicknessusingpermanentorremovableshuttering .
whereinsituconcretegulliesareformedwith permanentshutteringsuchshutteringshallhavea currentbritishboardofagrmentroadsandbridges certificate .
num gullygratingskerbtypegullycoversandframes shallcomplywithbsennumandthefollowingand shallbeoftheclassesandsizesdescribedin appendixnum .
num numtheuppersurfaceofgullygratingsshallbe flatexceptwhereotherwisedescribedinappendixnum .
slotsingratingsorbetweengratingsandframesshall notbeorientatedparalleltothedirectionoftraffic exceptwheretheslotsarelessthannummmlongorless thannummmwide.minimumwaterwayareasshallbeas specifiedinappendixnum.unlessotherwisespecifiedin appendixnumallgratingsandframesshallbesupplied inafinecastuncoatedcondition.whereacoatingis specifiedinappendixnumthecoatingshallonlybe appliedwhenthesurfacesofthecastingarecleanfree fromrustanddry.framesshallbebeddedonmortar complyingwithsubclausenum.brickworkshall complywithsubclausenum .
num numbackfillingtoprecastgulliesshallbecarried outuptosubformationlevelwithgeneralfillmaterial classnumasdescribedintablenumcompactedin compliancewithclausenum.wheremechanical compactionisimpracticablethebackfillingshallbein stnumconcrete.theremainderofthebackfillingshallbe inappropriatecappingandroadpavementmaterials exceptthatwheremechanicalcompactionofcappingor unboundmixtureforsubbaseisimpracticablestnum concreteshallbeused .
num numgullyconnectionpipesshallbeeither flexibleorrigidnotexceedingnumminlengthwith flexiblejointsforadistanceofnummfromthegullyand shallbeinaccordancewithsubclausenumwhen enteringchambers.junctionpipesshallbemanufactured ofthesametypeandclassofmaterialastheremainder ofthepipesintherun.junctionpipeswhicharelaidbut notimmediatelyconnectedshallbefittedwith temporarystoppersorsealsandthepositionofallsuch junctionsshallbeclearlydefinedbymeansofstakesor tracingwiresproperlymarkedorlabelled.saddlesmay beusedtoformjunctionsonlywherepermittedin appendixnum.nointernalprojectionsgreaterthan nummmwillbepermitted.saddlesforasbestoscement amendmentnovembernum num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts andplasticspipesshallbeinstalledinaccordancewith themanufacturersrecommendations.saddleswithclay pipesshallbejointedwithmortardesignationi complyingwithclausenumexcludinglime.saddles andpipesshallbesurroundedwithstnumconcrete .
num numwheretheadjustmentorreplacementof existingframesandgratingsisrequiredtheunitsshall betakenupandrefixedorremovedandreplacedwith newunitscomplyingwithsubclausesnumandnumofthis clauseorasdescribedinappendixnum.ontakingup orremovaloftheunitanyconcreteormortarbedding shallbebrokenoutandthesurfaceprepared.where existingframesandcoversorgratingsaretobe adjustedthecontractorshalltakeuptheunitandclean itforreuse.theadjustedorreplacedunitsshallbelaid atalevelunlessotherwisedescribedinappendixnum nummmbelowtheadjoiningroadsurfaceonamortarbed complyingwithsubclausenum.thefinished thicknessofthemortarbedshallbebetweennummmand nummm.whererequiredinappendixnumcoversand gratingsshallbebeddedusingaproprietaryquick settinghighstrengthmortar.detailsofsuchmortarshall betotheapprovaloftheoverseeingorganisation.any additionaladjustmentshallbemadebymodifyingthe brickworkincompliancewithsubclausenumorby usingaframeofsuitabledepth.oncompletionofthe workseachgratingshallbeliftedandtheframeand seatingcleaned .
num testing and cleaning num drainsrequiredinappendixnumtohavewatertight jointsshallbetestedasdescribedinappendixnumin sectionseg.betweenchambersbymeansoftheairtest describedinsubclausenumofthisclause.ifapipelineis rejectedbecauseofafailedairtestaspartofthe rectificationworkawatertestasdescribedinsub clausenumofthisclausemaybecarriedoutasan alternativeacceptabilitytest.beforetestingtheendsof thepipelinetobetestedincludingthoseofshort branchesshallbepluggedandsealed .
num forthepipelineairtestairshallbepumpedinby suitablemeansuntilastablepressureofnummmhead ofwaterisindicatedinautubeconnectedtothe system.theairpressureshallnotfalltolessthan nummmheadofwaterduringaperiodofnumminutes withoutfurtherpumpingafteraninitialperiodtoallow stabilization.drainswithtrapsshallbetestedtonummm headofwaterandthepermissiblelossshallthenbeno morethannummmheadofwaterinnumminuteswithout furtherpumpingaftertheinitialstabilisingperiod .
num forthepipelinewatertestthepipesshallbefilled withwaterunderaheadofnotlessthannummabovethe crownofthepipeatthehighendandnotmorethannumm abovethepipeatthelowend.steeplygradedpipelines shallbetestedinsectionssothattheabovemaximumis notexceeded.thetestshallcommencenotlessthantwo hoursafterfillingthetestsectionatwhichtimethelevel ofwaterattheverticalfeedpipeshallbemadeupto producetherequirednummminimumtesthead.theloss ofwateroveranumminuteperiodshallbemeasuredby addingwateratregularnumminuteintervalstorestore theoriginalwaterlevelandrecordingtheamountsso added.thedrainwillhavepassedthetestifthevolume ofwateraddeddoesnotexceedonelitreperhourper linearmetreofdrainpermetreofnominalinternal diameter .
num numallpipelineslessthannummmdiameter excludingserviceductsshallbecheckedbydrawing througheachcompletedlengthofpipeaspherical mandrelofadiameternumlessthanthenominalbore ofthepipesbeingtested .
num numduringtheprogressoftheworksallexisting chambersgulliesandroddingeyesshallbekeptclean andfreefromobstruction.oncompletionofthewhole oftheworksallchambersgulliesanddrainsincluding vergesurfacewaterdrainsandfilterdrainsbut excludingallfinandnarrowfilterdrainsshallbe flushedfromendtoendwithwaterandleftfreefrom obstructions.catchpitchambersshallbeleftcleanand freefromsilt .
unlessotherwiserequiredinappendixnummchw numallcarrierfoulandfilterdrainsbutexcludingall finandnarrowfilterdrainsshallbesurveyedbyclosed circuittelevisioncctvinaccordancewiththe relevantrequirementsofseriesnummchwnumparts numtonum.furtherguidanceisprovdedin subclausesngnumandngnum .
num thepipesandfiltermaterialoffilterdrainsshallat alltimesbeleftcleanandfreefromsiltandobstruction .
num wheredescribedinappendixnumsamplesofone ormorepartlywatertightjointsforpipelinesuptoand includingnummmdiametershallbetestedwithahead ofwaterkeptlevelwiththecrownofthepipe.thejoint willnotbeacceptediftheflowthroughthejointinlitres perminuteexceedsnumtimesthesquareofthenominal internaldiameterofthepipeinmetres .
num permeabilitytestsshallbeasdescribedin appendixnum .
num numserviceductsshallbecheckedbydrawinga woodenmandrelasshownonhcddrawingnumber inumthroughastheductsarelaidbutwhereasethasto begiventothelineofductsthewoodenmandrelshall bereplacedbyanironmandrelnummmlongbutofthe samediameterasthewoodenversion .
amendmentnovembernum num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts num surface water channels and drainage channel blocks num surfacewaterchannelsanddrainagechannel blocksshallbeconstructedasdescribedin appendixnum .
num surfacewaterchannelsshallcomplywith clausenum .
num drainagechannelblocksshallcomplywith clausenum .
num land drains num numexistinglanddrainswhicharepermanently severedbytheworksshallbelocatedandconnected intoanewdrainpipeorditchallasdescribedin appendixnum.thelengthsremainingwithintheworks shallbecleanedoutfromthenewdraintrenchfaceas necessary.anypipedisturbedbytheworksshallbe relaidtoensureafreedischargeintothenewdrain .
disusedendsofinterceptedlanddrainsshallbe adequatelysealedwithstnumconcreteincompliancewith clausenum .
num whereanexistinglanddrainisexposedand severedbytemporarytrenchexcavationthecontractor shallmarkthepositionofthedrainandrecordit.the drainshallbedivertedintoanexistingdrainor watercourse.alternativelythenormalfunctioningof thedrainshallbecontinuedbytheconstructionofa pipelineorchanneladequatelysupportedacrossthe excavationuntilpermanentrestorationismadeonthe originalline .
num thecontractorshallnotifytheoverseeing organisationofanylanddrainwhichisblockedoris otherwisedefectivewhenthedrainisfirstexposed .
num severedmoledrainsshallbeledstraightintonew drainsalternativelytheyshallwhererequiredin appendixnumbeinterceptedbytheconstructionofa landdrain.wheretheyhavebeendisturbedmole channelsshallbecleanedoutandfilledlocallywith typeafiltermaterialorasotherwisedescribedin appendixnum .
num backfilling to pipe bays and verges on bridges num numunlessotherwisedescribedinappendixnum fillingtopipebaysandvergesonbridgesshallbewell gradedgranularmaterialnotexceedingnummmsize containingnotmorethannumofmaterialpassingthe nummmsieveandwithauniformitycoefficientof morethannum.itshallbelaidandcompactedin compliancewithsubclausenumandnum.thematerial shallmeetthesulfaterequirementdescribedin subclausesnumandnum .
num permeable backing to earth retaining structures num unlessotherwisedescribedinappendixnum permeablebackingshallconsistofoneofthefollowing materialsexceptwhenthefillingadjacenttothe structureisselectedcohesivematerialclassnuma selectedconditionedpulverisedfuelashclassnumbor chalk i aminimumthicknessofnummmofgranular materialcomplyingwiththerequirementsof clausenumfortypeaortypecmaterial andinadditionsatisfyingthefollowing criteria pipingratiodefinedas numpercentsizeofthedrainagematerial numpercentsizeofthebackfillmaterial permeabilityratiodefinedas numpercentsizeofthedrainagematerial numpercentsizeofthebackfillmaterial wherethepercentsizeofamaterialisthesizeof particlecorrespondingtothegivenpercentordinateof theparticlesizedistributiongraph .
ii porousnofinesconcretecastinsitu nummmthickcomplyingwiththe requirementsofclausenum .
iii numprecasthollowconcreteblocks complyingwiththebsennumlaidin stretcherbondwithdryjointsinnummm thickwallingwithholesvertical .
num numwhenthefillingadjacenttothestructureis selectedcohesivematerialclassnumaselected conditionedpulverisedfuelashclassnumborchalkthe permeablebackingshallbeaminimumthicknessof nummmofnumornumcpormpsandcomplyingwith bsennumunlessotherwisedescribedin appendixnum .
num fin drains general num findrainsshallcomplywiththisclauseandthe specialrequirementsdescribedinappendixnum .
thetermsthicknesswidthheightandcoreshallhave themeaningsindicatedonhcddrawingnumberfnum unlessotherwisedescribedinappendixnum .
amendmentnovembernum num num num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts thetermfindrainshallmeanaplanargeocomposite structuredesignedtoperformthesamefunctionasa narrowfilterdrain .
num wherefindrainsaredesignedforlateralentryof waterfromonesideonlytherequirementsforflowrates insubclausesnumandnumofthisclauseshallapplytothe faceorplanedesignedtoadmitortransmitwater .
num thematerialsofwhichthedrainismadeshallbe treatedsothattheyareprotectedfromthedeleterious effectsofshorttermexposuretoultravioletlightand shallberesistanttodegradationbyacidsalkalis commonchemicalsbacteriafungiandmoulds occurringinsoilsandhighwayconstructionmaterials .
afterexposuretoultravioletlighttheoverseeing organisationmayrequireevidencethatthematerials stillcomplywiththerequirementsofthisclause.the drainshallbeprotectedfromdamageandultraviolet lightandbelabelledtoidentifythegradeand manufacturerorsupplier.wherenecessarytheside intendedforentryofwaterandthedirectionofinplane flowshallbeidentified .
geotextile num thegeotextileshall i numinbothmachineandcrossmachine directionssustainatensileloadofnotless thannumknmatbreakandhaveaminimum failurestrainofnumwhendeterminedin accordancewithbsenisonum ii numhaveaminimumpunctureresistance ofnumnwhendeterminedinaccordance withbsenisonum iii numhaveaminimumtearresistanceof numnwhendeterminedinaccordancewith astmstandarddnum iv haveasizedistributionofporeopenings suchthattheapparentopeningsizeonumwhen determinedinaccordancewith bsnumpartnumorotherappropriatetestis asstatedinappendixnum v allowwatertoflowthroughitineither directionnormaltoitsprincipalplaneata rateofnotlessthanthatstatedin appendixnumunderaconstantheadofwater ofnummmandamaximumbreakthrough headofnummmwhendeterminedin accordancewithbsnumpartnum .
composite drain num numthecompositedrainshall i haveaflowratethrougheachfaceofthe drainofmorethannumofthevalue specifiedinsubclausenumvofthisclauseon thesideorsideswhereinflowoccurs.this valuemaybefoundbyeither a directmeasurementofthecomposite drainusingamodifiedversionof bsnumpartnumor b calculationbasedontheflowrate obtainedbythestandardtestin bsnumpartnumandthepercentage contactareaofthedrainagecore obtainedfromsubclausenumofthis clauseorotherappropriatemethod ii havevaluesoflongterminplaneflowrates asstatedinappendixnumwhendetermined inaccordancewithsubclausesnumandnumof thisclause.thevaluesofhydraulicgradient andminimumappliedstressesshallbeas givenintablenum .
table num num applied stresses knm and hydraulic gradient hcd drain type num num num num subclausenum normalstress shearstress num num num num num num num num subclausenum normalstress num num num num subclausenum hydraulic gradient num num num num num num joints num findrainsshallbecapableofbeingjointed longitudinallyorlaterallyintopipesystemsorchambers forinflowandoutflowpurposesandbeselfjointing eitherdirectlyorthroughpurposemadeattachment piecesforformingcontinuousdrainlengths.allsuch jointsshallbeformedsoastopreventtheingressofsoil particlesorotherextraneousmaterialintothedrain .
findrainjointstransversetothedirectionofflowshall havevaluesofinplaneflowratesnotlessthanthat requiredbysubclausenumiiofthisclause .
findrainjointsparalleltothedirectionofflowandany exposededgesshallbeprotectedfromtheingressofsoil byageotextilewrappingwithaminimumoverlapof nummm .
pipes num numfordraintypenumpipesshallbeperforatedor porousandcomplywithsubclausenum.pipes amendmentnovembernum num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts complyingwithbsnumshallhaveaminimum ultimatepipestiffnessstesvalueofnumnmnum .
fordraintypenumpipesshallbeunperforated thermoplasticspipecomplyingwithbsnumbsnum bsennumbsennumorbsennumslotted longitudinallyalongthetopsurfaceandstressrelief treatedifrequiredinaccordancewiththesystem manufacturerspublishedspecification .
num numpipejointsshallcomplywiththe requirementsoftherelevantbritishstandardforthe pipeusedorclausenum .
backfill and surround material num pipesurroundmaterialfordraintypesnumandnumshall complywithsubclausenumiornumiiortypea orcmaterialcomplyingwithsubclausenum .
wherefindrainsareinstalledinatrenchbackfill materialshallbetheoriginalasdugmaterialfromthe trenchunlessotherwisespecifiedinappendixnum .
dimensions num numunlessotherwisedescribedinappendixnum thedimensionsofthefindrainshallbeasshownon hcddrawingsfnumandfnum.thepipediametershallbe asstatedinappendixnum.thedrainslopeanglexas shownondrawingfnumshallbenotgreaterthannum fromtheverticalunlessotherwisestatedin appendixnum .
installation and handling num installationoffindrainsshallbeasshownonhcd drawingnumbersfnumtofnum.wherefindrainsare assembledonsitetheassemblyareashallbecleanand dryandfreeofwindbornepollutants.anymaterial whichbecomescontaminatedmustbereplaced.no geotextileorcorematerialshallbeexposedtodaylight oranysourceofultravioletradiationforaperiod exceedingacumulativetotalofnumhours.anygeotextile orcorematerialexposedtodaylightoranysourceof ultravioletlightforaperiodexceedingacumulative totalofnumhoursshallbereplacedunlessitcanbe demonstratedthatthematerialsofthedrainstillcomply withtherequirementsofthisclause .
wherefindrainsarelaidintrenchthetrenchbottom shallbefreeofirregularitiesandtotherequiredlevels giveninappendixnum.rockandotherhard protuberancesshallberemovedandanyexcesscutin thetrenchbottomfilledandcompactedbacktothe requiredgradewithsuitableexcavatedorimported material .
thedrainshallbelaidwiththeappropriatefaceagainst thesideofthetrenchadjacenttothecarriagewayandin theappropriatedirection.thissideofthetrenchshall havewallssufficientlycleantoenablethefindrainto comeintoclosecontactwiththewallwhenthetrenchis backfilledandcompacted.compactionshallbein accordancewithclausenum.findrainsinstalledaspart ofthepermanentworksshallbeprotectedfromsurface watercontaminationandaccidentaldamageduring construction .
thefindrainpipesurroundandbackfillshallbe installedsoastocausenodamagetothefindrain .
whereanydamagedoesoccurthedamagedmaterials shallbereplacedbynewmaterial .
aftertheinstallationofthefindrainhasbeencompleted amarkertapeshallbelaidapproximatelynummmabove thefindraininthepositionshownonhcddrawing numbersfnumandfnum.thetapesshallbegreenself colouredpvcorpolytheneplasticnotlessthannummm thickandnummmwide .
identification num thecontractorshallobtainandmakeavailablethe followinginformationforeachseparateconsignmentof findraindeliveredtosite i geotextileandcorenamegradenumberand massperunitarea ii namesandaddressesofsystemproducerand geotextilecoreandpipemanufacturers iii manufacturingcharacteristicsand constituentsofgeotextileandcore.thisshall includecompositionandtypeofconstituent filamentsthreadsfibresfilmstapesand othercomponents iv consignmentnumberanddeliverydate v acopyofthesitedeliverynote .
test method for the percentage contact area of drainage core num i thetestdeterminestheareaofonefaceofa drainagecorewhichwillbeincontactwitha geotextilefilterasapercentage .
ii theapparatusrequiredisasfollows a loadingdeviceabletoapplya compressiveloadofatleastnumknand havingaflatsteelbase b flatsteelloadingplatenummmx nummm c printersinkandrollerorpad d sheetofthincompressiblerubber e planimeter .
amendmentnovembernum num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts iii thetestprocedureshallbeasfollows.cut threerepresentativetestspecimensnummm xnummmnummm.applyinktoone nummmxnummmfaceofaspecimenand coverwithasheetofplainpaperandathin compressiblerubbersheet.placethe preparedspecimenintotheloadingdevice andgraduallyapplytheloadofnumknand maintainfornumminutes.releasetheloadand removethespecimenandseparateitfromthe paper.usingtheplanimeterfindthetotal areaofthepaperwhichhasreceivedan imprint.repeatforallspecimens .
iv thepercentagecontactarea totalareaofimprint areaoftestspecimen v thereportshallinclude a areferencetothismethod b sampleidentificationdetails c individualandmeanpercentagecontact areas d detailsofanydeviationfromthe specifiedtestprocedure .
vi alternativemethodsofdeterminingthe percentagecontactareamaybeemployed withthepriorapprovaloftheoverseeing organisation .
test method for determining the thickness of fin drains under specified normal and shear stresses num i numthetestdeterminesthethicknessof thefindrainundersustainednormaland shearstresses.alongtermthicknessat numhoursiscalculatedbyextrapolation andashorttermequivalentnormalload whichproducesthelongtermthicknessis determined .
ii theapparatusrequiredisasfollows a asuitablecompressiontestingmachine whichshallhaveaverticaltravelat leastthenominalthicknessofthe specimen.itshallbecapableof sustainingthenecessaryloadstowithin numaccuracyforthedurationofthetest b thecompressiontestingapparatus whichshallincludeafixedbaseplate andparallelmoveabletopplatewithflat steelsurfacewithsufficientfrictionto permitthedevelopmentoftherequired shearforces c ameansofmeasuringthemean thicknessofthespecimentoan accuracyofnummm .
asanalternativetoaandbanappropriateinclined planeandkentledgesystemmaybeemployedto producethenormalandshearloads .
thetestprocedureshallbeasfollows iii cutsixrepresentativespecimensof minimumsizenummmxnummm symmetricallyaboutthecoredesign.three specimensshallbetestedinaccordancewith vbelowandthreeinaccordancewithvi below .
iv thetestspecimenshallbeplaced symmetricallyonthebaseplateandcovered bythetopplate.themeansofmeasuring thicknessshallbeattachedandtheinitial thicknessmeasured .
v numapplytheloadsmoothlyandas quicklyaspossibletothetopplate.thefull loadnormalandshearshallbeappliedin lessthannumsecondsandsustainedforatleast numhours.theappliedstressesshallbe thosegivenintablenum.atleastfour measurementsofthicknessshallbemade duringeachunitoflogarithmictimeafterthe firstminute.determinethelongterm thicknessofthespecimenasthethicknessof thespecimenatnumhoursreducedbynumt wheretisthedifferenceinthicknessesof thespecimenthicknessrecordedatnumhours andnumhours.repeatthetestonthetwo otherspecimens.thetestspecimensshallbe maintainedataconstanttemperatureof numcnumcthroughoutthetestperiod .
vi applyincreasingincrementsofnormalload tothespecimen.determinetheshortterm equivalentloadwhichshallbetheload whichwhenappliedforaperiodofnum minutesproducesaspecimenthicknessequal withinanaccuracyofnummmtothelong termthicknessofthespecimenobtainedat vabove.repeatthetestontheothertwo specimens .
vii thereportshallinclude a areferencetothismethod b sampleidentificationdetails c theinitialthicknessofthesample d theappliedload amendmentnovembernum num xnum volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts e thethicknessofeachsampleatnumand numhoursandthemeanofthethree results f aplotofpercentagereductionin thicknessagainstlogarithmictime g themeanlongtermthickness h themeanshorttermequivalentload i anydeviationsfromthespecifiedtest procedure .
determining inplane flow under compressive loading num numinplaneflowshallbedeterminedin accordancewithbsnumpartnumexceptthatthe followingconditionsshallapply a theappliednormalstressshallbethegreater ofthevaluegivenintablenum forsubclausenumorthemeanshortterm equivalentstressasdeterminedin subclausenumviofthisclause b thesampleshallbetestedsuchthatthe measuredfloworflowsisinthesame directionastheprincipalfloworflows whenthefindrainisinservice c thefoamrubberoptionofthetestprocedure shallbeuseddetailsofthefoamrubberto beusedmaybeobtainedfromthe overseeingorganisation d thehydraulictransmissivityshallbereported foreachofthehydraulicgradientsemployed .
test methods num notwithstandingtherequirementsof subclausesnumandnumofthisclausevariationsin thetestmethodsspecifiedthereinshallbemadewhere deemednecessarybythebritishboardofagrment followingconsultationwiththemanufacturer.allsuch variationsshallberecordedinthereport .
certification num findrainsandconstituentmaterialsshallhavea currentbritishboardofagrmentroadsandbridges certificatecertifyingtheappropriatephysicalproperties whentestedinaccordancewiththisclause .
num narrow filter drains general num narrowfilterdrainsshallcomplywiththisclause andthespecialrequirementsdescribedinappendixnum .
thetermnarrowfilterdrainreferstodraintypesnumornum indicatedinthehcddrawingnumberfnum.they consistofaporousorperforatedpipelaidinanarrow trenchsurroundedbygranularmaterialwherethe granularmaterialandorthepipeisenclosedbyalayer ofgeotextilefilter.narrowfilterdrainsandfindrains performthesamefunction .
materials num thegeotextilematerialsusedinthedrainshallbe storedsothattheyareprotectedfromthedeleterious effectsofshorttermexposuretoultravioletlightand shallberesistanttodegradationbyacidsalkalis commonchemicalsbacteriafungiandmoulds occurringinsoilsandhighwayconstructionmaterials .
afterexposuretoultravioletlighttheoverseeing organisationmayrequireevidencethatthematerials stillcomplywiththerequirementsofthisclause.they shallbeprotectedfromdamageandultravioletlightand belabelledtoidentifythegradeandmanufactureror supplier .
num thegeotextileusedinnarrowfilterdrainsshall complywithallrequirementsofsubclausenumfor geotextilesusedinfindrains .
fordraintypenumthegeotextilesurroundtothepipe shallconsistofaprefabricatedcontinuousclosefitting sock.alternativelythepipeshallbefirmlywrappedina singlelayerofgeotextilewithanoverlapofbetween numandnummmandsecuredaroundthepipeinamanner soastopreventtheingressofsoilparticlesorother extraneousmaterialandwithoutaffectingthe permeabilityofthewrappedmaterial.splicesbetween lengthsofsockorlayershallhaveoverlapswithinthese dimensionsandbesecurelytied .
fordraintypenumthegeotextilesurroundtothegranular materialshallhaveaminimumoverlapofnummm includingnummmdowntuck.splicingoflengthsof geotextileshallconsistofminimumnummmoverlap securedwithpinsormechanicalties.whereanoutlet pipepassesthroughthegeotextileaseparatepieceof geotextileshallbewrappedroundtheoutletpipeflared againstthegeotextileinthefilterdrainandsecured .
wheredrainlengthsareterminatedatchambersthe geotextileshallbesecuredagainstthechamberwallsby suitablemeanssoastopreventtheingressofsoil particlesorotherextraneousmaterialintothedrain .
num numpipesandfittingsshallcomplywithsub clausesnumandnum.wherecoilablepipesto bsnumareusedtheyshallbecapableofbeing straightenedsoastolieflatwithoutrestraintinthe trenchbottombeforebackfilling .
num numthegranularmaterialusedfortrenchinfill shallcomplywiththerequirementsfornonplasticity amendmentnovembernum num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts lacategoryandsulfatecontentofsubclausenum andhaveagradingwithinthelimitsoftablenum.the materialwhentestedinaccordancewithsubclause numshallmeetthepermeabilityrequirements describedinappendixnum .
table numnarrow filter drain trench infill grading requirements hcddraintype num num maximumparticlesize mm num num dnumsizemm num num dnumsizemm asstatedin appendixnum dnumsizemm holediameter ornumtimes widthofslotin pipe uniformitycoefficient numtonum numtonumorifcunum cudnumdnum dnummm dnsievesizepassingnbyweightofmaterial dimensions num unlessotherwisedescribedinappendixnumthe dimensionsofthenarrowfilterdrainshallbeasshown onhcddrawingno.fnum.thepipediametershallbe asstatedinappendixnum.thedrainslopeanglexas shownondrawingfnumshallbenotgreaterthannum fromtheverticalunlessotherwisestatedin appendixnum .
installation and handling num narrowfilterdrainsshallbeinstalledasshownon hcddrawingnumberfnum.beforeduringandafter installationthegeotextileshallbeprotectedfrom contaminationdamageandexposuretoultraviolet radiationinaccordancewithsubclausenum .
theexcavatedtrenchbottomshallbefreeof irregularitiesandtotherequiredlevelsgivenin appendixnum.rockandotherhardprotuberancesshall beremovedandanyexcesscutinthetrenchbottom filledandcompactedbacktotherequiredgradewith suitableexcavatedorimportedmaterial.draintypenum shallhavetrenchwallssufficientlycleantoenablethe geotextiletocomeintoclosecontactwiththewallwhen thegranularmaterialisplacedinsideit.thedeposition andcompactionofinfillshallbeinaccordancewith subclausenumforfilterdrains .
narrowfilterdrainsinstalledaspartofthepermanent worksshallnotbeusedforthedisposalofsurfacewater runoffduringconstruction.narrowfilterdrains exposedtosurfacewateringressshallbetemporarily protected .
markertapesshallconformandbeinstalledin accordancewithsubclausenum .
num thecontractorshallobtainandmakeavailablethe informationrequiredinsubclausenuminrespectof thegeotextileandpipe .
certification num thegeotextileshallhaveacurrentbritishboardof agrmentroadsandbridgescertificatecertifyingthe appropriatephysicalpropertieswhentestedin accordancewiththisclause .
num combined drainage and kerb systems num general num numcombineddrainageandkerbsystemslisted inappendixnumshallbetreatedasotherfeaturestobe designedbythecontractor.combineddrainageand kerbsystemsshallconformtobsennumandtothe specialrequirementsinappendixnum .
num numcombineddrainageandkerbsystemsshall besuitablefortheirintendeduseandplaceof installationintheworksandasstatedinappendixnum .
thecontractorshallprovideevidenceofsuch suitabilityforthepurposetotheoverseeing organisationinaccordancewithappendixnum .
num numdesignflowsgiveninappendixnumshallbe accommodatedwithoutsurchargewithinthemain combineddrainageandkerbsectionandbeneaththe undersideofanyinletslotsections .
num numwhereapplicablethewidthanddepthof combineddrainageandkerbsystemunitsshallnot exceedthedimensionsgiveninappendixnum .
num numwhenusedadjacenttoporousasphalt surfacingmaterialsunitsshallincorporatesideentry inletstopermitdrainageofwaterheldwithintheproous asphalt.inletsshallcomplywiththerequirementsof appendixnumandshallhavethecapacitytodrain porousasphalt .
num classification num numcombineddrainageandkerbsystems excludinginsitusystemshallbeclassifiedasfollows accordingtotheirintendeduseandshallbeasstatedin appendixnum i cnum ii dnumand amendmentnovembernum num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts iii whereexceptionallycombinedkerband drainageunitshavetobelocatedinareas subjectedtolargenumbersofhighspeed heavygoodsvehiclesclassenumcombined kerbanddrainageunitsshallbeconsidered .
num water tightness num numjointsbetweenunitscomprisingthesystem andbetweenthechannelandunitsshallbedesignedto avoidleakageofsurfacewater.jointsbetweenbridge deckwaterproofingandcomponentpartspassing throughthewaterproofingshallbewatertight.sealants shallbecompatiblewiththewaterproofingsystem .
num installation and handling num numcombineddrainageandkerbsystemsshall belaidandjointedinaccordancewiththe manufacturerswritteninstructions .
num numadjacentcarriagewayfootwayvergeor centralreservetobeddingbackingsurroundingor jointingofcombineddrainageandkerbunitsshallbein accordancewiththemanufacturerswritteninstructions .
num numjunctionsconnectingpipesandotherfittings comprisingthecombineddrainageandkerbsystem shallcomplywithsubclausenumandshallbeas describedinappendixnum.thecombineddrainageand kerbsystemshallincorporatemeasurestoenable roddingoftheoutfallpipeworkandadequateaccessfor jettingbywaterjettingequipmentintothesystem .
num cleaning num numcombineddrainageandkerbsystemsshall becleanedoutbyappropriatemeansandshallbeleft cleanandfreefromallobstruction.thecompleted combineddrainageandkerbsystemsshallbesurveyed byclosedcircuittelevisioncctvinaccordance withtherelevantrequirementsofseriesnummchw numpartsnumtonum .
num linear drainage channel systems general num numthelineardrainagechannelsystemslistedin appendixnumshallbetreatedasotherfeaturestobe designedbythecontractor.theinsitulineardrainage channelsystemsshallconformwhereapplicableto subclausesnumtonumandtherequirementsin appendixnumandappendixnumasappropriate.the prefabricatedlineardrainagechannelsystemswhere applicableshallconformtobsennumandwiththe otherrequirementsinappendixnum .
num numlineardrainagechannelsystemsshallbe suitablefortheirintendeduseandplaceofinstallation intheworks.thecontractorshallprovideevidenceof suchsuitabilityforthepurposetotheoverseeing organisationinaccordancewithappendixnum .
num designflowsgiveninappendixnumshallbe accommodatedwithoutsurchargewithinthemain channelsectionandbeneaththeundersideofanyinlet slotsections .
num numwhereapplicablethewidthanddepthof lineardrainagechannelsystemunitsshallnotexceed thedimensionsgiveninappendixnum .
num numdimensionsofinletslotsshallcomplywith thefollowingcriteria i forprefabricatedlineardrainagechannel systemstheyshallconformtobsennum ii forinsitulineardrainagechannelsystems theyshallconformtobsennum .
num numwhenusedadjacenttoporousasphalt surfacingmaterialsunitsshallalsoincorporateside entryinletstopermitdrainageofwaterheldwithinthe porousasphalt.inletsshallcomplywiththe requirementsofappendixnumandshallhavethe capacitytodrainporousasphalt .
num weathering resistance num nummarkingrelatingtothegradeofweathering resistancefordrainagechannelsmadeofconcreteshall beasstatedinappendixnum .
num classification num numlineardrainagechannelsystemsshallbe classifiedasfollowsaccordingtotheirintendeduseand shallbeasstatedinappendixnum i cnum ii dnumand iii whereexceptionallylineardrainagechannel systemshavetobelocatedinareassubjected tolargenumbersofhighspeedheavygoods vehiclesclassenumcombinedkerband drainageunitsshallbeconsidered .
num water tightness num numjointsbetweenunitscomprisingthesystem andbetweenadjacentconstructionandthesystemshall bedesignedtoavoidleakageofsurfacewater.where applicablejointsbetweenbridgedeckwaterproofing andcomponentpartspassingthroughthewaterproofing shallbewatertight.sealantsshallalsobecompatible withthewaterproofingsystem .
amendmentnovembernum num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts num numjunctionsconnectingpipesandotherfittings comprisingthelineardrainagechannelsystemshall complywithsubclausenumandshallbeasdescribed inappendixnum.thelineardrainagechannelsystem shallincorporatemeasurestoenableroddingofthe outfallpipeworkandadequateaccessforjettingby waterjettingequipmentintothesystem .
num cleaning num numthelineardrainagechannelsystemsshallbe cleanedoutbyappropriatemeansandshallbeleftclean andfreefromallobstructiononcompletionofthe works.thecompletedlineardrainagechannelsystems shallbesurveyedbyclosedcircuittelevisioncctv inaccordancewiththerelevantrequirementsofseries nummchwnumpartsnumtonum.furtherguidanceis providedinsubclausesngnumandngnum .
manufactured systems num nummanufacturedsystemsshallconformto bsennum .
in situ systems num numinsitusystemsshallcomplywiththe requirementsofsubclausesnumandnum .
theyshallalsocomplywiththerequirementsof subclausenumexceptthattheconcreteshallbe consideredasplainconcretewithinthetermsofthis subclauseirrespectiveoftheinclusionof reinforcement .
num numinsitusystemsshallbeslipformedexcept forsectionsatgullieswhichshallbehandformed.full depthjointsshallbeconstructedattheinterfaceateach sideofgullieswithanummmthickfillerboard complyingwithclausenumandsealedinaccordance withclausesnumandnum .
num numthecentralvoidmaybeformedbyan inflatedtubewhichisthenremovedorbyaninsitu suitablepipeorsimilarformerfitforthepurpose.at gullypositionstheinnerformershallbepresleeved withasuitablepipeorsimilarformerfitforthepurpose whichshallbeofsufficientlengthtooverlapthetwo jointsoneithersideofthegully .
num numthecentralvoidshallbecheckedin accordancewithsubclausenum.verificationofslot widthsshallbedeterminedbysuitabletemplates .
num numreinforcementshallcomplywithseries num.covertoreinforcementshallbenotlessthan nummm .
num numtriallengthsandtestingofinsituchannels shallbeundertakeninaccordancewithclausesnumandnum ofbsnumandtherelevantparagraphsofclausenumof bsennumrespectively .
num num thermoplastics structured wall pipes and fittings general num thermoplasticsstructuredwallpipeshallcomply withthisclauseandthespecialrequirementsdescribed inappendixnum .
thetermstructuredwallpipeshallmeanalltypesof smoothborepipeexceptsolidwallhomogeneouspipe .
typicalformsofconstructionclassifiedasstructured wallpipesincludesinglewallexternallystructured smoothboretwinwallfoamedcoreandspirally wound .
thetermfittingshallmeanaproductusedin conjunctionwiththepipetoformthesystembut excludinggulliesmanholechambersinspection chambersandaccesschambers .
materials num thematerialsfromwhichthepipeandfittingsare madeshallbetreatedsothattheyareprotectedfrom thedeleteriouseffectsofshorttermexposureto ultravioletlightandshallberesistanttodegradationby acidsalkaliscommonchemicalsbacteriafungiand mouldsoccurringinsoilhighwayconstruction materialsandhighwaydrainagesystems.inaddition thematerialsfromwhichthepipeandfittingsaremade shallnotincorporateanyadditivesinquantities sufficienttocausemicrobiologicaldegradationorto impairtheconformitytothechemicalphysicaland mechanicalpropertiesorimpactresistancerequirements giveninsubclausenumofthisclause.thespecification oftherawmaterialshallbeagreedbetweenthe certificationbodyasdefinedinsubclausenumofthis clauseandthemanufacturerandmayincorporate reprocessableandorrecyclablematerial.theagreed specificationshallincorporatetolerancesforeachofthe relevantcharacteristicsdefinedintheappropriateclause ofprennum.thecontractorshallsubmittothe overseeingorganisationpriortocommencementofthe workscompletedinformationsheetsinaccordance withappendixnum .
dimensions num systemsforcarrierdrainageshallbebetween nummmandnummmnominalinternaldiameter.pipes fornarrowfilterdrainsshallbenummmornummm nominalinternaldiameter.pipesforserviceductsshall havenominalinternaldiametersofbetweennummmand nummm.pipesforsubsoildrainageshallincorporate slotsorholeswithaminimumcrosssectionalareaof nummmnumpermetrerunofpipe .
amendmentnovembernum num volumenum seriesnum specificationforhighwayworks drainageandserviceducts theboreofthepipeandfittingsshallbeinaccordance withthestandardtolerancesfornominalboresgivenin bsennum .
appearance num numthesystemshallhaveasmoothboreandbe freefromanybursflashorotherinconsistenciesthat couldhaveadetrimentaleffectontheperformanceof thesystem.pipesandfittingsfordrainageshallbe externallycolouredeitherterracottaorblack.thecolour ofductingpipesshallbeinaccordancewithnational jointutilitiesgrouppublicationguidelinesonthe positioningandcolourcodingofutilitiesapparatus .
anyvariationinthecolourshallbedescribedin appendixnum .
structured wall pipe num thestructuredwallpipeshallhavetheproperties definedintablenum .
amendmentmaynum num table numrequirements for structured wall pipe property relevant standard requirement general bsenisonum bsenisonumand bsisonum dimensionstobespecified ringstiffness bsenisonum numknmnumminimum.lowerstiffnessvaluesarepermittedifdesign calculationstobsennumuknationalannexbasedonsite specificinstallationconditionsindicatesatisfactoryperformance .
creepratio bsenisonum pvcu maximumnum ppandpe maximumnum highvolumelowpressurejetting wrcjettingtestmethod minimumacceptablefailurepressurenumbar .
longitudinalbending subclausenum pipeswithnominaldiametersnummmtohaveadifferencein dimensionswhenmeasuredintheverticalaxisoflessthannumof thepipelengthandnolocalpermanentdeformationoccursduring thetest .
impactresistanceatnumc bsennumwithdnumstriker ofnumkg preliminarytesttestnumpiecesasdescribedinbsennum droppingthestrikerfromaheightofnumm.ifanytestpiecesfail subjectthepipetothefulltestgiveninclausenumofbsennum startingthestrikerfromadropheightofnummm.themeanminus numtimesthestandarddeviationmustexceednumm .
impactresistanceatnumc bsennumwithstrikeras above valuetobederivedfromthesamebatchofpipeasusedinthe impactresistancetestatnumc.thehnummeanvaluenumtobe usedastheminimumvalueforqualitycontroltesting .
alternativelythenumctestcanbeusedasaqctestifthe manufacturerchooses .
roddingresistance subclausenum pipeswithnominaldiametersnummmtohaveanaveragefailure energynumjoules staticfrictioncoefficientducts tsnum pass creepatelevatedtemperature ducts bsenisonum testtobecarriedoutatnumccreepratiotobelessthannumtimesthe valuestobsenisonum .
resistancetopointloadsducts subclausenum noperforationatnumrodtravel tensilestrengthofaseam bsennum prennum fittings num thefittingsforusewithstructuredwallpipeshall havethepropertiesdefinedintablenum .
volume num specification for highway works series num drainage and service ducts table num num requirements for fittings property relevant standard requirement general bs en iso num dimensions to be specified bs en iso num and bs en iso num ring stiffness excluding iso num num knmnum minimum couplers rodding resistance subclause num fittings with nominal diameters num mm to have an average failure energy num joules strength and flexibility of bs en num bs en num fabricated fittings impact resistance drop test drop test to bs en fall height num mm at a temperature of numc .
product less than nd num num num shall show no damage .
others may fail but must be identified as handle with care watertightness of fabricated bs en num num bar for num minute fittings pipe and fittings num the pipe and fittings shall have the properties defined in table num .
table num num requirements of the systems property relevant standard requirement leaktightness of joints diameter bs en num method num use default values from bs en num distortion watertight joints condition b temperature num numc leaktightness of joints angular bs en num method num use default values from bs en num deflection watertight joints condition c temperature num numc leakage rate from partially subclause num less than num times the square of the id of the pipe in metres shall watertight joints flow through the joint in litres per minute resistance to wheel loads bs en num adapted to less than num deformation when loaded to num kn for unequal suit ha loading conditions branches only num amendment november num bedding backfill and surround material num num all systems shall be installed in accordance with the pipe and bedding combinations given in advice note ha num dmrb num .
other combinations shall be supported by calculations in accordance with bs en num uk national annex .
bedding backfill and surround materials are classified in clause num and clause num .
installation and handling num the bedding surround and backfill shall be installed so as to cause no damage to the pipes and fittings .
installation of the pipe and fittings particularly procedures for preparation and execution of jointing operations shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
volume num specification for highway works series num drainage and service ducts identification num the contractor shall maintain records with the following information for each separate consignment of structured wall pipe or fittings delivered to site i system name ring stiffness gradenumber and size ii name and address of the system manufacturer iii consignment number and delivery date and iv a copy of the site delivery note .
test method for longitudinal bending num i the test specimen shall be a six metre length of pipe or the maximum length available from the manufacturer if less than six metres .
ii the apparatus shall include a two level support blocks at least num mm wide and of sufficient height to allow the pipe to sag over its length without touching the ground b a means of measuring the vertical distance between the pipe at the centre of the span and a fixed point of reference to an accuracy of num mm .
iii the test procedure shall be as follows a condition the specimen for at least num hour at numc numc b set the supports at a distance apart equal to the length of pipe minus num mm c place the pipe symmetrically on the supports d measure the distance between the top of the supports and the fixed point of reference in the vertical axis through the centre line of the pipe e after a period of two minutes measure the distance between the underside of the pipe at mid span and the fixed point of reference f record the difference in readings as a percentage of pipe length .
num amendment november num test method for rodding resistance internal puncture num i the test specimens shall be a twenty specimens cut from the structured wall pipe each specimen to be num mm to num mm in length and a quarter section of the circumference or b twenty specimens cut from a number of identical fittings .
ii the apparatus shall include a a standard drop weight pipe testing apparatus capable of dropping a tup from a height of num m b a numg tup which can be varied in numg multiples with a striker consisting a steel rod num mm in diameter with a num mm hemispherical end c a num mm x num mm box containing dry leighton buzzard sand garside quarry such that there is at least num mm of sand beneath the test specimen when bedded down .
iii procedure shall be as follows a mark the intended point on the inside of the pipe on the intersection of the centre lines .
with profiled pipes the point of impact shall be at the point nearest the intersection that mid way between the ribs or in the middle of a hollow corrugation b alternatively mark the intended point of impact on the section of fitting c condition the test specimens in air at a temperature of numc numc for a period of at least one hour before the test d locate the box under the drop tube of the impact apparatus e embed the specimen into the sand using a vibrator with the inner surface exposed and facing upwards f locate the specimen such that the marked point of impact is under the centre line of the tup g drop the tup from a height of num m on to the inner surface of the specimen within num seconds of removing the specimen from the conditioning environment volume num specification for highway works series num drainage and service ducts h examine the specimen for damage .
damage is defined as a puncture or crack of the inner layer .
ductile bending or whitening is not considered to be damage i num if the specimen exhibits no damage the next test shall be conducted with a tup of num g greater mass .
if the specimen does exhibit damage the next test shall be conducted using a tup of num g smaller mass j after having completed the num strikes calculate the average of the energies where a pass no damage was recorded and the average of the energies where a failure damage was recorded then calculate the average of the two averages .
iv the test report shall include a identification of the samples b the overall average c whether or not the specimens were damaged .
test method for resistance to sharp objects num i test specimens shall be three samples of duct each num mm long .
ii the apparatus shall include a a compression testing machine b a num mm diameter steel rod with an hemispherical end c and a num steel vee block at least num mm long .
iii the test method shall be as follows a condition the test specimens for at least num hour at numc numc b insert the steel rod in the jaws of the moveable platen of the compression testing machine so that the hemispherical end protrudes at least num of the nominal pipe diameter c num position the specimen in the vee block and place directly below the steel rod for twinwalled pipe the specimen shall be positioned firstly so that the rod strikes on the corrugation or rib and secondly in the valley where possible d set the machine to lower at a rate of num mmmin e allow the rod to travel into the pipe a distance equal to num of the nominal internal diameter of the pipe tnum mm or until the pipe wall is perforated .
when the outer skin of a twin wall pipe is perforated before num is attained the rod travel up to the point of failure shall be recorded tf mm and the rod allowed to travel to the inner wall .
the rod travel shall be continued to a total of num ie tnum tf or until complete penetration occurs .
iv for each test specimen pipe size reference maximum load and rod travel shall be recorded .
num notwithstanding the requirements of subclauses num num and num of this clause variations in the test methods specified therein shall be made where deemed necessary by the british board of agrment or equivalent following consultation with the manufacturer and in agreement with the overseeing organisation .
all such variations shall be recorded in the report .
certification num pipes and fittings shall have a current british board of agrment roads and bridges certificate or equivalent certifying the appropriate physical properties when tested in accordance with this clause .
num num concrete bagwork num num stnum concrete in compliance with clause num shall be used throughout .
the concrete filling to the bags shall have a low workability with a slump of num mm .
num the bags shall be hessian sand bags complying with bs num .
the size of the bags shall be such that when filled the dimensions shall be num mm x num mm x num mm .
the bags shall be placed in position and shaped to the profile shown on the drawings by striking with a flat timber board until all faces are flat and all edges square .
num the finished exposed faces of the bagwork shall not be punctured or torn and no tucked ends shall be visible .
num each concrete bag is to be spiked to the one below and the bottom row spiked to the foundation with num mm x num mm mild steel dowel bars .
where the concrete bags have a concrete backing alternate rows of bags shall be spiked to the backing concrete with num mm x num mm mild steel dowel bars at num degrees to the horizontal with one dowel per bag in the row .
num amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num drainage and service ducts num num where bagwork forms a headwall headwall foundations are to be cast against the excavated face and any overdig filled with stnum concrete .
num formed concrete surfaces shall be to class fnum finish and unformed surfaces to class unum finish in accordance with clause num .
num where bagwork is provided to protect watercourses before placing the bags the banks shall be cut into horizontal steps to provide a suitable foundation and shall be covered in geotextile to the requirements of clause num .
the bottom course of bags shall be at least num mm below the stream bed and all succeeding courses shall be horizontal and all vertical joints shall be staggered in alternate courses .
headers shall be placed at every third bag in alternate courses .
num the bagwork shall be thoroughly soaked with water upon completion of the construction to saturate the hessian bags .
num num the cleaning of existing drainage systems num where stated in appendix num the contractor shall clean existing drainage systems in accordance with this clause .
num the contractor shall take measures when clearing blocked drains to ensure that adjacent water courses or groundwater via soakaways will not be contaminated .
contamination includes mud or soil being washed or flushed into streams as well as other more obvious contaminants including diesel fuel oil and chemicals .
num num initial attempts to clear blocked drains prior to jetting shall be undertaken by hand rodding and any debris and silt removed by the operation shall be removed off site .
the contractor shall report any localised blockages that can not be cleared by rodding to the overseeing organisation .
num num where jetting is required in appendix num the procedures stated in clause num shall be followed .
cleaning of gullies catchpits soakaways and oil separators num at each chamber all mud and vegetation in the vicinity of the chamber likely to impede the flow of water shall be removed .
after lifting the cover or grating the chamber shall be cleansed of all water detritus debris and silt refilled with clean water to the outlet level and all covers and gratings replaced and evenly bedded .
num num cleaning of chambers shall be by mechanical means .
the vehicle used to clean existing chambers shall be equipped with a num mm dia gulley arm with boom jets an exhauster with a minimum output of num cummin and minimum num litres capacity .
sediment detritus and liquor from the chamber shall not be permitted to discharge into the outlet .
this may be achieved either by plugging the outlet during cleaning or by simultaneous jetting and abstraction of liquor from the chamber using a tanker fitted with low pressure high volume water jets around the boom .
num gullies and chambers not cleaned for whatever reason blocked connections and broken or cracked covers gratings or frames shall be marked to aid subsequent identification .
num oil separators shall be refilled with uncontaminated water following the cleaning operation .
num num the contractor shall dispose of all surplus water debris and arisings from the works off site at a licensed tip .
cleaning or testing of piped drainage systems and subway drainage channels num num routine cleaning or testing of piped drainage systems and subway drainage channels shall be carried out by rodding or low pressure high volume jetting in accordance with clause num .
num num the location of any obstruction that can not be removed by flushing shall be marked on the ground using a wooden peg or other semipermanent means and reported to the overseeing organisation using the routine maintenance manual system rmms referencing system in part num chapter num .
num all covers which have been removed for cleaning operations shall be replaced and evenly bedded .
num the contractor shall report any damage and defects to the drainage system or components to the overseeing organisation each day or immediately if considered a safety hazard .
cleaning kerb or channel offlet pipes num where necessary all vegetation and debris shall be removed from around metal kerb weirs and the cover lifted for cleaning .
num offlets shall be cleaned such that all silt and loose obstructions are removed from the pipe .
this shall be achieved by rodding or by using lorrymounted drain clearance equipment comprising combination pressure jetting with high air flow suction equipment .
the vehicle shall also be equipped with a hydraulically powered grid lifter .
num the contractor shall ensure that each end of the offlet is free from vegetation or other obstructions num amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num drainage and service ducts including any material expelled from the pipe .
where the invert of the outlet is below the invert of the ditch the bottom of the ditch shall be excavated until the invert of the pipe is exposed and the ditch invert regraded to facilitate flow from the outlet .
num the location of any obstruction that can not be removed shall be marked on the ground using a wooden peg or other semipermanent means and reported to the overseeing organisation .
num all covers lifted for cleaning operations shall be replaced and evenly bedded .
cleaning of bridge drainage systems num cleaning of bridge bearing shelves subway sumps grit chambers and other bridge drainage systems shall be carried out by one of the following methods i vacuumair suction having the ability to remove materials from depths of up to num m with a suction facility capable of displacing num mmin of air at num vacuum ii num low pressure high volume jetting in accordance with clause num iii sweeping .
num all adjacent surfaces of the structure shall be protected to prevent staining by arisings from the cleaning operation .
all arisings shall be taken off site .
num the contractor shall report to the overseeing organisation any damage or defects to the bridge drainage system .
num num low pressure high volume jetting of drainage systems num where stated in appendix num the contractor shall clean existing drainage systems in accordance with this clause .
num the drainage systems to be cleaned shall be as detailed in the appendix num .
num the pipe material of the drainage systems to be cleaned shall be identified in appendix num .
where the material is unknown and can not be verified by either visual inspection without recourse to manentry or from drainage records or damage to the pipeline is the suspected cause of a blockage cleaning shall proceed on the basis of use of the lowest pump pressure stated in table num .
num where the cleaning forms part of the precleansing works for the cctv survey of drainage systems the works shall be detailed in appendix num see model contract documents for cctv survey of highway drainage mchw num .
num amendment november num jetting of piped drainage systems num cleaning shall take place from downstream of the blockage in an upstream direction .
the pipe shall be plugged below the jetting point to prevent contaminants flowing to the watercourse .
the cleaning shall take place from a chamber although it may be necessary to make a temporary excavation into the pipeline in some circumstances .
num should the contractor find that it is not possible to jet in an upstream direction then the pipe shall be plugged below the blockage and the jetter then used to back jet to a suction hose .
table num maximum recommended pump pressures material maximum pump pressure barpsi unknownstructurally damaged num brickmasonry num plastics structural wall num plastics solid wall num concrete num clay num num the contractor shall select a jethead that is appropriate for delivering the maximum jetting pressure for the pipe material and also the minimum volume of water for the appropriate pipe diameter stated in table num .
num the jet head shall be of a configuration such that the number and direction of jets are adequate to be directed to the sides and soffit of the pipeline to prevent debris passing over the top of the jetting head .
table num num minimum jetting flow rates pipe diameter minimum jetting flows num mm num lm num mm num lm num mm num lm num mm num lm num the contractor shall provide suitable jetting equipment that shall include the provision of the following i operation at a maximum rate of num lmin at num barnum psi volume num specification for highway works series num drainage and service ducts ii liquid ring vacuum pump operating with air flows of num mnum per hour with a working vacuum of not less than num iii a minimum of num m of num mm diameter suction hose for cleaning pipes up to num mm diameter and num mm diameter suction hose for cleaning pipes of diameter greater than num mm iv minimum of num m of num mm or num mm diameter jetting hose and a capability of jetting up to num m v automatic and continuous water recycling vi silt sand and rubble to be dewatered prior to discharge at licensed tip .
num the contractor shall ensure that no damage occurs to the manhole chamber or pipeline during insertion of the jetting equipment .
num num the jetting head shall be propelled through or over the blockage and then the hose pulled backwards enabling the force of the jet to break up the blockage material .
the minimum force necessary to penetrate the blockage shall be used but the pump pressures should not exceed those stated in table num .
num the hose shall be rewound at a rate of between num mm and num mm per second .
num there is a possibility that damage may occur to certain pipe materials should the jetting head remain stationary thus the contractor must ensure that the jetting head never remains stationary for more than num seconds .
num perforated pipes and porous concrete pipes commonly occur in piped highway drainage systems .
where their presence is discovered during the course of the works the overseeing organisation shall be notified immediately and the cleaning operation suspended for that section of the works .
cleaning of linear drainage systems num where possible the contractor shall clear blockages in linear drainage channels and combined kerb drainage units by rodding .
num where silt removal is necessitated the use of pressure jetting will result in the loss of pressure through the grating slot or drainage holes together with the escape of silt and debris unless the apertures can be temporarily covered .
the application of pressure shall be regulated such that there is only sufficient to drive the jetting head across the silt to access remote from the point of entry .
numf amendment may num num if necessary the jetting head shall be changed for one that can deliver the highest volume of water at low pressure .
the water pressure shall be sufficient to agitate the silt .
num the nozzle shall be drawn back to the point of entry at a rate of between num mm and num mm per second .
silt removal num suitable measures such as stanks or stoppers shall be positioned downstream of the drainage system to be cleaned to minimise the risk of sediment causing contamination of watercourses or soakaways .
num wherever practical the contractor shall use equipment to carry debris over a greater depth than one atmosphere and with a capability to suck liquid .
num all arisings from the cleaning process shall be disposed of in an environmentally sensitive manner in accordance with current legislation .
health and safety num the use of high pressure water can result in serious internal injuries that may not be apparent at the skin surface .
num the contractor shall ensure that all hoses are free from damage and that the equipment is in full working order .
num where overhead electric cables are present there is a potential danger from accidental strike by a jet of water .
volume num specification for highway works series num drainage and service ducts numni gullies and pipe junctions num num gullies shall be trapped untrapped or sumpless as described in appendix num and be in accordance with hcd drawing numbers fnum and fnum .
all st concrete referred to in this clause shall comply with clause num unless otherwise described in appendix num .
num gullies shall be constructed so that no part of the spout or trap has a crosssectional area less than numrd that of the outlet .
the depth of water seal in trapped gullies shall be not less than num mm .
num num precast concrete gullies shall comply with bs num and clay gullies with bs en num .
in situ concrete gullies shall be as described in appendix num and constructed of stnum concrete of num mm minimum thickness using permanent or removable shuttering .
where in situ concrete gullies are formed with permanent shuttering such shuttering shall have a current british board of agrment roads and bridges certificate .
precast rectangular section gullies shall be as described in appendix num .
num gully gratings kerb type gully covers and frames shall comply with bs en num and the following and shall be of the classes and sizes described in appendix num .
num num the upper surface of gully gratings shall be flat except where otherwise described in appendix num .
slots in gratings or between gratings and frames shall not be orientated parallel to the direction of traffic except where the slots are less than num mm long or less than num mm wide .
minimum waterway areas shall be as specified in appendix num .
unless otherwise specified in appendix num all gratings and frames shall be supplied in a fine cast uncoated condition .
where a coating is specified in appendix num the coating shall only be applied when the surfaces of the casting are clean free from rust and dry .
gully gratings shall be laid parallel to and num mm below the finished road surface .
hinged gratings shall be orientated to close in the direction of traffic flow .
frames shall be bedded on mortar complying with subclause num .
brickwork shall comply with subclause num .
num num backfilling to precast gullies shall be carried out up to subformation level with general fill material class num as described in table num compacted in compliance with clause num .
where mechanical compaction is impracticable the backfilling shall be in national alterations of the overseeing organisation of northern ireland stnum concrete .
the remainder of backfilling around gully shall be strength class cnum or stnum concrete .
num num gully connection pipes shall be either flexible or rigid not exceeding num m in length with flexible joints for a distance of num m from the gully and shall be in accordance with subclause num when entering chambers .
junction pipes shall be manufactured of the same type and class of material as the remainder of the pipes in the run .
junction pipes which are laid but not immediately connected shall be fitted with temporary stoppers or seals and the position of all such junctions shall be clearly defined by means of stakes or tracing wires properly marked or labelled .
saddles may be used to form junctions only where permitted in appendix num .
no internal projections greater than num mm will be permitted .
saddles for asbestos cement and plastics pipes shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
saddles with clay pipes shall be jointed with mortar designation i complying with clause num excluding lime .
saddles and pipes shall be surrounded with stnum concrete .
num num where the adjustment or replacement of existing frames and gratings is required the units shall be taken up and refixed or removed and replaced with new units complying with subclauses num and num of this clause or as described in appendix num .
on taking up or removal of the unit any concrete or mortar bedding shall be broken out and the surface prepared .
where existing frames and covers or gratings are to be adjusted the contractor shall take up the unit and clean it for reuse .
the adjusted or replaced units shall be laid at a level unless otherwise described in appendix num num mm below the adjoining road surface on a mortar bed complying with subclause num .
the finished thickness of the mortar bed shall be between num mm and num mm .
where required in appendix num covers and gratings shall be bedded using a proprietary quick setting high strength mortar .
details of such mortar shall be to the approval of the overseeing organisation .
any additional adjustment shall be made by modifying the brickwork in compliance with subclause num or by using a frame of suitable depth .
on completion of the works each grating shall be lifted and the frame and seating cleaned .
nnumf amendment may num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendment february num num series num earthworks contents clause title page num num classification definitions and uses of earthworks materials num num num general requirements num num num forming of cuttings and cutting slopes num num num excavation for foundations num num num special requirements for class num material num num num watercourses num num num explosives and blasting for excavation num num num construction of fills num num num geotextiles and geotextilerelated products used to separate earthworks materials num num num fill to structures num num num fill above structural concrete foundations num num num compaction of fills num num num subformation and capping num num num cement stabilisation to form capping num num num lime stabilisation to form capping num num num preparation and surface treatment of formation num num num use of subformation or formation by construction plant num num num topsoiling num num num earthwork environmental bunds num num num landscape areas num num num strengthened embankments num num num earthworks for reinforced soil and anchored earth structures num num clause title page num num earthworks for corrugated steel buried structures num num num ground anchorages num num num crib walling num num num gabions num num num swallow holes and other naturally occurring cavities num num num disused mine workings num num num instrumentation and monitoring num num num ground improvement num num num earthworks materials tests num num num determination of moisture condition value mcv of earthworks materials num num num determination of undrained shear strength of remoulded cohesive material num num num determination of intact lump dry density idd of chalk num num num los angeles and other tests for particle soundness num num num determination of effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c of earthworks materials num num num determination of resistivity rs to assess corrosivity of soil rock or earthworks materials num num num determination of redox potential eh to assess corrosivity of earthworks materials for reinforced soil and anchored earth structures num num num determination of coefficient of friction and adhesion between fill and reinforcing elements or anchor elements for reinforced soil and anchored earth structures num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works num amendment february num clause title page num num determination of permeability of earthworks materials num num num determination of available lime content of lime for lime stabilised capping num num num determination of the constrained soil modulus m of earthworks materials for corrugated steel buried structures num num num lime and cement stabilisation to form capping num num num determination of sulfate content num num tables num to num num national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland scotland clause title page numts num classification definitions and uses of earthworks materials snum numts num determination of moisture condition value mcv of earthworks materials in scotland snumf num wales num numw num classification definitions and uses of earthworks materials wnum northern ireland numni num classification definitions and uses of earthworks materials nnum numni num explosives and blasting for excavation nnum denotes a clause or sample contract specific appendix which has a substitute national clause or sample contract specific appendix for one or more of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales or northern ireland .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num earthworks num num classification definitions and uses of earthworks materials num general num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num general classification num num earthworks materials shall fall into one or other of the following general classifications i acceptable material material excavated from within the site or imported on to the site which meets the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num for acceptability for use in the permanent works ii unacceptable material class unuma as defined in subclauses numia and numib of this clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num shall not be used in the permanent works iii unacceptable material class unumb as defined in subclause numiia of this clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num shall not be used in the permanent works and iv unacceptable material class unum as defined in subclause numi of this clause material excavated from within the site which shall not be used in the permanent works .
num unacceptable materials num num unacceptable material classes unuma and unumb i unacceptable material class unuma shall be a material which does not comply with the permitted constituents and material properties of table num and contract specific appendix num for acceptable material and b material or constituents of materials composed of the following unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num peat materials from swamps marshes and bogs logs stumps and perishable material materials in a frozen condition clay having a liquid limit determined in accordance with bs num part num exceeding num or plasticity index determined in accordance with bs num part num exceeding num material susceptible to spontaneous combustion except unburnt colliery spoil complying with subclause num of this clause ii unacceptable material class unumb shall be a contaminated materials including controlled wastes as defined in the environmental protection act num part iia whose level of contamination is above that given either in contract specific appendix num or in contract specific appendix num but excluding all hazardous wastes as defined in the hazardous waste england and wales regulations num and radioactive wastes as defined in the radioactive substances act num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num num num unacceptable material class unum shall be i hazardous waste as defined in the hazardous waste england and wales regulations num and radioactive waste as defined in the radioactive substances act num .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num unacceptable material other than class unum shall be processed by mechanical chemical or other means to render the material acceptable for use in the permanent works in accordance with the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num .
num definitions num num where source codes are referred to these shall be for materials from the sources listed in table num .
num num chalk shall mean i any porous material of natural origin composed essentially of calcium carbonate and identified as chalk on the maps produced by the british geological survey ii material designated as class num in contract specific appendix num .
num num argillaceous rock shall mean shales mudstones siltstones slates and micaceous schists composed of particles of clay and silt and mica .
it shall include unburnt colliery spoil .
where argillaceous rock is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source codes p natural aggregates described as shale siltstone or slate or gnum refuse from hard coal mining black coal shale .
num num pulverisedfuel ash shall mean solid material extracted by electrostatic and mechanical means from the flue gases of furnaces fired with pulverised bituminous coal .
it shall have a maximum particle size of num mm .
where pulverisedfuel ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source code cnum coal fly ash .
num num furnace bottom ash shall mean agglomerated pulverisedfuel ash obtained from the bottom of the power station furnace and having particle size no larger than num mm .
where furnace bottom ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source code cnum coal bottom ash .
num num formation shall be the top surface of capping .
where no capping is required formation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of subbase unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
num num subformation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of capping .
num num stabilisation shall mean the spreading of cement or lime or both on a layer of deposited or intact granular or cohesive material and the subsequent process of pulverising and mixing followed by appropriate compaction to form the whole or a constituent layer of a capping .
num num where recycled aggregate is used in this series the material shall be aggregate resulting from the processing of inorganic or mineral material previously used in construction and shall have been tested in accordance with clause num .
it shall not contain more than num other materials class x not more than num in class ra bituminous materials and not more than num in class rg crushed glass .
where recycled aggregate is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source code a construction and demolition recycling industries .
where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is used in this series the aggregate shall have been tested in accordance with clause num .
it shall not contain more than num other materials class x not more than num in class ra bituminous materials and not more than num in class rg crushed glass .
where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source codes anum crushed concrete andor anum crushed bricks masonry .
num num as dug shall mean material that has been excavated transported and placed without any processing .
where imported material undergoes any processing including cleaning and sorting it will not be deemed as dug and thus shall be aggregate complying with bs en num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num num use of fill materials num num in addition to any grading requirements the maximum particle size of any fill material shall be no more than twothirds of the compacted layer thickness except that cobbles having an equivalent diameter of more than num mm shall not be deposited beneath verges or central reserves within num m of the finished surface .
num num materials placed within num mm or any other distances described in the contract specific appendix num of concrete cement bound materials other cementitious mixtures or stabilised capping forming part of the permanent works shall conform to as appropriate the following requirements i materials shall conform to the following criteria a watersoluble sulfate ws content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num shall not exceed num mg of sulfate as snum per litre b total sulfur ts content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num expressed as s shall not exceed num for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or num for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a when described in accordance with bs en num and bs en num annex a limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b the sulfide content of the material determined in accordance with bs en num clause num is less than num as snum .
when determining ws ts or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
the mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
this shall also apply if six to nine results are available .
if ten or more results are available the mean of the highest num of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
num num material placed within nummm or any other distances described in the contract specific appendix num of metallic structural elements forming part of the permanent works shall conform as appropriate to the following requirements i materials shall conform to the following criteria a watersoluble sulfate ws content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num shall not exceed num mg of sulfate as snum per litre and b total sulfur ts content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num expressed as s shall not exceed num for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or num for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a when described in accordance with bs en num and bs en num annex a limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b the sulfide content of the material determined in accordance with bs en num clause num is less than num as snum .
when determining ws ts or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
the mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
this shall also apply if six to nine results are available .
if ten or more results are available the mean of the highest num of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
the requirements in i and ii above shall not apply to metallic items protected by concrete or ancillary metallic items such as the tops of chambers and gullies .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num num num unburnt colliery spoil may be used as general fill provided it is compacted in compliance with clause num and complies with the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
num num pulverisedfuel ash shall not be placed within the dimension described in contract specific appendix num below subformation or formation .
num num where pulverisedfuel ash is used the contractor shall for each consignment make available to the overseeing organisation a record of the type and source from which it was obtained and a certificate of results of tests showing that the material complies with the requirements of table num .
num num general requirements num num the contractor shall employ only plant and working methods which are suited to the materials to be handled and traversed .
he shall be responsible for maintaining the nature of the acceptable material so that when it is placed and compacted it remains acceptable in accordance with the contract .
acceptability shall be determined in accordance with table num and any special contract specific requirements in appendix num .
num num haulage of material to embankments or other areas of fill shall proceed only when sufficient spreading and compaction plant is operating at the place of deposition to ensure compliance with clause num .
num num no excavated acceptable material or unacceptable material required to be processed other than surplus to the requirements of the contract shall be removed from the site unless indicated otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
material which is unacceptable only by reason of being frozen shall be retained on site when in that condition .
where the contractor is permitted to remove acceptable material or unacceptable material required to be processed from the site to suit his operational procedure then he shall make good any consequent deficit of material arising therefrom .
environmental requirements for processing of class unumb material in terms of limiting values of contaminants or other requirements shall be set out in contract specific appendix num in the earthworks class for which the processed material is to be used .
num num if any acceptable material or unacceptable material required to be processed is where permitted by contract specific appendix num used by the contractor for purposes other than for general fill sufficient acceptable fill material to occupy after full compaction a volume corresponding to that which the excavated material occupied shall be provided by the contractor .
num num acceptable material other than class numa or any class numb material replacing class numa material in accordance with subclause num of this clause surplus to the total requirements of the permanent works and all unacceptable material class unuma not required to be processed shall unless indicated otherwise in contract specific appendix num be run to spoil in tips provided by the contractor .
in the case of unacceptable material class unumb and class unum the contractor shall comply with any specific requirements for disposal described in contract specific appendix num .
num num where the excavation reveals a combination of acceptable and unacceptable materials the contractor shall unless indicated otherwise in contract specific appendix num carry out the excavation in such a manner that the acceptable materials are excavated separately for use in the permanent works without contamination by the unacceptable materials .
unless otherwise described in the contract classes of fill material required to be deposited separately shall be excavated separately without contamination by other classes of material .
num num the contractor shall make his own arrangements for stockpiling of acceptable material and unacceptable material to be processed and for the provision of sites for the purpose .
num num the contractor shall ensure that he does not adversely affect the stability of excavations or fills by his methods of stockpiling materials use of plant or siting of temporary buildings or structures .
num num existing topsoil material shall except where it is to be left in place in the locations described in contract specific appendix num be stripped to depths as described in contract specific appendix num for class numa material from all areas of cutting and from all areas to be covered by embankment or by other areas of fill .
where stated in contract specific appendix num existing topsoil shall be stripped as turf in accordance with sub clause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num num num topsoil shall wherever practicable be used immediately after its stripping and if not shall be stored in stockpiles of heights not exceeding num m or other heights stated in contract specific appendix num .
unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num topsoil shall not be stockpiled for more than two years .
topsoil shall not be unnecessarily trafficked either before stripping or when in a stockpile .
stockpiles shall not be surcharged or otherwise loaded and multiple handling shall be kept to a minimum .
num num all class numa topsoil arising from the site or any class numb material replacing class numa material in accordance with subclause num of this clause in excess of the requirements for topsoiling shall be subject to the requirements described in contract specific appendix num .
num num excavations for foundations and trenches shall be adequately supported at all times and except where otherwise described in contract specific appendix num shall not be battered .
where excavations are permitted to be battered they shall be benched as described in contract specific appendix num prior to backfilling and compaction .
the additional work and materials shall be provided by the contractor .
sheeting and other excavation supports shall be removed as filling proceeds except where they are required in contract specific appendix num to be left in position .
num num excavations requiring backfilling shall remain open only for the minimum period necessary .
num num excavations requiring backfilling in existing paved or other surfaces including those paved areas to be reconstructed or repaired shall be carried out and reinstated in compliance with clause num .
num num the contractor shall keep earthworks free of water including i arranging for the rapid removal of water a shed on to the earthworks b entering the earthworks from any source ii lowering and maintaining by appropriate measures the water level in excavations sufficiently to enable the permanent works to be constructed .
num num in carrying out the requirements of subclause num of this clause the contractor shall i form and maintain cuttings embankments and other areas of fill with appropriate falls and gradient and sealed surfaces ii provide where necessary temporary watercourses drains pumping and the like iii discharge accumulated water and groundwater into the permanent outfalls of the drainage system where practicable iv provide adequate means for trapping silt on temporary systems discharging into permanent drainage systems .
num num the contractor shall carry out and maintain any groundwater lowering or other treatment required in contract specific appendix num .
num num where materials are designated in the contract as either class unumb or class unum the contractor shall carry out any special requirements for their handling described in contract specific appendix num .
where such materials are encountered during the progress of the works the contractor shall make all necessary arrangements for their safe handling and disposal after consultation with the appropriate environmental authority .
num num subject to the surface level tolerances given in clause num and subclause num material shall not be frost susceptible if it is used within num mm of the designed final surface of a road or paved central reserve or num mm if the annual frost index of the site is less than num .
material shall be classified as nonfrostsusceptible if the mean heave is num mm or less when tested in accordance with bs num part num or bs num part num for lime stabilised capping amended as given in subclause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num num num forming of cuttings and cutting slopes num num cuttings shall be excavated to the lines and levels described in contract specific appendix num .
num num cutting slopes or toes of cuttings shall only be undercut when required in the contract for trench or other excavations .
such excavations shall be restricted in extent as described in contract specific appendix num and where they require backfilling shall remain open only for the minimum period necessary so as to prevent risk to the permanent works .
num num except where otherwise described in contract specific appendix num the excavation of cuttings may be halted at any stage providing at least num mm of material as a weather protection is left in place above the formation or above the subformation subject to the requirements of clauses num and num .
num num where presplit blasting is required or permitted in contract specific appendix num it shall comply with clause num and any other requirements in contract specific appendix num .
full details of the methods and arrangements to be adopted shall be made available to the overseeing organisation before commencement of drilling operations .
num num final faces of cuttings which are not to receive topsoil shall i wherever possible be left without scars or damage from construction plant and ii to achieve a natural appearance when the stratum permits and when presplit blasting is not adopted have the face left irregular within tolerances given in contract specific appendix num and iii have boulders or other rock fragments that can be moved by hand without tools removed and iv where required in contract specific appendix num have material that can be blown away by airline hose having pressures no greater than those stated therein so removed and v have adequate access to enable inspection to be carried out to determine the extent of work required by this subclause .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num faces of cuttings which are not required to receive topsoil shall have one or more of the following measures carried out as appropriate i isolated patches of soft fragmented and insecure material shall each be excavated to a depth of at least num mm unless other depths are stated in contract specific appendix num and replaced as soon as practicable with stnum concrete to clause num well rammed into the cleaned out void .
ii areas of cutting face requiring their surface to be made stable shall be trimmed back by a nominal num mm or other amount required in contract specific appendix num and the resulting surface together with an area of any surrounding intact material as detailed in contract specific appendix num shall have a suitable cement based grout or sprayed concrete applied by pressure to form a total nominal thickness of num mm unless the required thickness is stated in contract specific appendix num .
where required in contract specific appendix num reinforcement shall be fixed to the surface before application of the concrete or grout .
weep holes using permanent formers shall be constructed to the requirements of contract specific appendix num and at the locations described in contract specific appendix num. iii soft or insecure material interlayered with rock shall be excavated to the depth behind the face described in contract specific appendix num .
the resulting cavity shall be filled with stnum concrete to clause num or with masonry infill complying with the series num and provided with weep holes all in accordance with requirements in contract specific appendix num. iv netting or other sheet covering as described in contract specific appendix num or rock bolts as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num faces of cuttings which are to receive topsoil shall have one or more of the following measures carried out as appropriate i be benched to retain topsoil as described in contract specific appendix num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num ii be harrowed to a depth of num mm .
such harrowing shall be carried out immediately prior to topsoiling diagonally at an angle between num to num to the line of the toe measured on the plane of the slope .
iii isolated patches of soft fragmented or insecure material shall be excavated and either a filled by well ramming in a class of fill with similar characteristics as the surrounding intact material or b excavated and dealt with as described in subclause numi of this clause .
iv other areas required to be made stable shall be dealt with as stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num the concrete referred to in subclauses numi and numiii of this clause permanently exposed on the face of the cutting shall have surface features as nearly as possible matching those of the adjacent intact face .
such concrete and the grout referred to in subclause numii of this clause shall have a consistent colour as nearly as possible matching that of the adjacent intact face .
num num excavation for foundations num num the bottom of all foundation excavations shall be formed to the lines and levels shown on the drawings .
pockets of soft soil or loose rock shall be removed and the resulting voids and any natural voids shall be filled with stnum concrete to clause num or other material as required by contract specific appendix num except in excavations for corrugated steel buried structures when class numk lower bedding fill material complying with table num shall be used .
after placing of any blinding concrete shown on the drawings no trimming of the side faces of the excavation shall be carried out for num hours .
num num the contractor shall make good i any lateral overbreak of the excavation above the bottom of the foundation greater than the net volume required for the permanent works with material of the same class as used for fill above structural concrete foundations to comply with clause num except that for corrugated steel buried structures class numk lower bedding material shall be used or where the excavation is too narrow to allow the compaction of earthworks materials with stnum concrete to clause num ii any additional excavation at or below the bottom of foundations including that resulting from removal of material which the contractor has allowed to deteriorate with stnum concrete to clause num or other material required by contract specific appendix num except that under corrugated steel buried structures class numk lower bedding material shall be used .
num num class numk lower bedding material referred to in this clause shall be deposited and compacted in compliance with clauses num and num and table num .
num num special requirements for class num material num num when contract specific appendix num designates a material as class num to be used or to remain intact in the permanent works the following shall apply i no earthworks involving class num material or trafficking of areas which consist of class num material unless they are protected shall be carried out during the periods described in contract specific appendix num. ii excavation of class num material shall be by means of a face shovel which shall excavate swing and unload without moving the chassis or undercarriage during one operating cycle or by means of a similar shovelloading machine so as to reduce the degradation of the material to a minimum .
iii when excavating class num material the contractor shall arrange his method of working so as to maintain a working face of minimum height num m or other height required in contract specific appendix num volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num within class num material except that where the depth of the cutting is less than num m the full height of class num material shall form the working face excluding any protection required to the formation or sub formation .
iv material other than chalk contained within the volume designated as class num material in the contract shall be excavated and deposited separately from chalk and not be mixed with it .
v trafficking of areas of class num material shall not be permitted by vehicles having a capacity when struck of more than num mnum unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num. vi class num material shall not be stockpiled or be subjected to multiple handling .
vii class num material shall not unless required in contract specific appendix num be layered with other fill material in the construction of embankments and other areas of fill .
viii when required in contract specific appendix num embankments and other areas of fill constructed of class num material shall either a upon reaching a level num mm below subformation or where there is no capping a level num mm below formation be left for a minimum of num weeks or other period stated in contract specific appendix num before continuing filling which shall in all cases be continued in compliance with subclause num or b be continued above subformation or formation with a protective layer in accordance with subclause numii but which shall be of class num material .
such material shall then be left for a minimum of num weeks or other period stated in contract specific appendix num before removal of the protective layer and shall be immediately continued with the preparation of subformation or formation as appropriate in accordance with clauses num and num. ix where temporary instability occurs in chalk during deposition or compaction due to excessive working by plant or to inclement weather the contractor shall delay the further deposition of class num material until the chalk has recovered sufficient strength for work to proceed .
a detailed record of the areas of instability shall be made available to the overseeing organisation .
x at the end of each working day of filling exposed class num material laid that day shall unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num be rolled with two passes of a smooth wheeled roller having a mass per metre width of roll exceeding num kg .
xi the other special requirements for class num material described in subclauses numi numi numii and num shall also apply together with any other special requirements described in contract specific appendix num or contract specific appendix num .
num num watercourses num num the clearance and modification of existing or the construction of new watercourses including ditches streams rivers lagoons and ponds shall be as described in contract specific appendix num including any protection lining revetment or other works and shall comply with subclauses num to num of this clause .
num num clearance of existing watercourses shall include the removal of vegetation vegetable matter and all other deposits within the watercourse profile .
materials resulting from this clearance shall be dealt with as unacceptable material .
num num new watercourses and cleared existing watercourses shall be maintained in a clear condition .
num num redundant watercourses shall where required in contract specific appendix num be drained and cleared in accordance with subclause num of this clause and material outside the watercourse profile excavated and dealt with as unacceptable material .
the excavations shall be to the dimensions stated in the contract and the whole filled with general or selected fills of the class described in contract specific appendix num complying with table num volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num deposited and compacted in compliance with clause num and num .
where the surface is to remain exposed it shall be topsoiled and seeded or receive other treatment all as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num explosives and blasting for excavation num num blasting for excavation shall not be employed unless permitted or required in contract specific appendix num and such blasting shall be confined to the locations and to within the time limits stated therein .
num num the contractor shall i not carry out plaster shooting ii for each location where blasting is to be undertaken give written notice to the overseeing organisation of the programme of blasting including trial explosions at least num days before it commences and give written notice of each blasting event as described in v below at least num hours beforehand iii carry out trial explosions starting with reduced quantities of explosive in order to determine the size of the actual explosive charges and their disposition for use in the main blasting operations so as not to exceed the values for vibrational amplitude and vibrational peak particle velocity stated in vi below at the positions described therein iv determine danger zones likely to be created by the blasting operations including trial explosions within which blasted material may be projected and utilise suitable arrangements including temporary works to retain such projectiles and ensure that no injury or damage is caused to persons or property thereby v limit blasting to a small number of events during permitted hours per day where an event shall comprise a single explosion or a group of explosions each separated by a short time interval the group lasting less than a minute vi ensure that a structures and earthworks existing or under construction on and off the site do not experience during blasting operations including trial explosions a vibrational amplitude exceeding num mm and a resultant peak particle velocity exceeding num mm per second or other limits stated in contract specific appendix num at the same time or individually and b peak overpressures of magnitude such as to endanger windows and glazed areas of structures do not occur .
vii where instrumentation and monitoring is appropriate a rigidly fix to structures and insert in earthworks described in via above suitable instruments to measure the vibrational amplitude and resultant vibrational peak particle velocity and peak overpressures experienced during blasting operations including trial explosions b make available details of the proposed instrumentation within the site c unless otherwise stipulated in contract specific appendix num make his own arrangements for installing instruments on property off the site including negotiating with landowners and other interested parties d read such instruments and take measurements throughout the period of blasting operations including trial explosions e for instruments on structures or earthworks on the site and where required in contract specific appendix num on property off the site make available the results to the overseeing organisation at the end of each days blasting .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num viii take measurements of vibrational amplitude and peak particle velocity in each of three mutually perpendicular planes and determine the peak value taken as the maximum resultant calculated by vector summation of the three components of amplitude and velocity respectively measured as instantaneously as the resolution of the recording instrument permits ix ensure that noise from blasting operations is controlled in accordance with clause num x use explosives in the quantities and in the manner recommended by the manufacturer xi store explosives in registered premises in a licensed store or magazine provided with a separate compartment for detonators or use them under an immediate use certificate issued by the police xii only permit explosives to be used or handled by or under the immediate control of a competent person in accordance with the construction general provisions regulations num regulation num and subsequent amending regulations xiii ensure there is no unauthorised issue or improper use of explosives brought on the site and maintain a strict check on quantities issued and consumed xiv comply with the requirements of bs num in respect of the use of electrical detonators in the vicinity of static and mobile radio transmitters including normal radio and television broadcasting stations and radar units associated with aircraft movements electricity generating plant and transmission lines .
num num construction of fills num num all fills including embankments shall be constructed i in the locations described in contract specific appendix num to the lines and levels stated therein ii of classes of materials required or permitted in contract specific appendix num complying with table num with unless otherwise described in the contract only class numa material deposited into open water iii by depositing as soon as practicable after excavation in layers to meet the compaction requirements of clause num as required for each class of material in table num except that a material requiring end product compaction shall be deposited in layers not exceeding num mm uncompacted thickness b material placed into open water shall be deposited by end tipping without compaction c material deposited in areas to receive dynamic compaction complying with clause num shall be deposited and compacted to the requirements therein .
iv to the requirements of this clause and any other requirements for fill in this series .
num num starter layers of classes numb numc or numd materials as described in contract specific appendix num shall be deposited as the first layer or layers of fill above existing ground level or if appropriate above any ground improvement required by contract specific appendix num .
starter layers below class nume pulverisedfuel ash general fill shall be class numd material .
plant movement across starter layer material shall be restricted to that plant which is necessary for its deposition spreading and compaction in compliance with this clause and clause num and any plant required to carry out any ground improvement beneath it if required by clause num .
the contractor shall take all reasonable measures to prevent damage to the underlying strata which may include use of lighter spreading plant or a reduction of the number of passes of compaction plant .
num num coarse granular material classes numc and numb shall before compaction be spread in layers by a crawler tractor of not less than num tonnes total mass .
after compaction each layer shall if voids remain be blinded with an approved class of granular material complying with table num so that all surface voids are filled before the next layer and before any capping or subbase is constructed .
num num embankments and other areas of fill shall unless otherwise required in the contract be constructed evenly over their full width and their fullest possible extent and the contractor shall control and direct volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num constructional plant and other vehicular traffic uniformly over them .
damage by constructional plant and other vehicular traffic shall be made good by the contractor with material having the same characteristics and strength as the material had before it was damaged .
num num embankments and other areas of unsupported fills shall not be constructed with steeper side slopes or to greater widths than those described in contract specific appendix num except to permit adequate compaction at the edges before trimming back or to obtain the final profile following any settlement of the fill and the underlying material .
however any oversteepening or increase in width shall not exceed any limits described in contract specific appendix num and shall remain only for the minimum periods necessary consistent with the safety of the permanent works .
num num staged construction of fills and any controlled rates of filling shall be carried out in accordance with any requirements described in contract specific appendix num including installation of instrumentation and its monitoring in compliance with clause num .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall surcharge embankments or other areas of fill as described therein for the periods stated .
if settlement of surcharged fill results in any surcharging material which is unacceptable for use in the fill being surcharged lying below the formation or where there is a capping the sub formation the contractor shall remove this unacceptable material and dispose of it in accordance with clause num .
he shall then bring the resultant level up to formation or subformation as appropriate with acceptable material .
num num where pipes in embankments or in other areas of fill are permitted in contract specific appendix num to be constructed other than in a trench the fill shall be brought up to and over them equally on both sides .
the fill shall be deposited in even layers and shall not be heaped above the pipe .
spreading and compaction shall be carried out evenly without dislodging distorting or damaging the pipe .
power rammers are not to be used within num mm of any part of the pipe or joint .
num num the last num mm depth of fill up to subformation level or formation level as appropriate shall unless otherwise required in the contract be carried out for the full width of embankments or between the outer extremities of the verges in other areas of fill in a continuous operation .
the contractor shall then continue without delay to carry out either i or ii below i form the subformation or formation all in accordance with clauses num and num following immediately either by a the construction of the full thickness of capping or subbase as appropriate or b if permitted in contract specific appendix num the construction of a lesser thickness of capping or subbase as described therein laid as a weather protection layer ii place an additional num mm minimum compacted thickness of material above subformation level or formation level as appropriate for the full width of the filling to form a weather protection .
this weather protection shall be composed of the same material as the subformation or formation and compacted in compliance with table num .
the material shall be provided from the contractors own resources and the protection layer shall be constructed in a continuous operation .
for stabilised capping the protective layer shall consist of unstabilised material .
num num during construction of embankments and other fills exposed sides of classes nume and numb pulverisedfuel ash material shall be protected against scour and erosion from any source .
num num completed slopes of classes nume and numb fill material shall be covered immediately by class num topsoil as required in contract specific appendix num or turf or other material as required in contract specific appendix num .
num num whenever fill is to be deposited against the face of a natural slope or sloping earthworks face including embankments cuttings other fills and excavations such faces shall be benched or otherwise shaped as required in contract specific appendix num immediately before placing the subsequent fill .
num num all permanent faces of side slopes of embankments and other areas of fill formed in classes num or num cohesive materials other than pulverisedfuel ash shall subsequent to any trimming operations be reworked and sealed by tracking a tracked vehicle suitable for the purpose on the slope or by other suitable methods .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num num num geotextiles and geotextilerelated products used to separate earthworks materials num num geotextiles and geotextilerelated products shall conform to the requirements of the product standard bs en num and other characteristics and locations as set out in contract specific appendix num .
a declaration of performance for each product stating compliance with bs en num and the required levels of performance stated in contract specific appendix num shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation prior to their placement in the works .
num num fill to structures num this clause shall apply to fill to structures other than i fill for reinforced earth structures including associated drainage layers ii fill for anchored earth structures including associated drainage layers iii fill for surround and bedding of corrugated steel buried structures iv fill above structural concrete foundations unless otherwise required in contract specific appendix num .
num num materials as required or permitted in contract specific appendix num of classes numn nump numa or numb and complying with table num shall be used as fill to structures in the locations described in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall compact in compliance with clause num endproduct compaction class numn nump numa and numb material to satisfy the compaction requirements for those classes as listed in table num but subject to the restrictions in subclauses num and num of this clause .
num num where fill to structures is required to the same level on more than one side of a structural element or buried structure except where clause num applies it shall be maintained at heights not differing by more than num mm after compaction on opposing sides of the structural element as filling proceeds .
num num the contractor shall restrict compaction plant used on fill to structures within num m of a structure to the following items as described in subclause num and listed in table num i vibratory roller having a mass per metre width of roll as determined by subclause num not exceeding num kg with a total mass not exceeding num kg ii vibrating plate compactor having a mass not exceeding num kg iii vibrotamper having a mass not exceeding num kg .
the compacted level of the fill within this zone shall not differ during construction from the compacted level of the remainder of the adjoining fill to structures by more than num mm .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num class numn nump and numb material shall be shown by means of a trial utilising not less than num mnum of the material deposited and compacted in accordance with this clause to be stable when it is trimmed to a slope of num vertical to num horizontal or other slope described in contract specific appendix num .
num num fill above structural concrete foundations num num fill deposited above structural concrete foundations shall be as shown on the drawings i class numn nump numa or numb selected fill material complying with clause num including compaction requirements ii class numm selected fill material deposited and compacted in accordance with clause num above the foundation of arch profile corrugated steel buried structures iii another class of selected fill or general fill complying with table num deposited and compacted in compliance with clauses num and num and in addition be subject to subclauses num and num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num num num compaction of fills num general num num except for dynamic compaction which shall comply with clause num and unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall carry out compaction in compliance with this clause as soon as practicable after deposition on all those classes of fill in table num which require to be compacted .
num num compaction shall be either method or endproduct as required for the class of fill in table num using plant appropriate to the class of fill and the site conditions .
num num the contractor shall obtain permission from the overseeing organisation before carrying out compaction outside normal working hours .
num method compaction num num where method compaction is required to be adopted it shall comply with subclauses num to num of this clause .
num num except as stated in subclause num of this clause method compaction shall be undertaken using the plant and methods in table num appropriate to the compaction requirements as listed in table num for the class of material being compacted .
num num plant and methods not included in table num shall only be used providing the contractor demonstrates at site trials that a state of compaction is achieved by the alternative method equivalent to that obtained using the specified method .
num num earthmoving plant shall not be accepted as compaction equipment nor shall the use of a lighter category of plant to provide any preliminary compaction to assist the use of heavier plant be taken into account when assessing the amount of compaction required for any layer .
num num if more than one class of material is being used in such a way that it is not practicable to define the areas in which each class occurs the contractor shall compact with plant operating as if only the material which requires the greater compactive effort is being compacted .
num num the contractor or overseeing organisation may carry out field dry density tests as described in subclause num of this clause on material compacted to method requirements at a frequency defined in contract specific appendix num .
if the results of field tests show densities which indicate the state of compaction to be inadequate then if this is due to failure of the contractor to comply with the requirements of the contract the contractor shall carry out such further work as is required to comply with the contract .
num num for the purposes of table num the following shall apply i the minimum number of passes n is the minimum number of times that each point on the surface of the layer being compacted shall be traversed by the item of compaction plant in its operating mode or struck by power rammers or falling weight compactors .
d is the maximum depth of the compacted layer .
ii in column headed n the number of passes shown is to be doubled for material classes numa numb numa numb numc and numd when such materials occur within num mm of subformation if capping is required or formation .
such extra compaction shall unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num either be carried out for the full width of the embankment or in other areas of fill which are to receive a pavement between the outer extremities of the verges .
iii the compaction plant in table num is categorised in terms of static mass .
the mass per metre width of roll is the total mass on the roll divided by the total roll width .
where a smooth wheeled roller has more than one axle the category of the machine shall be determined on the basis of the axle giving the highest value of mass per metre width .
iv a grid roller is a machine with a compacting roll or rolls constructed of heavy steel mesh of square pattern .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num v a deadweight tamping roller is a machine with a roll or rolls from which feet project and where the projected end area of each foot exceeds num m and the sum of the areas of the feet exceeds num of the area of the cylinder swept by the ends of the feet .
the requirements for tamping rollers apply to machines that have num rolls in tandem .
if only one tamping roll traverses each point on the surface of the layer on any one pass of the machine the minimum number of passes shall be twice the number given in table num plus any further doubling required to satisfy ii above .
vi for pneumatictyred rollers the mass per wheel is the total mass of the roller divided by the number of wheels .
in assessing the number of passes of pneumatictyred rollers the effective width shall be the sum of the widths of the individual wheel tracks together with the sum of the spacings between the wheel tracks provided that each spacing does not exceed num mm .
where the spacings exceed num mm the effective width shall be the sum of the widths of the individual wheel tracks only .
vii a vibratory tamping roller which may be selfpropelled or towed is a machine having a means of applying mechanical vibration to one or more rolls .
the roll or rolls have projecting feet where the height of each foot exceeds num of the radius of the roll drum the projected end area of each foot exceeds num of the roll drum surface area and the sum of the areas of the feet exceeds num of the area of the cylinder swept by the ends of the feet .
the requirements for the operation of vibratory tamping rollers shall be the same as those stated for vibratory rollers in subclause viii except that vibratory tamping rollers operating without vibration will be classified as deadweight tamping rollers .
viii vibratory rollers are selfpropelled or towed smoothwheeled rollers having means of applying mechanical vibration to one or more rolls except that vibratory rollers employed for method num compaction shall be single roll types .
vibratory rollers operating without vibration will be classified as smoothwheeled rollers .
the requirements for vibratory rollers are based on the use of the lowest gear on a selfpropelled machine with mechanical transmission and a speed of num to num kmh for a towed machine or a self propelled machine with hydrostatic transmission .
if higher gears or speeds are used an increased number of passes shall be provided in proportion to the increase in speed of travel .
where the mechanical vibration is applied to two rolls in tandem the minimum number of passes shall be half the number given in table num for the appropriate mass per metre width of one vibrating roll but if one roll differs in mass per metre width from the other the number of passes shall be calculated as for the roll with the smallest value .
alternatively the minimum number of passes may be determined by treating the machine as having a single vibrating roll with a mass per metre width equal to that of the roll with the higher value .
vibratory rollers shall be operated with their vibratory mechanism operating only at the frequency of vibration recommended by the manufacturers .
where more than one amplitude setting is available and or a range of frequencies is recommended the machine shall be operated at the maximum amplitude setting and at the maximum recommended frequency for that setting .
vibratory rollers shall be equipped or provided with devices indicating the frequency at which the mechanism is operating and the speed of travel .
both devices shall be capable of being read by an inspector alongside the machine .
ix vibratingplate compactors are machines having a baseplate to which is attached a source of vibration consisting of one or two eccentrically weighted shafts and a the mass per square metre of the baseplate of a vibratingplate compactor is calculated by dividing the total mass of the machine in its working condition by its area in contact with compacted material b vibratingplate compactors shall be operated at the frequency of vibration recommended by the manufacturers .
they shall normally be operated at travelling speeds of less than num kmh but if higher speeds are necessary the number of passes shall be increased in proportion to the increase in speed of travel .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num x vibrotampers are machines in which an enginedriven reciprocating mechanism acts on a spring system through which oscillations are set up in a baseplate .
xi power rammers are machines which are actuated by explosions in an internal combustion cylinder each explosion being controlled manually by the operator .
xii dropping weight compactors are machines in which a dead weight is dropped from a controlled height using a hoist mechanism and they include selfpropelled machines with mechanical traversing mechanisms capable of compacting soil in trenches and close to structures .
xiii in the case of power rammers and droppingweight compactors one pass will be considered as made when the compacting shoe has made one strike on the area in question .
xiv for items marked in the method num column of table num the roller shall be towed by tracklaying tractors .
selfpropelled rollers are unsuitable .
xv where combinations of different types or categories of plant are used the following shall apply a the depth of layer shall be that for the type of plant requiring the least depth of layer and b the number of passes shall be that for the type of plant requiring the greatest number of passes .
num endproduct compaction num num where endproduct compaction is required it shall comply with subclauses num to num of this clause .
num num the contractor shall at least num days before commencement of endproduct compaction make available the following to the overseeing organisation i the values of maximum dry density and the optimum moisture content obtained in accordance with bs num part num using the num kg rammer method or vibrating hammer method as appropriate for each of the fills he intends to use which meet the requirements of the permitted class or classes where within any class of material the fill contains material having different maximum dry densities and optimum moisture contents the class shall be further subdivided by extending the identification system in order to monitor the compacted density ii a graph of density plotted against moisture content from which each of the values in i above of maximum dry density and optimum moisture content were determined and for class numa material a plot of the num air voids curve for each subdivision .
num num once the information contained in subclause num of this clause has been made available to the overseeing organisation it shall form the basis for compaction .
num num fill compacted to endproduct requirements shall have a field dry density measured in accordance with subclause num of this clause equal to or greater than the percentage given in table num of the maximum dry density for the relevant class of fill previously made available to the overseeing organisation in accordance with sub clause num of this clause .
num num the field dry density referred to in subclause num of this clause shall be measured in accordance with bs num part num except that nuclear methods shall only be used where required or permitted in contract specific appendix num .
where nuclear methods are used the gauge shall be calibrated in accordance with bs num part num .
num num subformation and capping num num capping shall be provided only in those locations and to the extent particularly stated in the contract specific appendix num to be constructed with capping .
it shall comply with this clause and in addition for stabilised capping with clauses num num and num as appropriate .
num num capping shall be constructed with class numfnum numfnum numfnum numfnum numfnum nums numa numb numc numd nume or numf material as required or permitted in contract specific appendix num and complying with table num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num num num unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num capping shall either consist of one class of capping material throughout its depth laid in one or more layers of compacted thickness complying with clause num or be formed of not more than two elements of different capping materials .
each element shall be formed of one or more layers of the same capping material each of compacted thickness complying with clause num .
class numd or nume stabilised capping material shall not be placed or constructed above class numf granular capping material or class nums granular filter layer material .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num before commencing the construction of capping in the permanent works the contractor shall demonstrate the methods equipment and materials he proposes to use by constructing an area or areas as appropriate of capping on a typical prepared subformation to the same thickness as required in the permanent works .
the area of each capping construction demonstration shall be not less than num m .
num num the materials placed during the demonstration may form part of the permanent works provided they meet the requirements of the contract or be carried out elsewhere on the site where this is detailed in contract specific appendix num .
after completion of each demonstration area the contractor shall within a period of not greater than num days and before commencing the main construction of the appropriate capping in the permanent works carry out tests on each demonstration area and provide the overseeing organisation with records substantiating compliance with the stipulated criteria of contract specific appendix num .
where required by contract specific appendix num the contractor shall provide sheeting to protect the demonstration area .
num num the demonstration area shall if it does not meet the requirements for the permanent works or is located elsewhere on site be removed and the area reinstated in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
num num the methods and materials used in the accepted demonstration shall not be changed during the course of the works without the construction of a further demonstration where such demonstrations are required by contract specific appendix num .
num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the subformation shall have the same longitudinal gradient crossfall and surface level tolerances as the formation .
num num the contractor shall limit any unprotected area of subformation which is to receive capping to suit the output of the plant in use and the rate of deposition of capping .
num num no unprotected subformation which is to receive capping shall remain continuously exposed to rain causing degradation nor be left uncovered overnight .
num num in cuttings the contractor shall as permitted or required in contract specific appendix num carry out one of the following procedures i for class numf granular capping material or class nums granular filter layer material excavate below formation level to a depth to accept the capping trim the surface to form the subformation and immediately compact with one pass of a smoothwheeled roller having a mass per m width of roll not less than num kg or a vibratory roller having a mass per m width of roll not less than num kg or a vibrating plate compactor having a mass per m of not less than num kg except that only smooth wheeled rollers shall be used on class num chalk material and immediately deposit and compact above it a capping in class numf granular capping material or class nums granular filter layer material or ii for class numa numb numc numd nume or numf capping material construct the capping by stabilising the intact material providing it complies with class nume numr nume numf numg or numi material requirements immediately below formation to form class numa numb numc numd nume or numf material respectively or iii excavate below formation to sufficient depth to enable stabilisation of intact class nume numr nume numf numg or numi material to be carried out to produce class numa numb numc numd nume or numf material forming the lower element of the capping after stabilisation of this element the capping shall be completed by depositing a further layer or layers of class nume numr nume numf numg or numi material and stabilising it to form class numa numb numc numd nume or numf capping or depositing and compacting class numf granular capping material to form the upper element of the capping or iv excavate to subformation level and deposit material complying with classes nume numr nume numf numg or numi to be stabilised to form a capping of class numa numb numc numd nume or numf layers .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num where a stabilised layer is directly overlain by class numf granular capping material the stabilised layer shall be compacted as for a subformation in numi above .
num num on embankments and other areas of fill the contractor shall as permitted or required in contract specific appendix num carry out one of the following procedures i complete the embankment to form the subformation or remove any protection layer and trim the surface to form the subformation and in both cases compact with one pass of a smoothwheeled roller having a mass per m width of not less than num kg or a vibratory roller of not less than num kg per m width or a vibrating plate compactor having a mass per m of not less than num kg except that only smooth wheeled rollers shall be used on class num chalk material and immediately construct above it in one or more layers class numf granular capping material or class nums granular filter layer material or ii construct the embankment to sufficient height and carry out stabilisation to form a capping of class numa numb numc numd nume or numf material in one or more layers utilising where appropriate any protection layer previously constructed or iii for multielement capping incorporating stabilised material construct the embankment to sufficient height to carry out the work described in numii above and immediately construct above it one or more layers of class numf granular capping material .
where a stabilised layer is directly overlain by class numf granular capping material the stabilised layer shall be compacted as for a subformation in numi above .
num num for class numfnum material optimum moisture content shall be determined according to bs num part num method num vibrating hammer test .
measurements of moisture content both for control purposes and for optimum moisture content determination shall be according to bs num part num method num oven dry method but using an oven on a reduced temperature setting of num to numc .
num num filter layers constructed of class nums granular filter layer material shall be protected from damage by traffic and construction plant .
the contractor shall so organise work that only the traffic directly engaged in depositing spreading and compacting the filter layer shall be permitted access to the surface of this layer .
at no time shall the contractor permit the leading edge of the filter layer to extend more than num metres beyond the leading edge of the succeeding layer of subbase .
num num cement stabilisation to form capping num num where capping is to consist of either wholly or in part cement stabilised material class numa numb or numc this clause shall apply to the construction of those parts which are stabilised with cement .
num num material to be stabilised with cement shall be class nume class numf and class numg materials all complying with clause num and table num .
unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num cement shall be portland cement complying with bs en num and requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
num num class nume numf or numg material to be stabilised shall have added to it at any point that quantity of cement measured as a percentage of its dry weight as determined on the demonstration area to meet the required bearing ratio in contract specific appendix num subject to a minimum of num cement .
num num the appropriate quantity of cement shall be uniformly spread by a suitable spreading machine on top of the layer to be processed .
using a collecting tray and balance the contractor shall check the rate of spread of the machine once for every num m of cement spread .
num num unless indicated otherwise in contract specific appendix num class nume numf or numg material shall be stabilised in a single layer if its compacted thickness is num mm or less .
if its compacted thickness is greater the material shall be stabilised in layers not less than num mm and not more than num mm thick including any cutting in required by subclause num of this clause .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num num num the contractor shall not carry out cement stabilisation when the shade temperature is below numc unless on a rising thermometer above numc .
cement stabilisation shall not be carried out during periods of rain or when rain is imminent .
when cement is spread on material likely to cause premature hydration processing in accordance with subclause num of this clause shall follow immediately .
num num unless indicated otherwise by contract specific appendix num class nume numf or numg material forming the layer to be stabilised shall be processed by pulverising and mixing in the cement by means of a sufficient number of passes of a suitable mobile stabilising machine until num of the silt and clay fraction is reduced to particles or lumps passing a bs num mm sieve after dry sieving and the pulverisation complies with table num .
num num during processing sufficient water shall be available in the material to hydrate the cement and enable satisfactory mixing and compaction to be achieved .
any added water shall be through an integral spraybar on the stabilising machine .
any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding num mgl as sonum when tested in accordance with bs en num clause num .
num num the stabilising machine shall be equipped with a device for controlling the depth of processing which shall be maintained at the correct setting at all times .
an overlap of num mm shall be made between adjacent passes of the stabilising machine .
where a subsequent layer of material is placed on a layer previously stabilised the tines or blades of the stabilising machine shall be set so that they cut into the previously stabilised layer below by at least num mm .
num num each layer of class numa numb or numc processed material shall be compacted as soon as possible after the final pass of the stabilising machine .
compaction shall be completed within num hours following the mixing of the cement into the material to be stabilised .
immediately before compaction class numb processed material shall have a moisture condition value mcv of not greater than num nor less than the figure stated in contract specific appendix num for class numb cement stabilised material both as determined in accordance with clause num .
water shall be added if necessary in a uniform manner to enable this mcv requirement to be met .
any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding num mgl as sonum when tested in accordance with bs en num clause num .
num num the compaction of each layer of class numa or numb material shall comply with clause num table num method num or method num respectively except that if layers of class numa or numb greater than num mm thickness are to be constructed the number of passes of the compaction plant shall be determined from the results of a demonstration area as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
num num the compaction of class numc material shall comply with clause num end product compaction to satisfy the compaction requirements given in table num of this class .
num num class numa numb and numc materials shall be cured in accordance with clause num .
during periods when the air temperature is forecast to drop below numc or when ground frost is forecast class numa numb and numc material shall be protected to prevent freezing for a period of num days from the time of completion of compaction .
such protection shall be sealed to prevent the ingress of moisture .
num num class numa numb and numc materials shall not have other material deposited or compacted above them until such time as the required bearing ratio in contract specific appendix num has been achieved .
the relaxation allowed in subclause num shall not apply before this time .
num num lime stabilisation to form capping num num this clause shall apply only to those capping materials which are to be stabilised with lime to form material class numd .
num num material to be stabilised with lime shall be class nume material complying with clause num and table num .
num num the form of lime used for lime stabilisation shall be as required in contract specific appendix num the lime shall conform to bs en num and meet the performance requirements stated in contract specific appendix num .
this shall be demonstrated by the declaration of performance .
unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num lime shall be either quicklime or hydrated lime conforming to bs en num .
the particle size distribution of all types of quicklime shown in tables num and num of bs en num shall be of designation pnum as shown in tables num and num of bs en num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num num num the contractor shall carry out testing of the lime as installed for available lime in accordance with clause num at weekly intervals unless otherwise required in contract specific appendix num during periods when lime stabilisation is carried out .
the results shall be reported to the overseeing organisation .
the available lime shall meet the requirements stated in contract specific appendix num and the values stated in the declaration of performance .
num num class nume material to be stabilised shall have added to it at any point the percentage of its dry weight of lime as determined on the demonstration area to meet the required bearing ratio in contract specific appendix num subject to a minimum of num by weight of available lime as a percentage of the dry weight of the class nume material .
num num lime of quantity complying with subclause num of this clause shall be uniformly spread by a suitable spreading machine on top of the layer to be stabilised .
using a collecting tray and balance the contractor shall check the rate of spread by weight once for every num m of lime spread or a different rate of testing for the rate of spread as described in contract specific appendix num .
at the same time the contractor shall collect samples of lime deposited on the tray and test them for available lime content in accordance with clause num .
num num unless indicated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the material shall be stabilised in a single layer if its compacted thickness is num mm or less .
if its compacted thickness is greater the material shall be stabilised in layers not less than num mm and not more than num mm thick including any cuttingin required by subclause num of this clause .
num num unless indicated otherwise in contract specific appendix num lime stabilisation shall be carried out only during the months of march to september inclusive and when the shade temperature is not below numc .
only when the specified bearing ratio is attainable at a shade temperature less than numc may lime stabilisation be carried out at such lower temperature .
lime stabilisation shall be suspended if rainfall will have an adverse effect on the material being stabilised .
the spreading of lime shall not be carried out in a manner or under conditions that will result in lime being blown from the site onto adjacent land or property .
num num unless indicated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the material forming the layers to be stabilised shall be processed by pulverising and mixing in the lime by means of sufficient number of passes of a suitable mobile stabilising machine until num of the class numd processed material passes a bs num mm sieve after dry sieving and the pulverisation complies with table num .
num num during processing sufficient water shall be available in the material to slake the quicklime if used and to enable satisfactory mixing and compaction to be achieved .
any added water shall be through an integral spray bar on the stabilising machine .
any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding num mgl as sonum when tested in accordance with bs en num clause num .
num num the layer shall receive at least two passes of the stabilising machine to pulverise and mix the lime and soil after which the processing shall be interrupted by a period of not less than num hours and not greater than num hours to enable the lime to react with the soil .
before this period commences the surface of the layer shall be sealed with one pass of a smooth wheeled roller having a mass per metre width of roll of not less than num kg or a pneumatic tyred roller of not less than num kg per wheel .
at the end of this period the layer shall receive one further pass of the stabilising machine or more if required to enable the material to comply with subclauses num and num of this clause adding water uniformly if necessary .
any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding num mgl as sonum when tested in accordance with bs en num clause num .
num num the stabilising machine shall be equipped with a device for controlling the depth of processing which shall be maintained at the correct setting at all times .
an overlap of num mm shall be made between adjacent passes of the stabilising machine .
where a subsequent layer of material is placed on a layer previously stabilised the tines or blades of the stabilising machine shall be set so that they cut into the previously stabilised layer below by at least num mm .
num num each layer of class numd processed material shall be compacted as soon as possible after the final pass of the stabilising machine .
immediately before compaction the processed material shall have a moisture condition value mcv of not greater than nor less than the figures stated in contract specific appendix num for class numd lime stabilised material both as determined in accordance with clause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num num num if there is a delay following the final pass and before commencement of compaction the surface shall be sealed by not less than num passes of a smoothwheeled roller having a mass per metre width of not less than num kg or of a pneumatic tyred roller of not less than num kg mass per wheel .
on recommencement and before compaction the layer shall be reprocessed without the addition of lime by a sufficient number of passes of the stabilising machine to meet the mcv requirements of subclause num of this clause adding water uniformly if necessary .
num num the compaction of each layer shall comply with clause num table num method num except that if layers more than num mm thick are constructed the number of passes of the compaction plant shall be those determined from results obtained on a demonstration area as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
num num class numd material shall not have other material deposited or compacted above it until such time as the required bearing ratio in contract specific appendix num has been achieved .
the relaxation allowed in subclause num shall not apply before this time .
num num preparation and surface treatment of formation num num the formation shall after completion of any subgrade drainage and immediately before laying sub base on areas of completed formation have a surface level tolerance within num mm and num mm or other level of tolerance defined in contract specific appendix num relative to its designed level after completion of the following operations as necessary i any protection layer shall be removed and any soft or damaged areas shall be rectified by excavating them and replacing with acceptable material having the same characteristics and strength as the surrounding material .
the surface of the formation shall be trimmed and immediately cleaned free from mud and slurry which shall be dealt with as unacceptable material in accordance with subclause num. ii the formation shall immediately be compacted in addition to the compaction required for the fill .
this additional compaction shall for this purpose be assumed to be as for a layer of num mm finished thickness compacted in compliance with clause num and table num method num except for class num materials where method num shall be used .
immediately after the additional compaction the formation shall be trimmed to achieve the tolerances of this subclause .
num num where the tolerances in subclause num of this clause are exceeded the contractor shall determine the full extent of the area which is out of tolerance and shall make good the formation as follows i if the surface is too high it shall be retrimmed and recompacted in compliance with clause num and subclause num of this clause ii if the surface is too low it shall be corrected by the addition of acceptable material complying with table num having characteristics and strength matching the overlain material deposited and compacted in compliance with clause num and num and subclause num of this clause .
in cohesive materials classes num and num where this low surface is less than num mm below formation material shall be removed to a depth of at least num mm below formation before the additional material is deposited and compacted .
num num after trimming or retrimming if necessary the formation shall be rolled with one pass of a smoothwheeled roller having a mass per metre width of roll not less than num kg or except for class num material a vibratory roller having a mass per metre width of vibrating roll of not less than num kg or a vibrating plate compactor having a mass per m under the base plate of not less than num kg .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num or where the tolerances in subclause num of this clause can not be achieved in the preparation of formation in rock then one of the following shall be carried out so as to achieve the above tolerances i the material shall be excavated below formation to the depth described in contract specific appendix num .
the excavated material shall be processed as described in contract specific appendix num and re deposited and compacted in compliance with clauses num and num and table num method num in compacted layers not greater than num mm thick or volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num ii where the rock surface is tabular it shall be regulated by depositing and compacting cement bound material as described in contract specific appendix num complying with the num series or stnum concrete to clause num .
num num the contractor shall limit any areas of completed formation to suit the output of plant in use and the rate of deposition of subbase .
no formation of cohesive material classes num and num shall remain continuously exposed to rain causing degradation or be left uncovered overnight .
num num the preparation of formation on existing subbase material shall be completed as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num use of subformation or formation by construction plant num num construction plant and other vehicular traffic except that required for the construction of capping shall not be operated on the subformation unless adequate protection if necessary in addition to any weather protection is provided .
num num construction plant and other vehicular traffic except for that required for preparation of the formation in compliance with clause num shall not be operated on the formation unless adequate protection if necessary in addition to any weather protection is provided .
num num in addition to the requirements of subclauses num and num of this clause the contractor shall make available to the overseeing organisation his proposals for the protection of the subformation or formation in areas where they are within num mm of the existing ground level after topsoil has been stripped before using construction plant or other vehicular traffic at or above subformation or formation .
num num topsoiling num num topsoiling shall be carried out using class num material complying with table num .
num num imported topsoil class numb material shall only be imported when required in contract specific appendix num or contract specific appendix num .
num num when required in contract specific appendix num topsoil shall not be excavated from stockpiles whether on site or imported i which have been exposed to a cumulative rainfall exceeding num mm or other figure stated in contract specific appendix num over the preceding num days measured at a point detailed in contract specific appendix num or ii when heavy rain is falling or iii with a tracked vehicle or iv which have been stockpiled for more than num years or v which are frozen or vi in the case of topsoil which has been stockpiled for more than num months unless the stockpile has been treated with a total nonresidual herbicide as recently as is seasonally possible allowing the period of time recommended by the manufacturer to elapse prior to excavation .
num num topsoil shall i be deposited and spread on the areas to the thicknesses described in contract specific appendix num in layers not exceeding num mm .
each layer shall be firmed before spreading the next .
the thickness shall be reduced where necessary to allow for any subsequent turfing required in contract specific appendix num it shall not be spread using a tracked vehicle when so stipulated in contract specific appendix num volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num ii have stones and other debris removed and disposed off site which have a dimensions greater than num mm equivalent diameter unless otherwise permitted in contract specific appendix num and b dimensions greater than num mm equivalent diameter which lie within num mm of the surface iii be graded to smooth contours eliminating all mounds and depressions where water may collect iv not have stones or other debris protruding above the surface by more than num mm and comply with the further requirements of clauses num and num .
num num earthwork environmental bunds num num earthwork environmental bunds shall be constructed in the locations described in contract specific appendix num with fill materials complying with the requirements therein and clause num and table num .
deposition shall be in accordance with clause num and compaction with the requirements of table num unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num or the requirements of subclauses num or num of this clause apply .
num num earthwork environmental bunds formed of reinforced or anchored earth shall be constructed in compliance with clauses num and num .
num num earthwork environmental bunds formed of strengthened embankments shall be constructed in accordance with clause num .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num earthwork environmental bunds shall be topsoiled in accordance with clause num and seeded or turfed all in accordance with clause num and clause num .
num num landscape areas num num landscape areas shall be constructed in the locations shown in contract specific appendix num with class num material as described therein and complying with table num .
num num unless method compaction to clause num is required in contract specific appendix num the degree of compaction of class num material shall be sufficient to remove large voids and to produce a coherent mass whilst preventing overcompaction and any build up of excess pore pressures .
num num following completion of filling of landscape areas class num material shall where required in contract specific appendix num be shaped as described therein .
num num class num material shall be deposited in landscape areas after any adjoining embankment or other area of fill has been completed .
where permitted in contract specific appendix num and provided the adjoining embankment or other area of fill is always kept at least num m higher than the landscape area fill construction of such landscape area may proceed until completion .
num num landscape areas shall be topsoiled in accordance with clause num and seeded or turfed in accordance with clause num and clause num to the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
num num strengthened embankments num num strengthened embankments shall be constructed in the locations and to the details described in contract specific appendix num with fill materials and strengthening materials described therein .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num num num earthworks for reinforced soil and anchored earth structures num num the construction of earthworks for reinforced soil and anchored earth structures together with assembly and erection of reinforcing and anchor elements and associated components shall be in compliance with this clause and clause num .
num num excavation shall be carried out in compliance with clause num .
num num fill for reinforced soil structures shall except for their associated drainage layers be of class numi numj numb numc or numd selected material complying with table num as permitted in contract specific appendix num together with any other additional requirements therein .
where class numb conditioned pulverisedfuel ash is used for fill only nonmetallic reinforcing elements shall be used and metallic fasteners shall be of stainless steel .
num num fill for anchored earth structures shall except for their associated drainage layers be of numi or numj selected material complying with table num as permitted in contract specific appendix num together with any other additional requirements therein .
num num drainage layers to reinforced soil and anchored earth structures shall be one of the following as appropriate i class numh material complying with table num and contract specific appendix num. ii for use with class numb material uncrushed partially crushed or crushed gravel sand complying with bs en num fines content category fnum and sizes numcp nummp or nummp and when in contact with metallic components with the properties listed in table num. iii type b filter drain material complying with clause num for use only in horizontal drainage layers .
vertical layers of drainage layer material shall be brought up at the same rate as the adjoining fill material without mixing or contamination .
num num in addition to the requirements of subclauses num and num of this clause fill for reinforced soil and anchored earth structures shall be deposited and compacted in compliance with clauses num and num and table num with method compaction for classes numh numi numj numc and numd materials and endproduct compaction for class numb material .
drainage layer material other than class numh shall be deposited in accordance with clause num and compacted as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num reinforced soil and anchored earth structures shall have i the deposition and compaction carried out so that all layers of reinforcing and anchor elements are fixed at the required levels on top of compacted fill ii the deposition spreading levelling and compaction of the fill carried out generally in a direction parallel to the facing and executed in stages to alternate with the placing and fixing of the reinforcing and anchor elements and the facing elements iii the reinforcing and anchor elements kept as free as possible from damage or displacement during deposition spreading levelling and compaction of the fill also the programme of filling shall be arranged so that no machines or vehicles run on the reinforcing or anchor elements iv all construction plant and all other vehicles having a mass exceeding num kg kept at least num m away from the back of the facing v within num m of the back of the facing the plant used for compacting the fill restricted to the following items as described in subclause num and listed in table num a vibratory roller having a mass per metre width of roll not exceeding num kg with a total mass not exceeding num kg b vibrating plate compactor having a mass not exceeding num kg volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num c vibro tamper having a mass not exceeding num kg vi at the contractors option the reinforced soil and anchored earth fill beyond the num m zone referred to in v above raised in thicker layers than within the num m zone providing this is compatible with the arrangement of the reinforcing and anchor elements and the difference in compacted level does not exceed num mm vii during construction of the reinforced soil or anchored earth structure the retained fill at the rear of the structure as defined in subclause num of this clause maintained at the same level as the adjoining reinforced soil or anchored earth fill viii if the retained material at the rear of the reinforced soil or anchored earth structure as defined in subclause num of this clause is an existing earthwork or natural slope which requires supporting by temporary shoring this shoring shall be removed progressively as the work proceeds to prevent the formation of voids .
num num the rear of the reinforced soil or anchored earth structure is the position coinciding with the ends of the reinforcing or anchor elements furthest from the facing units .
num num earthworks for corrugated steel buried structures num num the construction of earthworks for corrugated steel buried structures together with assembly and erection of their components shall be in compliance with this clause and clause num .
num num excavation shall be carried out in compliance with clause num and any additional requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
num num fill for corrugated steel buried structures shall be of the following selected granular materials complying with table num i lower bedding material class numk ii upper bedding material class numl iii surround material class numm .
and the overlying fill shall be one of the following iv well graded uniformly graded or coarse granular material class numq or v wet dry stony or silty cohesive material and chalk class numh .
num num in addition to the requirements of subclauses num to num of this clause class numk numl and numm materials shall be deposited in compliance with clause num and shall except for class numl upper bedding material which shall be uncompacted be endproduct compacted in compliance with clause num and table num except that the compacted layers shall not exceed num mm thickness .
the compaction and testing requirements for class numk lower bedding and class numm surround materials shall also comply with any additional requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
num num as far as possible the class numk lower bedding material shall be shaped to fit the invert such that it supports num of the circumference of circular structures or the whole of the portion of circumference occupied by the bottom plates of multiradii structures .
in the case of structures of span less than num m where this can not be met and the structure is erected on a flat or partially preshaped bedding care shall be taken to ensure that the lower bedding material is properly placed and compacted under the haunches .
a uniform layer of uncompacted class numl upper bedding material shall be deposited before the placing of any part of the steel structure over the whole width of the shaped lower bedding material and shall be of sufficient depth to fill the corrugations of the underside of the structure .
num num class numm surround material shall be used for filling all excavations above the bedding except those in hard material for which class numk lower bedding material shall be used throughout .
additional requirements for making good are given in clause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num num num class numm surround material shall be deposited and compacted uniformly on either side of the structure .
the maximum difference in fill level on opposite sides of the structure shall be no more than nummm at all times unless otherwise permitted in contract specific appendix num .
num num class numm surround material shall be deposited and compacted in accordance with subclause num of this clause above the concrete foundations of archprofile corrugated steel buried structures .
num num class numm surround material under the structure shall be well compacted by hand using a suitably sized pole or length of rectangular timber between the corrugations or by another suitable method .
num num plant for compaction of class numm surround material within num m of either side of the structure and up to a height of num m or one fifth of the span if greater above the crown shall be restricted to the following items as described in subclause num and listed in table num i vibratory rollers having a mass per metre width of roll not exceeding num kg ii vibrating plate compactors having mass not exceeding num kg iii vibrotampers .
num num fill placed above the level of the crown of the structure including class numm surround material shall be deposited spread and compacted in such a manner that any out of balance forces transmitted to the culvert are kept to a minimum .
this will require that trafficking by construction plant is not all in one direction and that the compacted surface of the fill is kept as near horizontal as practicable .
num num during all operations of filling compaction road pavement construction and of any other traffic movements which affect the shape of the structure the changes in the horizontal and vertical diameters of the structure shall not exceed num for circular structures and num for structures of other crosssections .
the longitudinal straightness over any num m length of the structure shall not deviate by more than num mm and the rotational displacement in any num m length of structure shall not be greater than num mm .
num num only that compaction plant described in subclause num of this clause shall be used in the vicinity of the structure unless the depth of compacted class numm surround material placed above the crown of the structure is more than num m or one fifth of the span whichever is the greater .
the structure shall not be subjected to a surcharge greater than the depth of fill required in the contract and permitted depth of any protection layer given in contract specific appendix num .
num num no material shall be placed by tipping either onto the structure or within a distance on either side of the structure of num m or half the span of the structure whichever is the greater .
num num method compaction shall be used for the overlying fill classes numq and numh according to clause num the method used being that for the corresponding general fill in table num .
num num ground anchorages num num the contractor shall design the ground anchorages required as part of the permanent works and listed in contract specific appendix num in accordance with the design requirements described in contract specific appendix num .
the ground anchorages shall be installed and where required in contract specific appendix num proof loaded in accordance with the requirements therein .
num num ground anchorages not forming part of the permanent works will only be permitted where such anchorage will not affect the permanent works .
num num crib walling num num the contractor shall design the crib walling listed in contract specific appendix num in accordance with the design specification and procedures in contract specific appendix num and design manual for roads and bridges document bd num dmrb num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num num num gabions num num gabions shall be manufactured and constructed in compliance with this clause and with requirements stated in contract specific appendix num .
gabion units shall be assembled in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num they shall be filled with class numg material complying with table num .
the grading of fill shall be as described in appendix num the maximum size of fill material shall not exceed two thirds of the minimum dimension of the gabion compartment or nummm whichever is smaller and the minimum size of the fill material shall be not less than the size of the mesh opening .
gabion units shall be filled to fully achieve the required minimum cage density and compaction of fill .
at no point before during or after filling shall the cage be deformed by working methods or in use loading .
the required cage density shall be as stated in contract specific appendix num .
internal tie wires shall be inserted and units shall be tensioned in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
gabion units shall be constructed so as to maintain tightness of mesh and shall be laced securely with wire complying with subclause num of this clause .
num num gabion wire mesh units shall be woven steel wire conforming to bs en num or welded steel mesh conforming to bs en num .
the contractor shall submit documentary evidence to the overseeing organisation to demonstrate compliance of the gabion units at least four weeks prior to the commencement of gabion work .
documentation that demonstrates compliance with a product acceptance scheme as described in clause num sub clauses num and num can be supplied to meet this requirement where the scheme demonstrates that the gabion units meet the level of performance required by the specification .
unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the site environment level shall be high aggressive cnum and the assumed working life shall be num years or greater .
coating requirements for all wire shall be as required by tables num and a.num of bs en num and bs en num .
num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num woven steel gabions shall be of mesh designation numxnum or numxnum with minimum wire diameter of nummm .
num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num welded mesh shall be nummm to nummm diameter bars with the mesh size nummm x nummm maximum .
num num swallow holes and other naturally occurring cavities num num infilled swallow holes and other naturally occurring cavities shall where required in contract specific appendix num be excavated filled and capped as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num open swallow holes and other shallow cavities shall where required in contract specific appendix num be flushed cleared of rubbish where to do so would not endanger operatives and filled and capped as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num disused mine workings num num disused mine workings shall where required in contract specific appendix num be investigated inspected monitored cleared flushed filled capped or have any other treatment carried out all as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num instrumentation and monitoring num num instrumentation other than that required in compliance with clause num shall be as described in contract specific appendix num and shall be installed in the locations shown therein .
num num monitoring of instrumentation shall be carried out as required in the contract specific appendix num and the results supplied to the overseeing organisation as required therein .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num num num ground improvement num dynamic compaction num num dynamic compaction carried out to either method or endproduct as required in contract specific appendix num and achieved by dropping a freefalling heavy mass pounder a number of times at pre determined spacings on the surface of the ground or fill shall be applied to the areas described in contract specific appendix num .
num num dynamic compaction shall be completed before the commencement of construction of any permanent works or work on the placement or diversion of statutory undertakers equipment within that part of the site defined in the contract specific appendix num which contains the area to be dynamically compacted .
num num the contractor shall ensure that no damage or injury is caused to persons or property on or off the site as a result of the dynamic compaction .
num vibrated stone columns num num vibrated stone columns in existing natural soils or fill by vibroreplacement or vibrodisplacement shall be formed in the manner and in the areas described in contract specific appendix num .
num num unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num materials shall comply with subclause num of this clause .
num num the contractor shall report immediately to the overseeing organisation any circumstance which indicates that in the contractors opinion the ground conditions differ from those expected from his interpretation of the ground investigation reports .
num num columns shall be installed as shown on the drawings and within the permitted tolerances stated in contract specific appendix num .
num materials num num the material used to form the columns shall be clean hard inert material and shall be natural sand gravel crushed rock other than argillaceous rocks crushed hardcore crushed concrete crushed slag or well burnt nonplastic shale .
the material shall be appropriate to the ground conditions in which the stone columns are formed and its use shall not be detrimental to any other work on site .
the material shall be nominally single sized coarse aggregate with a value of upper d sieve size in the range num mm to num mm or a graded material complying with clause num type num unbound mixtures for subbase except the material passing the num mm sieve shall be non plastic when tested in accordance with bsnum part num .
num testing of ground treatment num num testing of treated ground shall be undertaken for control purposes during the treatment and on completion of the ground treatment .
the performance criteria for treated ground are given in contract specific appendix num .
num num improvement in treated ground shall be measured in accordance with the criteria stated in contract specific appendix num .
num types of test num num the following tests or alternatives permitted in contract specific appendix num shall be carried out at the positions and frequency given in contract specific appendix num .
num plate tests num num plate bearing tests are loading tests carried out using a plate on treated ground .
the test is described in bs num part num num method num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num num zone tests num num zone tests are loading tests carried out with a slab intended to test bearing pressure over a wider and deeper zone than in the plate tests .
the test is described in bs num part num num method num .
num penetration tests num num in granular soils the static cone dutch cone penetration test the standard penetration test spt or dynamic cone penetration tests shall be employed as described in contract specific appendix num .
num trial areas num num trial areas are to be treated and tested where required in contract specific appendix num .
trial areas which meet the performance requirements may form part of the permanent works .
num num equipment and materials used in trial areas shall be identical to those proposed for the permanent works .
num num testing in trial areas shall be carried out as given in contract specific appendix num .
num num detailed reports shall be prepared for all testing as defined in table num .
num records and reports num num complete records of plant equipment and materials shall be maintained during all ground treatment operations .
num num records shall be made available to the overseeing organisation including all information identified in table num and any other information required by contract specific appendix num .
all records pertaining to a particular days operations shall be made available to the overseeing organisation at the start of the following days operations .
num other methods num num other methods of ground improvement shall be carried out where required in contract specific appendix num and as described therein .
num num earthworks materials tests num num unless otherwise described in the contract sampling and testing of earthworks materials shall be carried out in accordance with bs num part num to part num inclusive .
num num determination of moisture condition value mcv of earthworks materials num num where the moisture condition value mcv is to be determined the determination shall be carried out in accordance with bs num part num .
num num the determination of the mcvmoisture content relation in accordance with bs num part num shall be carried out when required in contract specific appendix num .
num num where permitted in contract specific appendix num the rapid assessment procedure for material acceptability also given in bs num part num may be used .
num num determination of undrained shear strength of remoulded cohesive material num num where required in contract specific appendix num the undrained shear strength of cohesive soil under total stress conditions shall be determined from triaxial compression tests performed on remoulded specimens and tested under conditions where the lateral pressure is maintained constant and there is no change in total volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num water content of the specimens .
unless otherwise required in contract specific appendix num the tests shall be in accordance with bs num part num and the additional requirements of subclauses num to num of this clause .
num num the specimens shall be prepared in accordance with bs num part num using remoulded material compacted into a split mould of nominal diameter num mm and nominal height num mm .
the soil shall be at its natural moisture content and compacted in accordance with bs num part num using the num kg rammer method described in bs num part num .
num num the specimens shall be tested at an operating cell pressure of num num knm and an axial strain rate of num per minute .
where contract specific appendix num requires c and j to be determined the test shall be modified to enable mohr circles to be plotted and c and j reported .
num num where stated and described in contract specific appendix num other tests may be used during construction to supplement the test described above provided the results have been correlated to ensure compatibility .
num num determination of intact lump dry density idd of chalk num num the intact lump dry density idd of chalk lumps shall be determined in accordance with bs num part num .
num num los angeles and other tests for particle soundness num resistance to fragmentation los angeles coefficient la num num the value of los angeles coefficient shall be determined in accordance with bs en num .
num other tests for particle soundness num num where contract specific appendix num requires magnesium sulfate soundness tests to be carried out they shall be carried out in accordance with bs en num .
where contract specific appendix num requires slake durability point load or other tests for soundness to be carried out they shall be carried out in accordance with the procedures given therein .
num num determination of effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c of earthworks materials num num the effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c shall be determined by shear box or triaxial tests as required in table num and contract specific appendix num .
unless otherwise required in contract specific appendix num the tests shall be in accordance with the requirements in subclauses num to num of this clause .
num shear box tests num num for classes numn nump numi and numj granular materials the tests shall be carried out in accordance with bs num part num and the following i the plan size of the shear box shall be nominally num mm square .
ii three samples shall be tested each sample occupying the full depth of the shear box and shall be compacted at the optimum moisture content to a dry density of num num of the maximum dry density determined in accordance with bs num part num using the vibrating hammer method .
the samples shall not be immersed in water .
iii each of the samples shall be subjected to a different normal stress equal to the maximum vertical pressure in the fill at the base quarter height and midheight of the structure respectively .
each of the volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num samples shall be sheared in a single stage test within one hour of compaction and the rate of shearing shall be such that no pore water pressure is generated .
iv the values of c and j reported shall be those corresponding to the maximum strength envelope .
num num for classes numa numc and numd cohesive materials the tests shall be carried out in accordance with bs num part num and the following i the shear boxes shall be nominally num mm square and nominally num mm square .
ii for the initial determination of fill properties three samples shall be tested in each size of shear box .
the samples shall occupy the full depth of the shear box and shall be compacted at the optimum moisture content to a dry density of num num of the maximum dry density determined in accordance with bs num part num using the num kg rammer method .
to allow the samples to soften the shear box assembly shall then be immersed in water for a minimum period of num hours .
iii each of the three samples in a set shall be subjected to a different effective normal stress equal to the maximum vertical pressure in the fill at the base quarter height and midheight of the structure respectively .
normal stresses shall be applied to the softened sample for a minimum period of num hours prior to shearing in a single stage test .
the rate of shearing shall be such that no pore water pressure is generated .
iv the values of c and j reported shall be those corresponding to the maximum strength envelope .
v the test results obtained using the num mm square box shall be taken as the properties of the fill .
the initial test results obtained using the num mm square box shall be used for the subsequent quality control of the fill .
num num for class numb pulverisedfuel ash material the procedure shall be as for subclause num of this clause except that i the maximum dry density and optimum moisture content shall be determined in accordance with bs num part num using the num kg rammer method .
ii an additional sample in each set shall be subjected to an effective normal stress equal to the maximum vertical pressure in the fill at three quarters of the height of the structure or the lowest attainable normal stress whichever is the greater .
iii as soon as the shear box has been filled and the sample compacted the normal stress shall be applied and the sample immersed in water .
this concurrent loading and immersion of the sample shall continue for a period of num hours and the sample shall then be sheared without further delay .
num triaxial tests num num where class numa cohesive fill to structures is to be tested by a consolidated drained triaxial test the test shall be in accordance with bs num part num using the sample size and preparation procedure in clause num and the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
num num determination of resistivity rs to assess corrosivity of soil rock or earthworks materials num method of test num num where the resistivity of the ground or of material to be used in the permanent works is required to be determined this shall be obtained by in situ tests as described in subclause num of this clause or when required in contract specific appendix num by laboratory tests on samples in accordance with bs num part num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num num in situ resistivity tests num num in situ resistivity shall be determined at the site of the structure or the cutting or the proposed borrow pit or on stockpiles in accordance with bs num part num and the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
num num details of the area and volume of material to be tested shall be made available to the overseeing organisation together with the arrangement of electrodes in each test .
the overseeing organisation shall be given notice of the date time and location of each test .
num num at any test location at each selected depth two measurements shall be made such that the electrode alignment for the second measurement is approximately at right angles to the electrode alignment for the first measurement .
num num at any test location the first selected depth shall be no more than num m below the ground surface or no more than num m below the upper surface of the material to be tested whichever is appropriate .
following the measurements at the first selected depth further measurements shall be made at selected depths increasing by approximately num m each time until measurements have been carried out on the full depth of ground or material to be tested .
num num where the depth of material to be tested is too great to be tested from the surface within the confines of the site the contractor shall undertake all necessary arrangements for testing such material including subsequent tests which may be required at a lower level following excavation .
details of his arrangements shall be made available to the overseeing organisation .
num num determination of redox potential eh to assess corrosivity of earthworks materials for reinforced soil and anchored earth structures num method of test num num where the redox potential of material to be incorporated into reinforced earth or anchored earth structures is required to be determined this shall be obtained by in situ tests as described in subclauses num to num of this clause or when required in contract specific appendix num by laboratory tests on samples in accordance with bs num part num .
num in situ redox potential tests num num in situ redox potential shall be determined in undisturbed ground at the site of the cutting or the proposed borrow pit or on stockpiles in accordance with bs num part num and the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
num num details of the area and volume of material to be tested shall be made available to the overseeing organisation together with the locations of the test pits .
num num the overseeing organisation shall be given notice of the date time and location of each test .
num num at each test location the tests shall be carried out in a test pit not less than num mm square in plan excavated to a depth given in contract specific appendix num .
num num at each test location a sample shall be taken from the base of the excavation and kept in a hermetically sealed container for determining the ph value of the fill which shall be obtained in accordance with bs num part num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num num num determination of coefficient of friction and adhesion between fill and reinforcing elements or anchor elements for reinforced soil and anchored earth structures num reinforcing elements num num the coefficient of friction and the adhesion shall be determined by tests carried out in a num mm size shear box with the element material fixed at the top of the lower half of the box and the fill sample occupying the top half only .
num num the test shall be carried out following the procedure given in clause num for the determination of the effective angle of internal friction and effective cohesion of earthworks materials except that i the apparatus shall in addition include a steel block fitting closely inside the lower half of the shear box and equal in height to it less the thickness of the reinforcing element material .
the flat toothed grid fitting the bottom of the shear box is not required .
ii the preparation of test specimens shall be as follows element material shall be cut to fit the interior plan shape of the shear box using a sufficient number of strips of such material abutting to completely fill the interior plan area without overlap .
they shall be firmly fixed to the top of the steel block so that the top face of the material is flush with the top edge of the lower half of the box and aligned so that shearing occurs in a direction parallel to the longitudinal axis of a reinforcing element .
a sample of the fill material to be used in the permanent works of sufficient size to carry out the tests and within the range of moisture contents permitted in table num for such material shall be sieved to obtain a test sample passing the num mm bs sieve of sufficient quantity after compaction to fill the top half of the shear box .
the top and bottom of the shear box shall be fixed together and the test sample of the sieved fill materials immediately placed and compacted in the top half of the box as described in clause num .
num num the value of the coefficient of friction between the fill and the reinforcing element shall be obtained by plotting the values of peak shear stress obtained in the tests against applied normal stress and by measuring the slope of the resulting straight line graph .
the adhesion between the fill and the reinforcement shall be obtained by taking the shear stress corresponding with zero normal stress .
num num the following additional information shall be recorded for each test i normal stress applied knm .
ii peak shear stress knm .
iii strain at peak shear stress .
iv moisture content of fill after test classes numb numc and numd .
num anchor elements num num where required in contract specific appendix num tests shall be carried out as described therein to assess the interaction between the fill and the element .
num num determination of permeability of earthworks materials num num where required in table num or contract specific appendix num the permeability of earthworks materials shall be determined as described in contract specific appendix num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num num num determination of available lime content of lime for lime stabilised capping num num contract compliance testing shall be carried out by the contractor to determine the available lime content of lime as installed for lime or lime and cement stabilised capping .
this compliance testing shall be carried out in accordance with bs en num except that the sample increments shall be taken from the collecting tray used to check the rate of spread at intervals of one increment per num m per lane .
num num the available lime content shall be determined as required by bs en num it shall be reported and categorised as required in bs en num .
num num determination of the constrained soil modulus m of earthworks materials for corrugated steel buried structures num general num num when required in contract specific appendix num the constrained soil modulus m shall be determined by one of the following methods i from plate loading tests in accordance with bs num part num. ii from the results of standard penetration resistance tests spt on noncohesive materials in accordance with bs num part num. iii from the values of the coefficient of volume compressibility mv from onedimensional consolidation tests on undisturbed soil specimens of cohesive materials in accordance with bs num part num .
num plate loading tests num num when testing compacted granular fill materials the test surface shall be prepared by either i removing the surface layer carefully using hand tools to perform the test at a depth of num mm below the surface or ii compacting the surface after the required compaction has been applied with two additional passes with no vibration to remove the overstressing in the surface layer .
if necessary the plate shall be bedded onto the fill using a small quantity of dry sand to remove any slight unevenness of the surface of the fill .
the field dry density and moisture content shall be determined at the position of each plate loading test in accordance with clause num and bs num part num or equivalent respectively .
num num when using the plate loading test to determine m of the material existing on site a smooth surface shall be prepared by careful hand excavation and the plate bedded onto the soil using either sand or quick setting gypsum plaster depending on whether the soil is granular or cohesive .
num num the loading test shall be carried out under a series of maintained loads .
the maximum load shall be such that the average pressure applied to the plate is in excess of num knm .
the elastic modulus es shall be determined as the secant modulus between average pressures applied to the plate of num and num knm in the first load cycle .
a value of poissons ratio of num shall be assumed .
a second load cycle testing shall also be conducted and the results of this test compared with the first load cycle to check that the plate was seated satisfactorily during the first load cycle .
if the results of the first load cycle suggest that the plate was not seated satisfactorily then the procedure shall be repeated at a new location .
second load cycle results shall not be used to demonstrate the adequacy of the material being tested .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num num num the constrained soil modulus m shall be determined from the elastic modulus es using the equation num ves m nmmnum num vnum numv where v poissons ratio to be taken as num and es elastic modulus of the soil nmmnum num standard penetration resistance tests num num the constrained soil modulus m of noncohesive materials existing on site shall be determined from the relationship numnnum m nmmnum m where n uncorrected spt value and m num num onedimensional consolidation tests num num the constrained soil modulus m of undrained cohesive materials existing on site shall be determined from the formula num m nmmnum mv where mv mmnumn is the coefficient of volume compressibility the value of mv to be used in the formula is that calculated from the test results for the loading increment in the consolidation test corresponding to the in situ effective overburden pressure at the level of the crown of the structure .
num number of tests num num three tests for m shall be carried out on the soil occurring on each side of the structure one of which is to be at the level of the maximum span unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
num num lime and cement stabilisation to form capping num num where capping is to consist of either wholly or in part lime and cement stabilised material class nume or numf this clause shall apply to the construction of those parts which are stabilised with lime and cement .
num num material to be stabilised with lime and cement shall be class numr or numi material all complying with clause num and table num .
num num the form of lime used for lime and cement stabilisation shall be as required in contract specific appendix num the lime shall conform to bs en num and meet the performance requirements stated in contract specific appendix num .
this shall be demonstrated by the declaration of performance .
unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num lime shall be either quicklime or hydrated lime conforming to bs en num .
the particle size distribution of all types of quicklime shown in tables num and num of bs en num shall be of designation pnum as shown in tables num and num of bs en num .
num num the contractor shall carry out testing of the lime as installed for available lime in accordance with clause num at weekly intervals unless otherwise required in contract specific appendix num during periods when lime and cement stabilisation is carried out .
the results shall be reported to the overseeing organisation .
the available lime shall meet the requirements stated in contract specific appendix num and the values stated in the declaration of performance .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num num num cement for lime and cement stabilisation shall be portland cement complying with clause num unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
num num classes numr and numi material to be stabilised shall have added to it at any point the percentage of its dry weight of lime and cement as determined on the demonstration area to meet the required bearing ratio in contract specific appendix num subject to a minimum of num by weight of available lime and num cement as a percentage of the dry weight of the numr and numi materials .
num num the contractor shall not carry out lime and cement stabilisation when the shade temperature is below numc unless on a rising thermometer above numc .
lime and cement stabilisation shall not be carried out during periods of rain or when rain is imminent .
when cement is spread on material likely to cause premature hydration processing in accordance with subclause num of this clause shall follow immediately .
num num lime of quantity complying with subclause num of this clause shall be uniformly spread by an approved spreading machine on top of the layer to be stabilised .
using a collecting tray and balance the contractor shall check the rate of spread by weight once for every num mnum of lime spread or a different rate of testing for the rate of spread as described in contract specific appendix num .
at the same time the contractor shall collect samples of lime deposited on the tray and test them for available lime content in accordance with clause num .
num num unless indicated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the material shall be stabilised in a single layer if its compacted thickness is num mm or less .
if its compacted thickness is greater the material shall be stabilised in layers not less than num mm and not more than num mm thick including any cuttingin required by subclause num of this clause .
num num unless indicated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the material forming the layer to be stabilised shall be processed by pulverising and mixing in the lime by means of sufficient number of passes of an approved mobile stabilising machine until num of the class nume or num of the silt and clay fraction of class numf processed material passes a bs num mm sieve after dry sieving and the pulverisation complies with table num .
num num during processing sufficient water shall be available in the material to slake the quicklime if used and to enable satisfactory mixing and compaction to be achieved .
any added water shall be through an integral spray bar on the stabilising machine .
any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding num mgl as sonum when tested in accordance with bs en num clause num .
num num the layer shall receive at least two passes of the stabilising machine to pulverise and mix the lime and soil after which the processing shall be interrupted by a period of not less than num hours and not greater than num hours to enable the lime to react with the soil .
before this period commences the surface of the layer shall be sealed with one pass of a smooth wheeled roller having a mass per metre width of roll of not less than num kg or a pneumatic tyred roller of not less than num kg per wheel .
at the end of this period the layer shall receive one further pass of the stabilising machine or more if required to enable the material to comply with subclauses num of this clause .
num num the stabilising machine shall be equipped with a device for controlling the depth of processing which shall be maintained at the correct setting at all times .
an overlap of num mm shall be made between adjacent passes of the stabilising machine .
where a subsequent layer of material is placed on a layer previously stabilised the tines or blades of the stabilising machine shall be set so that they cut into the previously stabilised layer below by at least num mm .
num num the appropriate quantity of cement shall be uniformly spread by a suitable spreading machine on top of the layer previously processed with lime .
using a collecting tray and balance the contractor shall check the rate of spread of the machine once for every num mnum of cement spread .
num num unless indicated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the material previously mixed with lime shall be stabilised with cement in a single layer or in layers of the same compacted thickness as for the lime mixed material layers including any cuttingin required by subclause num of this clause .
num num unless indicated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the material forming the layer to be stabilised shall be processed by pulverising and mixing in the cement by means of a sufficient number of passes of an approved mobile stabilising machine until num of the silt and clay fraction is reduced to particles or lumps passing a bs num mm sieve after dry sieving and the pulverisation complies with table num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num num num during processing sufficient water shall be available in the material to hydrate the cement and enable satisfactory mixing and compaction to be achieved .
any added water shall be through an integral spraybar on the stabilising machine .
any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding num mgl as sonum when tested in accordance with bs en num clause num .
num num the stabilising machine shall be equipped with a device for controlling the depth of processing which shall be maintained at the correct setting at all times .
an overlap of num mm shall be made between adjacent passes of the stabilising machine .
where a subsequent layer of material is placed on a layer previously stabilised the tines or blades of the stabilising machine shall be set so that they cut into the previously stabilised layer below by at least num mm .
num num each layer of class nume or numf processed material shall be compacted as soon as possible after the final pass of the stabilising machine .
compaction shall be completed within num hours following the mixing of the cement into the material to be stabilised .
immediately before compaction class nume processed material shall have a moisture condition value mcv of not greater than num nor less than the figure stated in contract specific appendix num both as determined in accordance with clause num .
water shall be added if necessary in a uniform manner to enable this mcv requirement to be met .
any added water shall have a sulfate content not exceeding num mgl as sonum when tested in accordance with bs en num clause num .
num num the compaction of each layer of class nume or numf material shall comply with clause num table num method num except that if layers of class nume or numf greater than num mm thickness are to be constructed the number of passes of the compaction plant shall be determined from the results of a demonstration area as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
num num class nume and numf materials shall be cured in accordance with clause num .
during periods when the air temperature is forecast to drop below numc or when ground frost is forecast class nume and numf material shall be protected to prevent freezing for a period of num days from the time of completion of compaction .
such protection shall be sealed to prevent the ingress of moisture .
num num class nume and numf materials shall not have other material deposited or compacted above them until such time as the required bearing ratio in contract specific appendix num has been achieved .
the relaxation allowed in subclause num shall not apply before this time .
num num determination of sulfate content num num where required in table num or contract specific appendix num the effects of watersoluble sulfate oxidisable sulfides and total potential sulfate shall be assessed in accordance with bs en num clauses num num and num .
num num test results and limiting values for sulfate shall be given as sonum .
num num at least five samples of each material shall be tested for ws os and tps .
the mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
this also applies if six to nine results are available .
if ten or more results are available the mean of the highest num of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper g e n e r a l g r a n u l a r f i l l num a well graded granular material general fill any material or combination of materials other than material designated as class num in the contract .
properties i ii and iv in next column shall not apply to chalk .
recycled aggregate .
where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates a construction and demolition recycling industries bnum municipal incinerator bottom ash miba dnum air cooled blast furnace slag dnum basic oxygen furnace slag dnum electric arc furnace slag eaf c e non ferrous steel industry except enum molybdenum slag g mining and quarry industry i grading bs num part num or bs en num tab num tab num tab num method num num a ii uniformity coefficient see note num num iii mc bs num part num see note num app num app num iv mcv clause num app num app num v idd of chalk clause num app num volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper g e n e r a l g r a n u l a r f i l l num b uniformly graded granular material general fill any material or combination of materials other than chalk .
recycled aggregate where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except chalk a construction and demolition recycling industries bnum municipal incinerator bottom ash miba cnum coal fly ash cnum coal bottom ash dnum air cooled blast furnace slag dnum basic oxygen furnace slag dnum electric arc furnace slag eaf c e non ferrous steel industry except enum molybdenum slag f foundry industry g mining and quarry industry hnum dredge spoil sand i grading bs num part num or bs en num tab num tab num tab num method num num b ii uniformity coefficient see note num num iii mc bs num part num see note num app num app num iv mcv clause num app num app num num c coarse granular material general fill any material or combination of materials other than material designated as class num in the contract .
properties i and ii in next column shall not apply to chalk .
recycled aggregate where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates a construction and demolition recycling industries dnum air cooled blast furnace slag g mining and quarry industry i grading bs num part num or bs en num tab num tab num tab num method num num c ii uniformity coefficient see note num num iii los angeles coefficient clause num num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper g e n e r a l c o h e s i v e f i l l num a wet cohesive material general fill any material or combination of materials other than chalk .
i grading bs num part num tab num tab num tab num method num except for materials with liquid limit greater than num determined by bs num part num only deadweight tamping or vibratory tamping rollers or grid rollers shall be used .
num a ii plastic limit pl bs num part num iii mc bs num part num see note num pl num app num iv mcv clause num app num app num v undrained shear strength of remoulded material clause num app num app num num b dry cohesive material general fill any material or combination of materials other than chalk i grading bs num part num tab num tab num tab num method num num b ii plastic limit pl bs num part num iii mc bs num part num see note num app num pl num iv mcv clause num app num app num v undrained shear strength of remoulded material clause num app num app num num c stony cohesive material general fill any material or combination of materials other than chalk i grading bs num part num tab num tab num tab num method num num c ii plastic limit pl bs num part num iii mc bs num part num see note num app num app num iv mcv clause num app num v undrained shear strength of remoulded material clause num app num volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper g e n e r a l c o h e s i v e f i l l num d silty cohesive material general fill any material or combination of materials other than chalk i grading bs num part num tab num tab num tab num method num num d ii mc bs num part num see note num app num app num iii mcv clause num app num app num iv undrained shear strength of remoulded material clause num app num app num num e reclaimed pulverised fuel ash cohesive material general fill reclaimed material from lagoon or stockpile containing not more than num furnace bottom ash i mc bs num part num see note num to enable compaction to clause num end product num of maximum dry density of bs num part num num kg rammer method num e ii bulk density bs num part num app num app num g e n c h a l k f i l l num chalk general fill chalk and associated materials all designated as class num in the contract i mc bs num part num see note num app num tab num method num or method num if required in app num .
all types of vibratory rollers of categories over num kg shall not be used num ii idd clause num app num app num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper l a n d s c a p e f i l l num various fill to landscape areas see app num i grading bs num part num app num app num see clause num and app num num ii mc bs num part num see note num app num iii mcv clause num app num app num t o p s o i l num a topsoil or turf existing on site topsoiling topsoil or turf designated as class numa in the contract i grading clause num clause num num a num b imported topsoil topsoiling general purpose grade complying with bs num num b volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num a selected well graded granular material below water natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock other than argillaceous rock crushed concrete chalk well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
properties i and ii in next column shall not apply to chalk .
recycled aggregate where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num a construction and demolition recycling industries gnum red coal shale gnum preselected allin from quarryingmining i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num no compaction num a bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii uniformity see note num num iii smc of chalk index clause num num iv plasticity index bs num part num nonplastic num b selected coarse granular material starter layer natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete chalk well burnt colliery spoil slag or any combination thereof .
properties ii and iii in next column shall not apply to chalk .
recycled aggregate where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num a construction and demolition recycling industries dnum air cooled blast furnace slag dnum basic oxygen furnace slag dnum electric arc furnace slag eaf c gnum red coal shale gnum preselected allin from quarryingmining i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num tab num method num num b bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii plasticity index bs num part num nonplastic iii los angeles coefficient clause num num iv mc bs num part num see note num app num app num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num c selected uniformly graded granular material starter layer natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock other than argillaceous rock crushed concrete chalk well burnt colliery spoil slag or any combination thereof .
property iii in next column shall not apply to chalk .
recycled aggregate where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num a construction and demolition recycling industries dnum air cooled blast furnace slag dnum basic oxygen furnace slag dnum electric arc furnace slag eaf c gnum red coal shale gnum preselected allin from quarryingmining i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num tab num method num num c bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii uniformity coefficient see note num num iii plasticity index bs num part num nonplastic iv los angeles coefficient clause num num v mc bs num part num see note num app num app num volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num d selected uniformly graded granular material starter layer below pulverised fuel ash natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock other than argillaceous rock crushed concrete chalk well burnt colliery spoil slag or any combination thereof .
recycled aggregate where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num a construction and demolition recycling industries dnum air cooled blast furnace slag dnum basic oxygen furnace slag dnum electric arc furnace slag eaf c gnum red coal shale i grading bs num part num on site tab num tab num tab num method num num d bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii uniformity coefficient see note num num iii plasticity index bs num part num nonplastic iv mc bs num part num see note num app num app num v mcv clause num app num app num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num e selected granular material class numa for stabilisation with cement to form capping any material or combination of materials other than unburnt colliery spoil and argillaceous rock .
properties i ii and iii in next column shall not apply to chalk .
recycled aggregate where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num a construction and demolition recycling industries dnum air cooled blast furnace slag g mining and quarry industry except gnum black coal shale i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num not applicable num e bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii mc bs num part num see note num app num iii liquid limit bs num part num num iv plasticity index bs num part num num v organic matter bs num part num app num vi water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num num mgl as sonum vii oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num num as sonum viii smc of chalk clause num num num f num selected granular material fine grading capping any material or combination of materials including recycled aggregates with not more than num by mass of recycled bituminous planings and granulated asphalt but excluding materials contaminated with tar and tar bitumen binders unburnt colliery spoil argillaceous rock and chalk .
property vi in the next column shall not apply if the class ra asphalt content of any recycled aggregate is num or less .
where material in this class is imported onto site it shall be classified as class numfnum and comply with the requirements for that material .
i grading bs num part num on site materials only tab num tab num tab num method num num f num ii optimum mc bs num part num vibrating hammer method iii mc bs num part num see note num optimum mc num optimum mc iv los angeles coefficient clause num num v class ra asphalt content clause num num vi bitumen content bs en num or bs en num num volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num f num selected granular material coarse grading capping any material or combination of materials including recycled aggregates with not more than num by mass of recycled bituminous planings and granulated asphalt but excluding materials contaminated with tar and tar bitumen binders unburnt colliery spoil and argillaceous rock .
property i in the next column shall not apply to chalk .
property vi in the next column shall not apply if the class ra asphalt content of any recycled aggregate is num or less .
where material in this class is imported onto site it shall be classified as class numfnum and comply with the requirements for that material .
i grading bs num part num on site materials only tab num tab num tab num method num num f num ii optimum mc bs num part num vibrating hammer method iii mc bs num part num see note num optimum mc num optimum mc iv los angeles coefficient clause num num v class ra asphalt content clause num num vi bitumen content bs en num or bs en num num num f num selected granular material capping any material or combination of materials with not less than num by mass of recycled bituminous planings and granulated asphalt but excluding materials contaminated with tar and tarbitumen binders unburnt colliery spoil and argillaceous rock .
where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from the following source codes see notes num num and num anum reclaimed asphalt anum mixed recycled aggregate aggregates from source code anum shall contain at least num of constituents in class ra bituminous materials .
i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num tab num method num maximum compacted layer thickness shall be num mm num f num bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii optimum mc clause num iii mc clause num see note num optimum mc num optimum mc iv class ra asphalt content clause num num v bitumen content bs en num or bs en num num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num f num selected granular material fine grading imported on to the site capping unbound mixture complying with bs en num containing aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except chalk shale siltstone or slate see note num anum crushed concrete anum crushed bricks masonry anum mixed recycled aggregate bnum municipal incinerator bottom ash miba dnum air cooled blast furnace slag dnum basic oxygen furnace slag dnum electric arc furnace slag eaf c g mining and quarry industry except gnum black coal shale aggregates from source code anum shall contain not more than num of constituents in class ra bituminous materials .
property x in the next column shall not apply if the class ra asphalt content of any recycled aggregate is num or less .
i size designation and overall grading category bs en num num and ge tab num tab num tab num method num num f num ii maximum fines and oversize categories bs en num ufnum and ocnum tab num tab num iii los angeles coefficient bs en num lanum num iv volume stability of blast furnace slag bs en num free from dicalcium silicate and iron disintegration v volume stability of steel bof and eaf slag bs en num vnum vi other aggregate requirements bs en num categorynr no requirement vii laboratory dry density and optimum water content bs en num clause num declared values viii water content bs en num optimum wc num optimum wc ix class ra asphalt content clause num num x bitumen content bs en num or bs en num num volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num f num selected granular material coarse grading imported on to the site capping unbound mixture complying with bs en num containing aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except chalk shale siltstone or slate see note num anum crushed concrete anum crushed bricks masonry anum mixed recycled aggregate bnum municipal incinerator bottom ash miba dnum air cooled blast furnace slag dnum basic oxygen furnace slag dnum electric arc furnace slag eaf c g mining and quarry industry except gnum black coal shale aggregates from source code anum shall contain not more than num of constituents in class ra bituminous materials .
property x in the next column shall not apply if the class ra asphalt content of any recycled aggregate is num or less .
i size designation and overall grading category bs en num num and ge tab num tab num tab num method num num f num ii maximum fines and oversize categories bs en num ufnum and ocnum tab num tab num iii los angeles coefficient bs en num lanum num iv volume stability of blast furnace slag bs en num free from dicalcium silicate and iron disintegration v volume stability of steel bof and eaf slag bs en num vnum vi other aggregate requirements bs en num category nr no requirement vii laboratory dry density and optimum water content bs en num clause num declared values viii water content bs en num optimum wc num optimum wc ix class ra asphalt content clause num num x bitumen content bs en num or bs en num num num g selected granular material gabion filling natural gravel crushed rock crushed concrete or any combination thereof .
none of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num anum crushed concrete .
i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num none num g bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii los angeles coefficient clause num num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num h selected granular material drainage layer to reinforced soil and anchored earth structures natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete chalk well burnt colliery spoil or any structures combination thereof .
none of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
properties vi vii viii ix x xi and xii in next column only apply when metallic reinforcing or anchor elements facing units or fastenings are used .
properties ii and v in next column shall not apply to chalk .
recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num anum crushed concrete anum crushed bricks masonry gnum red coal shale i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num tab num method num num h bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii plasticity index bs num part num nonplastic iii los angeles coefficient clause num num iv mc bs num part num see note num app num app num v mcv clause num app num app num vi ph value bs num part num tab num tab num vii chloride ion content bs en num tab num viii water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num tab num ix oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num tab num x resistivity clause num tab num xi redox potential clause num tab num xii organic content bs num part num tab num xiii microbial activity index table num tab num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num i selected well graded granular material fill to reinforced soil and anchored earth structures natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete slag chalk well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof except that chalk shall not be combined with any other constituent .
none of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
properties i ii and v in next column shall not apply to chalk .
properties viii ix x xi xii xiii and xiv only apply when metallic reinforcing or anchor elements facing units or fastenings are used .
recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num anum crushed concrete anum crushed bricks masonry dnum air cooled blast furnace slag gnum red coal shale i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num tab num method num num i bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii uniformity coefficient see note num num iii smc of chalk clause num num iv mc bs num part num see note num app num app num v mcv clause num app num app num vi effective angle of friction j and effective cohesion c clause num app num vii coefficient of friction and adhesion fill elements clause num app num viii ph value bs num part num tab num tab num ix chloride ion content bs en num tab num x water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num tab num xi oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num tab num xii resistivity clause num tab num xiii redox potential clause num tab num xiv organic content bs num part num tab num xv microbial activity index table num tab num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num j selected uniformly graded granular material fill to reinforced soil and anchored earth natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete slag chalk well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof except that chalk shall not be combined with any other constituent .
none of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
properties viii ix x xi xii xiii and xiv in next column only apply when metallic reinforcing or anchor elements facing units or fastenings are used .
properties i ii and v in next column shall not apply to chalk .
recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num anum crushed concrete anum crushed bricks masonry dnum air cooled blast furnace slag gnum red coal shale .
i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num tab num method num num j bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii uniformity coefficient see note num num num iii smc of chalk clause num num iv mc bs num part num see note num app num app num v mcv clause num app num app num vi effective angle of friction j and effective cohesion c clause num app num vii coefficient of friction and adhesion fill elements clause num app num viii ph value bs num part num tab num tab num ix chloride ion content bs en num tab num x water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num tab num xi oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num tab num xii resistivity clause num tab num xiii redox potential clause num tab num xiv organic content bs num part num tab num xv microbial activity index table num tab num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num k selected granular material lower bedding for corrugated steel buried structures natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
none of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
where material is imported onto which is not as dug site it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codessee notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num anum crushed concrete anum crushed bricks masonry gnum red coal shale i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num end product num of maximum dry density of bs num part num vibrating hammer method num k bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii uniformity coefficient see note num num iii plasticity index bs num part num num iv optimum mc bs num part num vibrating hammer method v mc bs num part num see note num optimum mc num optimum mc num vi mcv clause num app num app num vii los angeles coefficient clause num num viii resistivity clause num num ohm cm ix water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num num mg l as sonum x oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num num as sonum xi chloride ion content bs en num num xii ph value bs num part num num num xiii sulfide and hydrogen sulfide standard textbook of qualitative inorganic analysis rapid blackening of lead acetate paper table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num l selected uniformly graded granular material upper bedding for corrugated steel buried structures natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
none of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num anum crushed concrete anum crushed bricks masonry gnum red coal shale i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num num l bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii resistivity clause num num ohm cm iii water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num num mg l as sonum iv oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num num as sonum v chloride ion content bs en num num vi ph value bs num part num num num vii sulfide and hydrogen sulfide standard textbook of qualitative inorganic analysis rapid blackening of lead acetate paper table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num m selected granular material surround to corrugated steel buried structures natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
none of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num anum crushed concrete anum crushed bricks masonry gnum red coal shale .
i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num end product num of maximum dry density of bs num part num vibrating hammer method unless otherwise stated in app num num m bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii uniformity coefficient see note num num iii plasticity index bs num part num num iv optimum mc bs num part num vibrating hammer method v mc bs num part num see note num optimum mc num optimum mc num vi mcv clause num app num app num vii los angeles coefficient clause num num viii resistivity clause num num ohm cm ix water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num num mg l as sonum x oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num num as sonum xi chloride ion content bs en num num xii ph value bs num part num num num xiii sulfide and hydrogen sulfide standard textbook of qualitative inorganic analysis rapid blackening of lead acetate paper table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num n selected well graded granular material fill to structures natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete slag well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
none of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num anum crushed concrete anum crushed bricks masonry dnum air cooled blast furnace slag gnum red coal shale .
i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num end product num of maximum dry density of bs num part num vibrating hammer method num n bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii uniformity coefficient see note num num iii los angeles coefficient clause num num iv undrained shear parameters c and j clause num app num v effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c clause num app num vi permeability clause num app num vii mc bs num part num see note num app num app num viii mcv clause num app num app num ix slope stability test where required in app num clause num app num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num p selected granular material fill to structures natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete slag chalk well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
none of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
properties i ii and ix in next column shall not apply to chalk .
recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num anum crushed concrete anum crushed bricks masonry dnum air cooled blast furnace slag gnum red coal shale .
i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num end product num of maximum dry density of bs num part num vibrating hammer method num p bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii uniformity coefficient see note num num iii idd of chalk clause num app num iv los angeles coefficient clause num num v undrained shear parameters c and j clause num app num vi effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c clause num app num vii permeability clause num app num viii mc bs num part num see note num app num app num ix mcv clause num app num app num x slope stability test where required in app num clause num app num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num q selected granular material fill to structures natural gravel natural sand crushed gravel crushed rock crushed concrete slag chalk well burnt colliery spoil or any combination thereof .
none of these constituents shall include any argillaceous rock .
properties i ii and ix in next column shall not apply to chalk .
recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt .
where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except shale siltstone or slate see note num anum crushed concrete anum crushed bricks masonry dnum air cooled blast furnace slag gnum red coal shale .
as for class numa numb or numc with the addition of the following end product num of maximum dry density of bs num part num vibrating hammer method num q i water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num num mg l as sonum ii oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num num as sonum iii chloride ion content bs en num num iv ph value bs num part num num num v sulfide and hydrogen sulfide standard textbook of qualitative inorganic analysis rapid blackening of lead acetate paper table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d g r a n u l a r f i l l num r selected granular material for stabilisation with lime and cement to form capping class numf any material or combination of materials other than unburnt colliery spoil and argillaceous rock .
properties i ii and iii in next column shall not apply to chalk .
i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num num r bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii mc bs num part num see note num app num iii liquid limit bs num part num num iv plasticity index bs num part num num v organic matter bs num part num app num vi water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num num mg l as sonum vii oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num num as sonum viii idd of chalk clause num app num num s selected well graded granular material filter layer below subbase crushed rock or sand .
where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates except chalk shale siltstone or slate see note num. i grading bs num part num onsite tab num tab num num s bs en num imported onto site tab num tab num ii plasticity index bs num part num nonplastic table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d c o h e s i v e f i l l num a selected cohesive material fill to structures any material or combination of materials other than argillaceous rock and materials designated as class num in the contract .
if chalk is used it shall form num of constituents .
properties i and iii shall not apply to chalk .
properties vii and viii may be increased to num and num respectively for lias clay only and subject to the requirements of contract specific appendix num i grading bs num part num tab num tab num end product num of maximum dry density of bs num part num num kg rammer method or a dry density corresponding to num air voids at field mc whichever is lower num a ii mc bs num part num see note num app num app num iii mcv clause num app num app num iv undrained shear parameters c and j clause num app num app num v effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c clause num app num app num vi idd of chalk clause num app num app num vii liquid limit bs num part num num viii plasticity index bs num part num num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d c o h e s i v e f i l l num b selected conditioned pulverised fuel ash cohesive material fill to structures and to reinforced soil conditioned material direct from power station dust collection system and to which a controlled quantity of water has been added i mc bs num part num see note num to enable compaction to clause num end product num of maximum dry density of bs num part num num kg rammer method num b ii bulk density bs num part num app num app num iii undrained shear parameters c and j clause num app num iv effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c clause num app num v coefficient of friction and adhesion fill elements clause num app num vi permeability clause num app num vii slope stability test where required in app num clause num app num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d c o h e s i v e f i l l num c selected wet cohesive material fill to reinforced soil any material or combination of materials other than unburnt colliery spoil argillaceous rock and chalk .
properties viii ix x xi and xii in next column only apply when metallic reinforcing elements facing units or fastenings are used i grading bs num part num tab num tab num tab num method num num c ii mc bs num part num see note num app num app num iii mcv clause num app num app num iv effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c clause num app num v coefficient of friction and adhesion fill elements clause num app num vi liquid limit bs num part num num vii plasticity index bs num part num num viii ph value bs num part num tab num tab num ix chloride ion content bs en num tab num x water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num tab num xi oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num tab num xii resistivity clause num tab num xiii redox potential clause num tab num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d c o h e s i v e f i l l num d selected stony cohesive material fill to reinforced soil any material or combination of materials other than unburnt colliery spoil argillaceous rock and chalk .
properties vi vii viii ix x xi and xii in next column only apply when metallic reinforcing elements facing units or fastenings are used i grading bs num part num tab num tab num tab num method num num d ii mc bs num part num see note num app num app num iii mcv clause num app num app num iv effective angle of internal friction j and effective cohesion c clause num app num v coefficient of friction and adhesion fill elements clause num app num vi liquid limit bs num part num num vii plasticity index bs num part num num viii ph value bs num part num tab num tab num ix chloride ion content bs en num tab num x water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num tab num xi oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num tab num xii resistivity clause num tab num xiii redox potential clause num tab num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d c o h e s i v e f i l l num e selected cohesive material for stabilisation with lime to form capping class numd any material or combination of materials other than unburnt colliery spoil i grading bs num part num tab num tab num not applicable num e ii mc bs num part num see note num app num iii mcv clause num app num iv plasticity index bs num part num num v organic matter bs num part num app num vi water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num app num vii oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num app num viii total potential sulfate ts content bs en num clause num app num num f selected silty cohesive material for stabilisation with cement to form capping class numb any material or combination of materials other than chalk unburnt colliery spoil and argillaceous rock i grading bs num part num tab num tab num not applicable num f ii uniformity coefficient see note num num iii mc bs num part num see note num app num app num iv mcv clause num app num app num v liquid limit bs num part num num vi plasticity index bs num part num num vii organic matter bs num part num app num viii water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num app num ix oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num app num x total potential sulfate ts content bs en num clause num app num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s e l e c t e d c o h e s i v e f i l l num g selected conditioned pulverised fuel ash cohesive material for stabilisation with cement to form capping class numc conditioned material direct from power station dust collection system and to which a controlled quantity of water has been added i mc bs num part num see note num app num app num num g ii water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num num mgl as sonum iii oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num num as sonum iv total potential sulfate ts content bs en num clause num num as sonum num h wet dry stony or silty cohesive material and chalk overlying fill for corrugated steel buried structures as class numa numb numc numd general cohesive fill material or class num chalk fill material except that argillaceous rock slag pfa or any combination thereof shall not be used as for class numa numb numc numd or num with the addition of the following num h i water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num num mgl as sonum ii oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num num as sonum iii chloride ion content bs en num num iv ph value bs num part num num num num i selected cohesive material for stabilisation with lime and cement to form capping class nume any material or combination of materials other than unburnt colliery spoil i grading bs num part num tab num tab num not applicable num i ii mc bs num part num see note num app num iii mcv clause num app num iv plasticity index bs num part num num v organic matter bs num part num app num vi water soluble ws sulfate content bs en num clause num app num vii oxidisable sulfides os content bs en num clause num app num viii total potential sulfate ts content bs en num clause num app num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper m i s c f i l l num class num class num or class num material lower trench fill any material except no stones or lumps of clay shall be retained on the nummm test sieve .
recycled aggregate where material is imported onto site which is not as dug it shall be aggregate conforming to bs en num from one or more of the following source codes see notes num num and num p natural aggregates a construction and demolition recycling industries bnum municipal incinerator bottom ash miba dnum air cooled blast furnace slag dnum basic oxygen furnace slag dnum electric arc furnace slag eaf c g mining and quarry industry .
i mc bs num part num see note num app num app num tab num num ii mcv clause num app num app num s t a b i l i s e d m a t e r i a l s num a cement stabilised well graded granular material capping class nume with addition of cement according to clause num i pulverisation bs en num num tab num method num num a ii bearing ratio bs en num app num iii mc bs en num app num app num num b cement stabilised silty cohesive material capping class numf with addition of cement according to clause num i pulverisation bs en num app num tab num method num num b ii mcv immediately before compaction clause num app num num iii bearing ratio bs en num app num iv mc bs en num app num app num num c cement stabilised conditioned pulverised fuel ash cohesive material capping class numg with addition of cement according to clause num i pulverisation bs en num num end product num of maximum dry density bs en num num kg rammer method num c ii bearing ratio bs en num app num iii mc bs en num to enable compaction to clause num table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num class general material description typical use permitted constituents all subject to requirements of clause num and contract specific appendix num material properties required for acceptability in addition to requirements on use of fill materials in clause num and testing in clause num compaction requirements in clause num class property see exceptions in previous column defined and tested in accordance with acceptable limits within lower upper s t a b i l i s e d m a t e r i a l s num d lime stabilised cohesive material capping class nume with addition of lime according to clause num i pulverisation bs en num num tab num method num num d ii mcv immediately before compaction clause num app num app num iii bearing ratio bs en num app num iv mc bs en num app num app num num e lime and cement stabilised cohesive material capping class numi with addition of lime and cement according to clause num i pulverisation bs en num num tab num method num num e ii mcv immediately before completion clause num app num app num iii bearing ratio bs en num app num iv mc bs en num app num app num num f lime and cement stabilised well graded granular material capping class numr with addition of lime and cement according to clause num i pulverisation bs en num num tab num method num num f ii bearing ratio bs en num app num iii mc bs en num see note num app num app num footnotes to table num num num app contract specific appendix num num tab table num num where in the acceptable limits column reference is made to app num only those properties having limits ascribed to them in contract specific appendix num shall apply .
where contract specific appendix num gives limits for other properties not listed in this table such limits shall also apply .
num num where bs num part num is specified for mc this shall mean bs num part num where the material is a soil or bs en num where the material is required to conform to a harmonised european standard .
num num uniformity coefficient is defined as the ratio of the particle diameters dnum to dnum on the particlesize distribution curve where dnum particle diameter at which num of the soil by weight is finer dnum particle diameter at which num of the soil by weight is finer num .
num the limiting values for class unumb material are given in contract specific appendix num and contract specific appendix num .
num num for works in wales see subclause numw .
num num where material source codes are referenced these are as listed in table num .
num num where materials are required to be aggregates conforming to bs en num materials certificated as being compliant with bs en num are acceptable for use provided that they meet all the specification requirements and the declaration of performance for constituent parts to bs en num are provided to the overseeing organisation .
num num materials shall comply with the current environmental regulations at the time of use .
reference shall be made to annex za informative of bs en num .
table num num acceptable earthworks materials classification and compaction requirements see footnotes continued volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num table num num grading requirements for acceptable earthworks materials other than classes numfnum numfnum and nums percentage by mass passing the size shown class size mm size mm bs series size microns bs series size micr ons class num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numa num num num numa numb num num numb numc num num num num numc numa numb num num num num numa numb numc num num num numc numd num num num numd numa num num num num num numa numb num num numb numc num num num num num num numc numd num num num num num num num num except num for crushed rock numd nume numr num num num num num num nume numr numfnum num num num num num num numfnum numfnum num num num num num num num num num numfnum numfnum num num num num num num num num num numfnum numh num num num num num numh numi numj num num num num num num num num num numi numj numk num num numk numl num num num num num num num num except num for crushed rock numl volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num table num num grading requirements for acceptable earthworks materials continued percentage by mass passing the size shown class size mm size mm bs series size microns bs series size micr ons class num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numm num num numm numn nump num num numn nump nums num num num num num num nums numa num num numa numc num num num num num num num num num num numc numd num num num num num num num num numd nume num num num nume numf num num numf numi num num num numi volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num table num num limits of material properties of fill for use with metal components in reinforced soil and anchored earth structures for class numh numi numj numc and numd materials reinforcing element material properties of fill ph value max chloride ion content max organic content max water soluble ws sulfate content mgl as sonum maximum oxidisable sulfides os content as sonum minimum restivity ohm.cm minimum redox potential volts microbial activity index min max galvanised steel num num num num num num num num less than num stainless steel num num num num num num num num notes num num a method of calculating the microbial activity index may be obtained by reference to trrl contractor report num soil corrosivity assessment .
num num the corrosion potential of frictional fill shall be assessed from resistivity ph chloride water soluble sulfate and oxidisable sulfides tests .
for cohesive soil it will be necessary to test additionally for organic content .
should either organic content or sulfate be in excess of the specified levels then tests shall also be included for redox potential and microbial activity index .
num num the water soluble sulfate content and oxidisable sulfides content shall be determined in accordance with the methods described in bs en num clause num num and num .
num num methods of test except for microbial activity index water soluble sulfate content and oxidisable sulfides content are given in bs num part num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num table num num method compaction for earthworks materials plant and methods method num to method num this table is to be read in conjunction with subclause num type of compaction plant ref no .
category method num method num method num method num method num method num d n d n d n d n d n n for d num mm n for d num mm n for d num mm smoothed wheeled roller or vibratory roller operating without vibration num mass per metre width of roll over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num num num unsuitable num unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg num num num num unsuitable num num unsuitable num num unsuitable grid roller num mass per metre width of roll over num kg up to num kg num num unsuitable num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num unsuitable num num unsuitable num unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg num num num num unsuitable num num unsuitable num num unsuitable deadweight tamping roller num mass per metre width of roll over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num num num unsuitable num num unsuitable num over num kg num num num num num num num num unsuitable num num num pneumatictyred roller num mass per wheel over num kg up to num kg num num unsuitable num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num unsuitable unsuitable num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num unsuitable num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num unsuitable num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num num unsuitable num over num kg num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num num unsuitable vibratory tamping roller mass per metre width of a vibrating roll num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num num num unsuitable num unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num unsuitable unsuitable num num unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num unsuitable num num num num unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num unsuitable num num num num unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num unsuitable num num num num unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num unsuitable num num num num num num over num kg num num num num num num unsuitable num num num num num volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num table num num method compaction for earthworks materials plant and methods method num to method num this table is to be read in conjunction with subclause num continued type of compaction plant ref no .
category method num method num method num method num method num method num d n d n d n d n d n n for d num mm n for d num mm n for d num mm vibratory roller mass per metre width of vibratory roll num over num kg up to num kg unsuitable num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg unsuitable num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num num num unsuitable num unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num num num unsuitable num num unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num unsuitable unsuitable num num num num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num unsuitable num num num num num num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num unsuitable num num num num num num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num unsuitable num num num num num num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num unsuitable num num num num num num over num kg num num num num num num unsuitable num num num num num vibrating plate compactor mass per mnum of base plate num over num kg up to num kg unsuitable unsuitable num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg unsuitable num num num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg unsuitable num num num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num unsuitable unsuitable num unsuitable unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num unsuitable unsuitable num num unsuitable num over num kg num num num num num num unsuitable unsuitable num num num vibrotamper mass num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num num num unsuitable num num unsuitable num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num num num unsuitable num num num num over num kg up to num kg num num num num num num num num unsuitable num num num num over num kg num num num num num num num num unsuitable num num num power rammer mass num num kg up to num kg num num num num unsuitable num num unsuitable num num unsuitable num over num kg num num num num unsuitable num num unsuitable num num num droppingweight compactor mass of rammer over num kg weight drop num over num m up to num m num num num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num over num m num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num table num num method compaction for earthworks materials plant and methods method num this table is to be read in conjunction with subclause num continued type of compaction plant ref no .
category method num n for d num mm n for d nummm smooth wheeled roller or vibratory roller operating without vibration num num num mass per metre width of roll over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg unsuitable unsuitable num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable grid roller num num num mass per metre width of roll over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg unsuitable num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable deadweight tamping roller num num mass per metre width of roll over num kg up to num kg over num kg num num num num pneumatictyred roller num num num num num num num num mass per wheel over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg unsuitable num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num num num num vibratory tamping roller num num num num num num num num mass per metre width of vibrating roll over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg unsuitable unsuitable num num num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num num num vibratory roller num num num num num num num num num num mass per metre width of vibrating roll over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num num num num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num vibratory plate compactor num num num num num num mass per mnum of base plate over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable vibrotamper num num num num mass over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable power rammer num num mass num kg up to num kg over num kg num num unsuitable num dropping weight compactor num num mass of rammer over num kg height drop over num m up to num m over num m unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num num table num num imported onto site grading requirements for class num acceptable earthworks materials percentage by mass passing the size shown class size mm size mm bs en num series size microns bs en num series class num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numa num num num num num numa numb num num numb numc num num num num num num numc numd num num num num num num num except num for crushed rock numd nume numr num num num num num nume numr numfnum num num num num num num num num numfnum numfnum num num num num num num num numfnum numfnum num num num num num num num num numfnum numh num num num num num numh numi numj num num num num num num numi numj numk num num numk numl num num num num num num num except num for crushed rock numl numm num num numm numn nump num num numn nump nums num num num num num nums volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks num amendment february num table num num records and reports information required ground treatment in situ testing for each columnarea treated date contract title area identification unique grid location ground level at commencement material used approximate column diameter depth of penetration of each compaction point vibrator power consumption during operation jetting pressure where applicable duration of penetration duration of compaction obstructions and delays number and type of tests carried out for each area tested date contract title area identification test position coordinates and level method of test used all information required by appropriate british standard test procedure volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num numf table num num material sources and source codes for imported materials this table is taken from bs en num which was published on numst may num and subsequently withdrawn on numth january num .
all other specification requirements which reference bs en num shall be taken as reference to the version of that standard current at the contract reference document date unless otherwise detailed in the contract specific specification .
source code source subcode specific material p natural aggregates p all petrographic types included in bs en num a construction and demolition recycling industries anum reclaimed asphalt anum crushed concrete anum crushed bricks masonry anum mix of anum anum and anum b municipal solid waste incineration industry bnum municipal incinerator bottom ash excluding fly ash miba bnum municipal incinerator fly ash mifa c coal power generation industry cnum coal fly ash cnum fluidised bed combustion fly ash fbcfa cnum boiler slag cnum coal bottom ash cnum fluidised bed combustion bottom ash fbc bottom ash d iron and steel industry dnum granulated blast furnace slag gbs dnum aircooled blast furnace slag abs dnum basic oxygen furnace slag converter slag bos dnum electric arc furnace slag from carbon steel production eaf c dnum electric arc furnace slag from stainlesshigh alloy steel production eaf s dnum ferrochromium slag e non ferrous steel industry enum copper slag enum molybdenum slag enum zinc slag enum phosphorous slag f foundry industry fnum foundry sand fnum foundry cupola furnace slag g mining and quarry industry gnum red coal shale gnum refuse from hard coal mining black coal shale gnum preselected allin from quarrymining gnum spent oil shale h maintenance dredging works hnum dredge spoil sand hnum dredge spoil clay i miscellaneous inum excavated soil inum paper sludge ash inum sewage sludge incineration ash municipal inum biomass ash inum crushed glass inum expanded clay volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num snum national alterations of the overseeing organisation of scotland numts num classification definitions and uses of earthworks materials num general num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num general classification num num earthworks materials shall fall into one or other of the following general classifications i acceptable material material excavated from within the site or imported on to the site which meets the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num for acceptability for use in the permanent works ii unacceptable material class unuma as defined in subclauses numia and numib of this clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num shall not be used in the permanent works iii unacceptable material class unumb as defined in subclause numiia of this clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num shall not be used in the permanent works and iv unacceptable material class unum as defined in subclause numi of this clause material excavated from within the site which shall not be used in the permanent works .
num unacceptable materials num num unacceptable material classes unuma and unumb i unacceptable material class unuma shall be a material which does not comply with the permitted constituents and material properties of table num and contract specific appendix num for acceptable material and b material or constituents of materials composed of the following unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num peat materials from swamps marshes and bogs logs stumps and perishable material materials in a frozen condition clay having a liquid limit determined in accordance with bs num part num exceeding num or plasticity index determined in accordance with bs num part num exceeding num material susceptible to spontaneous combustion except unburnt colliery spoil complying with subclause num of this clause ii unacceptable material class unumb shall be a contaminated materials including controlled wastes as defined in the environmental protection act num part iia whose level of contamination is above that given either in contract specific appendix num or in contract specific appendix num but excluding all special wastes as defined in the special waste amendment scotland regulations num and radioactive wastes as defined in the radioactive substances act num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks snum amendment february num num num unacceptable material class unum shall be i special waste as defined in the special waste scotland amendment regulations num and radioactive waste as defined in the radioactive substances act num .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num unacceptable material other than class unum shall be processed by mechanical chemical or other means to render the material acceptable for use in the permanent works in accordance with the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num .
num definitions num num where source codes are referred to these shall be for materials from the sources listed in table num .
num num chalk shall mean i any porous material of natural origin composed essentially of calcium carbonate and identified as chalk on the maps produced by the british geological survey ii material designated as class num in contract specific appendix num .
num num argillaceous rock shall mean shales mudstones siltstones slates and micaceous schists composed of particles of clay and silt and mica .
it shall include unburnt colliery spoil .
where argillaceous rock is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source codes p natural aggregates described as shale siltstone or slate or gnum refuse from hard coal mining black coal shale .
num num pulverisedfuel ash shall mean solid material extracted by electrostatic and mechanical means from the flue gases of furnaces fired with pulverised bituminous coal .
it shall have a maximum particle size of num mm .
where pulverisedfuel ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source code cnum coal fly ash .
num num furnace bottom ash shall mean agglomerated pulverisedfuel ash obtained from the bottom of the power station furnace and having particle size no larger than num mm .
where furnace bottom ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source code cnum coal bottom ash .
num num formation shall be the top surface of capping .
where no capping is required formation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of subbase unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
num num subformation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of capping .
num num stabilisation shall mean the spreading of cement or lime or both on a layer of deposited or intact granular or cohesive material and the subsequent process of pulverising and mixing followed by appropriate compaction to form the whole or a constituent layer of a capping .
num num where recycled aggregate is used in this series the material shall be aggregate resulting from the processing of inorganic or mineral material previously used in construction and shall have been tested in accordance with clause num .
it shall not contain more than num other materials class x not more than num in class ra bituminous materials and not more than num in class rg crushed glass .
where recycled aggregate is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source code a construction and demolition recycling industries .
where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is used in this series the aggregate shall have been tested in accordance with clause num .
it shall not contain more than num other materials class x not more than num in class ra bituminous materials and not more than num in class rg crushed glass .
where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source codes anum crushed concrete andor anum crushed bricks masonry .
num num as dug shall mean material that has been excavated transported and placed without any processing .
where imported material undergoes any processing including cleaning and sorting it will not be deemed as dug and thus shall be aggregate complying with bs en num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num snum num use of fill materials num num in addition to any grading requirements the maximum particle size of any fill material shall be no more than twothirds of the compacted layer thickness except that cobbles having an equivalent diameter of more than num mm shall not be deposited beneath verges or central reserves within num m of the finished surface .
num num material placed within num mm or any other distances described in contract specific appendix num of concrete cement bound materials other cementitious materials or stabilised capping forming part of the permanent works shall conform to as appropriate the following requirements .
i materials shall conform to the following criteria a watersoluble sulfate ws content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num shall not exceed num mg of sulfate as snum per litre b total sulfur ts content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num expressed as s shall not exceed num for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or num for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a when described in accordance with bs en num and bs en num annex a limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b the sulfide content of the mixture determined in accordance with bs en num clause num is less than num as snum .
when determining ws ts or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
the mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
this shall also apply if six to nine results are available .
if ten or more results are available the mean of the highest num of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
num num material placed within num mm or any other distances described in contract specific appendix num of metallic structural elements forming part of the permanent works shall conform as appropriate to the following requirements .
i materials shall conform to the following criteria a watersoluble sulfate ws content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num shall not exceed num mg of sulfate as snum per litre and b total sulfur ts content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num expressed as s shall not exceed num for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or num for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a when described in accordance with bs en num and bs en num annex a limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b the sulfide content of the mixture determined in accordance with bs en num clause num is less than num as snum .
when determining ws ts or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
the mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
this shall also applies apply if six to nine results are available .
if ten or more results are available the mean of the highest num of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
the requirements in i and ii above shall not apply to metallic elements protected by concrete or ancillary metallic items such as the tops of chambers and gullies .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num snumf num num unburnt colliery spoil may be used as general fill provided it is compacted in compliance with clause num and complies with the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
num num pulverisedfuel ash shall not be placed within the dimension described in contract specific appendix num below subformation or formation .
num num where pulverisedfuel ash is used the contractor shall for each consignment make available to the overseeing organisation a record of the type and source from which it was obtained and a certificate of results of tests showing that the material complies with the requirements of table num .
numts num determination of moisture condition value mcv of earthworks materials in scotland num num where the moisture condition value mcv is required in contract specific appendix num the mcv determination shall be carried out in accordance with trl report num appendix a sections num to num .
num num where the natural moisture content mcv is required in contract specific appendix num the mcv determination shall be carried out in accordance with trl report num appendix a sections num to num .
num num where the mcv of saturated materials is required in contract specific appendix num the mcv determination shall be carried out in accordance with trl report num appendix a sections num num and num .
num num when required in contract specific appendix num the determination of the mcvmoisture content relation shall be carried out in accordance with trl report num appendix a sections num num and num .
num num an alternative procedure is given in appendix a sections num num and num of trl report num .
the rapid assessment procedure for material acceptability may be used when permitted in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall provide for each moisture condition apparatus mca to be used a test certificate to show that the mca is functioning correctly .
the tests for correct function shall be carried out as described in appendix d of trl report num and the results recorded on form mcanum trl report num appendix b or similar .
all equipment used shall be traceable to national standards .
num num the contractor shall provide for each operator of the mca a certificate which shows the operator has completed an appropriate course of training approved by the overseeing organisation .
the overseeing organisation shall be contacted for details of those organisations able to provide such training .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num wnum national alterations of the overseeing organisation of wales num numw classification definitions and uses of earthworks materials num general num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num general classification num num earthworks materials shall fall into one or other of the following general classifications i acceptable material material excavated from within the site or imported on to the site which meets the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num for acceptability for use in the permanent works ii unacceptable material class unuma as defined in subclauses numia and numib of this clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num shall not be used in the permanent works v unacceptable material class unumb as defined in subclause numiia of this clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num shall not be used in the permanent works and vi unacceptable material class unum as defined in subclause numi of this clause material excavated from within the site which shall not be used in the permanent works .
num unacceptable materials num num unacceptable material classes unuma and unumb i unacceptable material class unuma shall be a material which does not comply with the permitted constituents and material properties of table num and contract specific appendix num for acceptable material and b material or constituents of materials composed of the following unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num peat materials from swamps marshes and bogs logs stumps and perishable material materials in a frozen condition clay having a liquid limit determined in accordance with bs num part num exceeding num or plasticity index determined in accordance with bs num part num exceeding num material susceptible to spontaneous combustion except unburnt colliery spoil complying with subclause num of this clause ii unacceptable material class unumb shall be a contaminated materials including controlled wastes as defined in the environmental protection act num part iia whose level of contamination is above that given either in contract specific appendix num or in contract specific appendix num but excluding all hazardous wastes as volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks wnum amendment february num defined in the hazardous waste england and wales regulations num and radioactive wastes as defined in the radioactive substances act num .
num num unacceptable material class unum shall be i hazardous waste as defined in the hazardous waste england and wales regulations num and radioactive waste as defined in the radioactive substances act num .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num unacceptable material other than class unum shall be processed by mechanical chemical or other means to render the material acceptable for use in the permanent works in accordance with the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num .
num definitions num num where source codes are referred to these shall be for materials from the sources listed in table num .
num num chalk shall mean i any porous material of natural origin composed essentially of calcium carbonate and identified as chalk on the maps produced by the british geological survey ii material designated as class num in contract specific appendix num .
num num argillaceous rock shall mean shales mudstones siltstones slates and micaceous schists composed of particles of clay silt and mica .
it shall include unburnt colliery spoil .
where argillaceous rock is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source codes p natural aggregates described as shale siltstone or slate or gnum refuse from hard coal mining black coal shale .
see subclause num .
num num pulverisedfuel ash shall mean solid material extracted by electrostatic and mechanical means from the flue gases of furnaces fired with pulverised bituminous coal .
it shall have a maximum particle size of num mm .
where pulverisedfuel ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source code cnum coal fly ash .
num num furnace bottom ash shall mean agglomerated pulverisedfuel ash obtained from the bottom of the power station furnace and having particle size no larger than num mm .
where furnace bottom ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source code cnum coal bottom ash .
num num formation shall be the top surface of capping .
where no capping is required formation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of subbase unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
num num subformation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of capping .
num num stabilisation shall mean the spreading of cement or lime or both on a layer of deposited or intact granular or cohesive material and the subsequent process of pulverising and mixing followed by appropriate compaction to form the whole or a constituent layer of a capping .
num num where recycled aggregate is used in this series the material shall be aggregate resulting from the processing of inorganic or mineral material previously used in construction and shall have been tested in accordance with clause num .
it shall not contain more than num other materials class x not more than num in class ra bituminous materials and not more than num in class rg crushed glass .
where recycled aggregate is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source code a construction and demolition recycling industries .
where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is used in this series the aggregate shall have been tested in accordance with clause num .
it shall not contain more than num other materials class x not more than num in class ra bituminous materials and not more than num in class rg crushed glass .
where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source codes anum crushed concrete andor anum crushed bricks masonry .
num num as dug shall mean material that has been excavated transported and placed without any processing .
where imported material undergoes any processing including cleaning and sorting it will not be deemed as dug and thus shall be aggregate complying with bs en num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num wnum num use of fill materials num num in addition to any grading requirements the maximum particle size of any fill material shall be no more than twothirds of the compacted layer thickness except that cobbles having an equivalent diameter of more than num mm shall not be deposited beneath verges or central reserves within num m of the finished surface .
num num materials placed within num mm or any other distances described in the contract specific appendix num of concrete cement bound materials other cementitious mixtures or stabilised capping forming part of the permanent works shall conform to as appropriate the following requirements i materials shall conform to the following criteria a watersoluble sulfate ws content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num shall not exceed num mg of sulfate as snum per litre b total sulfur ts content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num expressed as s shall not exceed num for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or num for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a when described in accordance with bs en num and bs en num annex a limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b the sulfide content of the material determined in accordance with bs en num clause num is less than num as snum .
when determining ws ts or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
the mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
this shall also apply if six to nine results are available .
if ten or more results are available the mean of the highest num of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
num num material placed within nummm or any other distances described in the contract specific appendix num of metallic structural elements forming part of the permanent works shall conform as appropriate to the following requirements i materials shall conform to the following criteria a watersoluble sulfate ws content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num shall not exceed num mg of sulfate as snum per litre and b total sulfur ts content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num expressed as s shall not exceed num for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or num for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a when described in accordance with bs en num and bs en num annex a limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b the sulfide content of the material determined in accordance with bs en num clause num is less than num as snum .
when determining ws ts or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
the mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
this shall also apply if six to nine results are available .
if ten or more results are available the mean of the highest num of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
the requirements in i and ii above shall not apply to metallic items protected by concrete or ancillary metallic items such as the tops of chambers and gullies .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num wnumf num num unburnt colliery spoil may be used as general fill provided it is compacted in compliance with clause num and complies with the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
num num pulverisedfuel ash shall not be placed within the dimension described in contract specific appendix num below subformation or formation .
num num where pulverisedfuel ash is used the contractor shall for each consignment make available to the overseeing organisation a record of the type and source from which it was obtained and a certificate of results of tests showing that the material complies with the requirements of table num .
num num where stated in contract specific appendix num permissible options for fill materials shall include slate or other argillaceous rock materials as stated .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num nnum national alterations of the overseeing organisation of northern ireland numni num classification definitions and uses of earthworks materials num general num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num general classification num num earthworks materials shall fall into one or other of the following general classifications i acceptable material material excavated from within the site or imported on to the site which meets the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num for acceptability for use in the permanent works ii unacceptable material class unuma as defined in subclauses numia and numib of this clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num shall not be used in the permanent works iii unacceptable material class unumb as defined in subclause num iia of this clause material excavated from within the site which unless processed so that it meets the requirements of table num and contract specific appendix num shall not be used in the permanent works and iv unacceptable material class unum as defined in subclause numi of this clause material excavated from within the site which shall not be used in the permanent works .
num unacceptable materials num num unacceptable material classes unuma and unumb i unacceptable material class unuma shall be a material which does not comply with the permitted constituents and material properties of table num and contract specific appendix num for acceptable material and b material or constituents of materials composed of the following unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num peat materials from swamps marshes and bogs logs stumps and perishable material materials in a frozen condition clay having a liquid limit determined in accordance with bs num part num exceeding num or plasticity index determined in accordance with bs num part num exceeding num material susceptible to spontaneous combustion except unburnt colliery spoil complying with subclause num of this clause ii unacceptable material class unumb shall be a contaminated materials including controlled wastes as defined in the waste and contaminated land northern ireland order num whose level of contamination is above that given either in contract specific appendix num or in contract specific appendix num but excluding all hazardous wastes as defined in the hazardous waste regulations northern ireland num and radioactive wastes as defined in the radioactive substances act num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks nnum amendment february num num num unacceptable material class unum shall be i hazardous waste as defined in the hazardous waste regulations northern ireland num and radioactive waste as defined in the radioactive substances act num .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num unacceptable material other than class unum shall be processed by mechanical chemical or other means to render the material acceptable for use in the permanent works in accordance with the requirements of table num and the contract specific appendix num .
num definitions num num where source codes are referred to these shall be for materials from the sources listed in table num .
num num chalk shall mean i any porous material of natural origin composed essentially of calcium carbonate and identified as chalk on the maps produced by the geological survey of northern ireland ii material designated as class num in contract specific appendix num .
num num argillaceous rock shall mean shales mudstones siltstones slates and micaceous schists composed of particles of clay silt and mica .
it shall include unburnt colliery spoil .
where argillaceous rock is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source codes p natural aggregates described as shale siltstone or slate or gnum refuse from hard coal mining black coal shale .
num num pulverisedfuel ash shall mean solid material extracted by electrostatic and mechanical means from the flue gases of furnaces fired with pulverised bituminous coal .
it shall have a maximum particle size of num mm .
where pulverisedfuel ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source code cnum coal fly ash .
num num furnace bottom ash shall mean agglomerated pulverisedfuel ash obtained from the bottom of the power station furnace and having particle size no larger than num mm .
where furnace bottom ash is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source code cnum coal bottom ash .
num num formation shall be the top surface of capping .
where no capping is required formation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of subbase unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
num num subformation shall be the top surface of earthworks at the underside of capping .
num num stabilisation shall mean the spreading of cement or lime or both on a layer of deposited or intact granular or cohesive material and the subsequent process of pulverising and mixing followed by appropriate compaction to form the whole or a constituent layer of a capping .
num num where recycled aggregate is used in this series the material shall be aggregate resulting from the processing of inorganic or mineral material previously used in construction and shall have been tested in accordance with clause num .
it shall not contain more than num other materials class x not more than num in class ra bituminous materials and not more than num in class rg crushed glass .
where recycled aggregate is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source code a construction and demolition recycling industries .
where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is used in this series the aggregate shall have been tested in accordance with clause num .
it shall not contain more than num other materials class x not more than num in class ra bituminous materials and not more than num in class rg crushed glass .
where recycled aggregate except recycled asphalt is imported onto the site it shall be aggregate complying with bs en num from source codes anum crushed concrete andor anum crushed bricks masonry .
num num as dug shall mean material that has been excavated transported and placed without any processing .
where imported material undergoes any processing including cleaning and sorting it will not be deemed as dug and thus shall be aggregate complying with bs en num .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num nnum num use of fill materials num num in addition to any grading requirements the maximum particle size of any fill material shall be no more than twothirds of the compacted layer thickness except that cobbles having an equivalent diameter of more than num mm shall not be deposited beneath verges or central reserves within num m of the finished surface .
num num materials placed within num mm or any other distances described in contract specific appendix num of concrete cement bound materials other cementitious materials or stabilised capping forming part of the permanent works shall conform to as appropriate the following requirements i materials shall conform to the following criteria a watersoluble sulfate ws content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num shall not exceed num mg of sulfate as snum per litre b total sulfur ts content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num expressed as s shall not exceed num for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or num for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii marerials shall conform to at least one of the following options a when described in accordance with bs en num and bs en num annex a limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b the sulfide content of the mixture determined in accordance with bs en num clause num is less than num as snum .
when determining ws ts or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
the mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
this shall also apply if six to nine results are available .
if ten or more results are available the mean of the highest num of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
num num material placed within num mm or any other distances described in contract specific appendix num of metallic structural elements forming part of the permanent works shall conform as appropriate to the following requirements .
i materials shall conform to the following criteria a watersoluble sulfate ws content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num shall not exceed num mg of sulfate as snum per litre and b total sulfur ts content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num expressed as s shall not exceed num for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or num for air cooled blast furnace slag .
ii materials shall conform to at least one of the following options a when described in accordance with bs en num and bs en num annex a limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or b the sulfide content of the mixture determined in accordance with bs en num clause num is less than num as snum .
when determining ws ts or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
the mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
this shall also applies apply if six to nine results are available .
if ten or more results are available the mean of the highest num of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
the requirements in i and ii above shall not apply to metallic elements protected by concrete or ancillary metallic items such as the tops of chambers and gullies .
volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks nnum amendment february num num num unburnt colliery spoil may be used as general fill provided it is compacted in compliance with clause num and complies with the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
num num pulverisedfuel ash shall not be placed within the dimension described in contract specific appendix num below subformation or formation .
num num where pulverisedfuel ash is used the contractor shall for each consignment make available to the overseeing organisation a record of the type and source from which it was obtained and a certificate of results of tests showing that the material complies with the requirements of table num .
numni num explosives and blasting for excavation num num blasting for excavation shall not be employed unless permitted or required in contract specific appendix num and such blasting shall be confined to the locations and to within the time limits stated therein .
num num the contractor shall i not carry out plaster shooting ii for each location where blasting is to be undertaken provide written notice to the overseeing organisation of the programme of blasting including trial explosions at least num days before it commences and give written notice of each blasting event as described in v below at least num hours beforehand iii carry out trial explosions starting with reduced quantities of explosive in order to determine the size of the actual explosive charges and their disposition for use in the main blasting operations so as not to exceed the values for vibrational amplitude and vibrational peak particle velocity stated in vi below at the positions described therein iv determine danger zones likely to be created by the blasting operations including trial explosions within which blasted material may be projected and utilise suitable arrangements including temporary works to retain such projectiles and ensure that no injury or damage is caused to persons or property thereby v limit blasting to a small number of events during permitted hours per day where an event shall comprise a single explosion or a group of explosions each separated by a short time interval the group lasting less than a minute vi ensure that a structures and earthworks existing or under construction on and off the site do not experience during blasting operations including trial explosions a vibrational amplitude exceeding num mm and a resultant peak particle velocity exceeding num mm per second or other limits stated in contract specific appendix num at the same time or individually and b peak overpressures of magnitude such as to endanger windows and glazed areas of structures do not occur vii where instrumentation and monitoring is appropriate a rigidly fix to structures and insert in earthworks described in via above suitable instruments to measure the vibrational amplitude and resultant vibrational peak particle velocity and peak overpressures experienced during blasting operations including trial explosions b make available details of the proposed instrumentation within the site c unless otherwise stipulated in contract specific appendix num make his own arrangements for installing instruments on property off the site including negotiating with landowners and other interested parties volume num series num specification for highway works earthworks amendment february num nnumf d read such instruments and take measurements throughout the period of blasting operations including trial explosions e for instruments on structures or earthworks on the site and where required in contract specific appendix num on property off the site make available the results to the overseeing organisation at the end of each days blasting viii take measurements of vibrational amplitude and peak particle velocity in each of three mutually perpendicular planes and determine the peak value taken as the maximum resultant calculated by vector summation of the three components of amplitude and velocity respectively measured as instantaneously as the resolution of the recording instrument permits ix ensure that noise from blasting operations is controlled in accordance with clause num x use explosives in the quantities and in the manner recommended by the manufacturer xi store explosives in registered premises in a licensed store or magazine provided with a separate compartment for detonators or use them under an immediate use certificate issued by the police xii only permit explosives to be used or handled by or under the immediate control of a competent person in accordance with the construction general provisions northern ireland regulations num regulation num and subsequent amending regulations xiii ensure there is no unauthorised issue or improper use of explosives brought on the site and maintain a strict check on quantities issued and consumed xiv comply with the requirements of bs num in respect of the use of electrical detonators in the vicinity of static and mobile radio transmitters including normal radio and television broadcasting stations and radar units associated with aircraft movements electricity generating plant and transmission lines .
manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works num amendment february num series num road pavements general contents clause title page num num general num num num pavement construction num num num horizontal alignments surface levels and surface regularity of pavement courses num num to num num not used num num num excavation trimming and reinstatement of existing surfaces num num num breaking up or perforation of redundant pavement num num num not used num num num coldmilling planing of bituminous bound flexible pavement num num num testing for constituent materials in recycled aggregate and recycled concrete aggregate num num num overband and inlaid crack sealing systems num num num maintenance of arrester beds num num num sawcut and seal bituminous overlays on existing jointed concrete pavements num num num preparation of jointed concrete pavements prior to overlaying and sawcut and seal of the bituminous overlays num num num sawcut crack and seat existing jointed reinforced concrete pavements num num num cracking and seating of existing jointed unreinforced concrete pavements and hydraulically bound mixture hbm bases num num num monitoring of cracked and seated jointed unreinforced concrete pavements and hbm bases using the falling weight deflectometer fwd num num num monitoring of sawcut cracked and seated jointed reinforced concrete pavements using the falling weight deflectometer fwd num clause title page num num backanalysis of falling weight deflectometer fwd measurements made on concrete pavements treated by fractured slab techniques num national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland northern ireland numni num horizontal alignments surface levels and surface regularity of pavement courses nnum numni num excavation trimming and reinstatement of existing surfaces nnum denotes a clause or sample contract specific appendix which has a substitute national clause or sample contract specific appendix for one or more of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales or northern ireland .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general road pavements general num num general num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num num pavement construction num num road pavements shall be constructed from one of the permitted options described in contract specific appendix num and in compliance with this series and the appropriate clauses of series num num and num .
num num the contractor shall in his choice of permitted materials for subbases and bases have regard to the nature of those materials and of the subgrade or any capping and the need to protect them from deterioration due to the ingress of water the adverse effects of weather and the use of constructional plant .
the contractor shall programme the laying and compaction of the subbase and the subsequent pavement courses and take such other steps as may be considered necessary to afford protection to the base subbase and subgrade .
num num horizontal alignments surface levels and surface regularity of pavement courses horizontal alignments num num horizontal alignments shall be determined from one edge of the pavement surface as described in contract specific appendix num .
the edge of the pavement as constructed and all other parallel alignments shall be correct within a tolerance of num mm therefrom except for kerbs and channel blocks which shall be laid with a smooth alignment within a tolerance of num mm .
longitudinal road markings lateral tolerance shall be in accordance with subclause num .
num surface levels of pavement courses num the design levels of pavement courses shall be calculated from the vertical profile crossfalls and the pavement course thicknesses described in contract specific appendix num .
the level of any point on the constructed surface of the pavement courses shall be the design level subject to the appropriate tolerances stated in table num .
table num num tolerances in surface levels of pavement courses road surfaces general adjacent to a surface water channel num mm num num mm binder course num mm base num mm subbase under concrete pavement surface slabs laid full thickness in one operation by machines with surface compaction num mm subbases other than above num num mm where a surface water channel is laid before the adjacent road pavement layer the top of that layer measured from the top of the adjacent edge of the surface water channel shall be to the tolerances given in table num .
num num notwithstanding the tolerances permitted in surface levels of pavement courses the cumulative tolerance shall not result in a reduction in thickness of the pavement excluding the subbase by more than num mm from the specified thickness nor a reduction in the thickness of the bituminous surface course by more than num mm from that specified .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num num for checking compliance with subclause num of this clause measurements of the surface levels of all courses will be taken on a grid of points located as described in contract specific appendix num .
in any length of pavement compliance shall be deemed to be met for all surfaces other than the final road surface when not more than one of ten consecutive measurements taken longitudinally or one in any transverse line exceeds the tolerances permitted in table num provided that this one measurement shall not exceed by more than num mm the tolerance for the course concerned .
for the final road surface the tolerance given in table num shall apply to any point on that surface .
num surface regularity num num the longitudinal regularity of the surfaces of surface courses binder courses and concrete slabs shall be such that the number of surface irregularities is within the relevant limits stated in table num .
an irregularity is a variation of not less than num mm or not less num mm of the profile of the road surface as measured by the rolling straightedge set at num mm or num mm as appropriate or equivalent apparatus capable of measuring irregularities within the same magnitudes over a num m length .
no irregularity exceeding num mm shall be permitted .
num num prior to checking any final road surface binder course or top surface of base in pavements without binder course for level regularity or macrotexture depth it shall be cleaned of loose or extraneous materials .
these operations shall be carried out without damaging the surface of the pavement as soon as possible and within num days of construction of the pavement .
num num compliance with table num shall be checked by the rolling straightedge along any line or lines parallel to the edge of pavement on sections of num m at regular intervals as stated in contract specific appendix num whether or not it is constructed in shorter lengths .
sections shorter than num m forming part of a longer pavement shall be assessed using the number of irregularities for a num m length prorata to the nearest whole number .
where the total length of pavement is less than num m the measurements shall be taken on num m lengths .
num num pavements shall be measured transversely for irregularities at regular intervals as stated in contract specific appendix num by a num m long straightedge in accordance with bs num placed at right angles to the centre line of the road .
the maximum allowable difference between the pavement surface and the straightedge shall be num mm .
num num a straightedge num metres long shall be used to check longitudinal surface regularity in the following cases i for lengths of less than num m of surface course binder course and concrete slabs ii where use of the rolling straightedge or equivalent apparatus is impracticable iii for all lengths of subbase under concrete pavement slabs laid full thickness in one operation by machine with surface compaction .
the maximum allowable difference between the surface and the underside of the straightedge when placed parallel with or at right angles to the centre line of the road shall be for pavement surfaces num mm for binder courses num mm for subbases under concrete pavements as in iii above num mm num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general table num num maximum permitted number of surface irregularities surfaces of each lane of carriageway each hard strip and each hard shoulder for each irregularity limit surfaces of each lane of bituminous binder courses for carriageway hard strip and hard shoulder for each irregularity limit surfaces of laybys service areas and associated bituminous binder courses for each irregularity limit irregularity limits num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm length m num num num num num num num num num num num num category a roads num num num num num num num num num num num num category b roads num num num num num num num num num num num num the category of each section of road is described in contract specific appendix num .
num rectification num num where any pavement area does not comply with the specification for regularity surface tolerance thickness macrotexture depth material properties or compaction the full extent of the area which does not comply with the specification shall be made good and the surface of the pavement course shall be rectified in the manner described below i unbound and hydraulically bound materials the top num mm shall be scarified reshaped with material added or removed as necessary and re compacted .
the area treated shall be not less than num m long and num m wide .
for hydraulically bound materials all rectification shall be completed within num hours of the binder being added to the material .
ii cement bound subbases and bases the method of correction will depend on the period which has elapsed between detection of the error and the time of mixing of the material .
if this is less than num hours the surface shall be scarified to a depth of not less than num mm surplus material removed or freshly mixed material added as necessary and recompacted in accordance with the specification .
if the period is num hours or more the full depth of the layer shall be removed from the pavement and replaced with material in accordance with the specification .
in either case the area treated shall be at least num m long and the full width of the paving laid in one operation .
if the contractor proposes rectification within num days of laying he shall comply with clause num .
alternatively for subbases under concrete pavements the contractor may make up low areas to a level within the tolerances of this clause with a num cement and sand mortar or with an acnum fine surface course complying with clause num. iii bituminous bases with coated macadam or asphalt bases the full depth of the top layer as laid shall be removed and be replaced with fresh material laid and compacted in accordance with the specification .
any area so treated shall be at least num m long and the full width of the paving laid in one operation .
alternatively for low areas in bituminous bases the contractor may make up the level with additional binder course material .
iv surface courses and binder courses these shall have the full depth of the course removed and replaced with fresh material laid and compacted in accordance with the specification .
the area rectified shall be the full width of the paving laid in one operation and at least num m long if binder course or num m if surface course .
where the number of surface irregularities exceeds the limits in table num the area to be rectified shall be num m or num m long as appropriate and the full width of the lanes affected or such lesser length as necessary to make the number of surface irregularities conform with the limits and shall be the full width of the lanes affected .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general checking of the surface course for compliance with this clause shall be carried out as soon as possible after completion of the surfacing and remedial works completed before the road is opened to traffic .
where the macrotexture depth requirement is not met for a a section num m in lane length or b the full lane length of a section less than num m long as the balance of a complete scheme or c the full lane length of a scheme less than num m long then sufficient num m lengths shall be replaced starting with that length having the least macrotexture depth until the average requirement for the section length is complied with .
a minimum length of num m and the full lane width shall be removed and replaced either a to the full depth of the surface course or b to a depth of num mm when replaced by the repave method process in compliance with clause num .
areas to be removed shall be delineated both longitudinally and transversely by saw cutting prior to the material being removed .
joints shall be formed either by coating the exposed sawn face with hot bitumen or heating by a suitable heater .
the heater shall raise the temperature of the full depth of the course immediately before laying the new material to a figure within the range of minimum rolling temperature and maximum temperature at any stage specified for the material and for a width of not less than num mm .
v concrete slabs concrete slabs shall be rectified by planing grinding or bump cutting .
large depressions which can not be dealt with in this way shall be rectified by cutting out the surface and replacing by a thin bonded surface repair complying with clause num .
retexturing of hardened concrete shall be carried out by sawing grooves in accordance with the specification .
texturing of replaced surfaces shall be by brushing in accordance with the specification .
where the slab can not be rectified as above the full depth of slab shall be removed and replaced with a slab constructed in compliance with clause num to the extent required to obtain compliance with the specification .
remedial works involving the placing of fresh concrete shall be completed in sufficient time for the concrete strength to have developed as required in clause num before that section of pavement is opened to traffic .
num to num num not used num num excavation trimming and reinstatement of existing surfaces num general num num the contractor shall not excavate pits trenches or other openings in paved areas which have been constructed as part of the permanent works in order to construct other parts of the works including statutory undertakers and other service works except with the prior approval of the overseeing organisation .
num num where excavation and trimming of existing paved areas and highways not constructed as part of the permanent works are required in contract specific appendix num they shall be carried out and reinstated in compliance with this clause and with any additional requirements described in contract specific appendix num .
excavations shall be carried out to the dimensions described in contract specific appendix num or if not so described to the minimum dimensions subject to subclause num of this clause necessary to carry out the work .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num excavations num num excavations in existing pavements and other paved areas except those described in subclause num of this clause including surfacing base and subbase shall be cut to neat lines to dimensions at least num mm greater on each side than the dimensions of any further excavation below formation level .
excavations in capping shall be taken at least num mm outside the dimensions of any excavation below .
road surfacing of bituminous material shall be cut back by sawing or planing to a further num mm on each side .
planing shall be carried out in accordance with clause num .
concrete surfacing and concrete bases except cbm shall be cut back by sawing by at least num mm on each side to the level of any reinforcement in reinforced slabs and to the full depth of the slab in unreinforced slabs .
if excavations are required to inspect the condition of lower layers each layer shall be excavated separately and cleaned of debris to permit inspection .
num num concrete blocks clay pavers and precast concrete flags kerbs and channels shall be lifted without cutting to the nearest joint satisfying subclause num of this clause and carefully stored for reuse or dealt with as described in contract specific appendix num .
in situ kerbs and channels shall be broken out to at least num mm beyond the excavation .
num reinstatement of paved areas num num for roads designed to carry traffic loading of num msa or less reinstatements of openings in highways shall comply with the specification for the reinstatement of openings in highways issued by the highway authorities and utilities committee .
the same requirements shall apply for roads designed to carry traffic loading of more than num msa except where otherwise stated in the appropriate clauses of the specification for highway works including the contract specific requirements of appendix num .
num num where foamed concrete is used for the reinstatement of openings in roads carrying more than num msa the requirements of the foamed concrete shall comply with clause num .
num num immediately before bituminous layers are reinstated the edges of the existing material shall be cleaned of all loose material and be coated with an appropriate hot bituminous binder or equivalent treatment .
where joints in concrete slabs are affected by the excavation they shall be reinstated by cutting back to at least num m on each side of a transverse joint and forming an expansion joint on one side of the excavation and a contraction joint on the other and provide longitudinal joints where necessary in the same line before reinstatement in compliance with series num to match the existing construction .
num reinstatement of other areas num where the excavation affects grassed areas unpaved footpaths footways verges and bridleways they shall be reinstated to match the existing surface after backfilling with acceptable material described in contract specific appendix num to a depth of not less than num mm below the finished surface .
num junctions between new pavement construction and existing pavement or other paved areas num num where new pavement construction abuts an existing bituminous pavement which has to be reduced in level or overlaid to match alignment and levels the existing surface shall be trimmed by the minimum amount of coldmilling planing to a depth which will allow the specified thickness of new construction to be laid the edge being trimmed and treated in compliance with this clause .
where the difference in level makes it necessary a regulating course as described in contract specific appendix num and specified in clause num shall be provided .
the locations of areas to be trimmed are given in contract specific appendix num .
num num junctions between concrete pavements and between concrete and bituminous pavements shall be constructed as described in contract specific appendix num .
junctions in porous asphalt surfacing shall comply also with clause num .
junctions between porous asphalt surfacing and other pavement surfaces shall be constructed as described in contract specific appendix num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num compressed air num num when compressed air is used to clean dust dirt and debris from prepared faces of existing concrete or bituminous pavements which are otherwise ready for reinstatement only oilfree compressed air shall be used and this shall be at a pressure of not less than num nmmnum .
num num breaking up or perforation of redundant pavement num where redundant pavement construction is to be perforated or broken up the pavement shall be treated as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num not used num num coldmilling planing of bituminous bound flexible pavement num num where coldmilling of bituminous bound flexible pavement is required the area of carriageway to be milled shall be removed by a suitable milling machine to the requirements specified in contract specific appendix num .
the process shall be carried out so as not to produce excessive quantities of dust which shall be minimised by damping with water sprays .
num num the cut edges shall be left neat vertical and in straight lines .
the contractor shall brush and sweep the milled surface by mechanical means to produce a clean and regular running surface with a groove depth not greater than num mm and with a uniform texture .
num num carriageways shall be milled to the tolerance of num mm .
if the tolerances in this clause are exceeded the full extent of the area which does not comply shall be rectified by further milling or by regulating with materials in accordance with clause num .
num num existing ironwork shall not be disturbed by the milling action .
where necessary surfacing in the vicinity of ironwork and in small or irregular areas shall be cut out by pneumatic tools or other suitable methods and removed .
num num where milling is carried out on a carriageway open to traffic temporary ramping to ensure the safe passage of vehicles shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
num num if the milled surface profile varies by more than num mm when measured transversely or longitudinally by a num metre straightedge adjustments or replacements shall be made to the cutting teeth on the milling drum before work continues .
any discontinuity between adjacent milling passes exceeding num mm when measured transversely by a num metre straightedge shall be rectified by further milling or regulating before placing bituminous materials .
num num where milling is required over extensive areas the contractor shall programme the work to allow removal of full lane widths unless this is impracticable .
the contractor shall notify his proposed programme of milling to the overseeing organisation prior to commencement of the work .
num num immediately after milling surplus materials shall be removed by a machine of suitable and efficient design and the milled surface swept to remove all dust and loose debris .
num num the material removed from the carriageway shall be removed from site unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
no stockpiling shall be allowed on site unless the material is to be used in the works .
num num carriageways which are closed to traffic to permit milling shall be resurfaced after milling prior to reopening the carriageway to traffic unless otherwise agreed by the overseeing organisation .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num num when specified in contract specific appendix num num hours prior to coldmilling the contractor shall carry out a sweep of the areas to locate any buried metalwork within the layer to be coldmilled .
the sweep shall be carried out with electronic detection equipment suitable for the purpose .
the surface shall be clearly marked above all objects to show their detected extent .
the objects shall be referenced and their location and depth reported to the overseeing organisation within num hours of discovery .
surfacing in the vicinity of such objects shall be excavated using pneumatic tools or other suitable methods .
num num testing for constituent materials in recycled aggregate and recycled concrete aggregate num scope num num this clause specifies the basic procedure and test methods for the examination of recycled aggregate and recycled concrete aggregate for the purpose of identifying and quantifying constituent materials .
num quality control procedure num num the quality control procedure shall be in accordance with the quality protocol for the production of aggregates from inert waste and the producers compliance checklist published by waste and resources action programme wrap .
the results of all quality control checks carried out by the contractor shall be compiled in accordance with the procedure set down in the above document and with those in this clause .
these shall be delivered promptly to the overseeing organisation on request .
num test method num num the constituents of a sample of recycled aggregate shall be classified by handsorting the coarse aggregate particles in accordance with bs en num .
the test shall be carried out by a suitably trained laboratory technician who has demonstrated competence in classifying the constituent classes in accordance with the test method .
num num overband and inlaid crack sealing systems num num overbanding and inlaid crack sealing systems shall have current hapas roads and bridges certificates or equivalent .
if no hapas or equivalent certificates have been issued then in the interim only overbanding and inlaid crack sealing systems approved by the overseeing organisation shall be used .
num num a crack sealing system with a current hapas or equivalent certificate shall only be installed by a contractor approved by the certificate holder as an approved installer for that system .
num overbanding crack sealing systems num num the installed width and nominal thickness of overbanding sealants applied on the road surface shall not exceed num mm and num mm respectively .
num inlaid crack sealing systems num num the inlaid crack sealing system hapas grade classification or equivalent required for each location shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
num chippings num num the minimum polished stone value of the source aggregate for chippings applied to the surface of overbanding and inlaid crack sealing systems determined in accordance with bs en num shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num installation and quality control procedures num num the installation and quality control procedures for overbanding and inlaid crack sealing systems shall be in accordance with the hapas or equivalent certificate for each system and the current method statement .
the results of all quality control checks carried out on site by the contractor and quality assurance information compiled in accordance with the requirements of the hapas certificate including results from surveillance visits shall be made available to the overseeing organisation on request .
num initial skid resistance num num the minimum wet skid resistance value of overbanding and inlaid crack sealing systems when newly installed shall not be less than num when determined using the portable skid resistance tester pendulum in accordance with bs en num except that for sealant widths less than num mm the narrow slider shall be used over the full num mm sliding length utilising the normal slider scale c. num num maintenance of arrester beds num num the locations and maintenance requirements of arrester beds are given in contract specific appendix num .
generally the arrester beds comprise an area of ground excavated and replaced with a granular material and having a paved approach .
num num the contractor shall provide advance signing indicating that an arrester bed is closed and shall temporarily cover the permanent signing while this work is carried out .
num num the maintenance work shall comprise i clearance of debris litter and weed growth from granular material and removal off site ii sweeping of loose granular material from channel or paved approach replacement on bed and raking over and levelling the granular material on bed .
num num where there is a series of arrester beds the contractor shall restrict access to only one bed at a time .
num num sawcut and seal bituminous overlays on existing jointed concrete pavements num general num num where shown on the drawings listed in contract specific appendix num a bituminous overlay or inlay as specified in contract specific appendix num shall be laid over the existing concrete pavement which has been either treated or prepared as specified in clause num .
the overlay or inlay shall then be sawcut and sealed above existing transverse joints .
num num prior to the commencement of any preparatory work under subclause num of this clause any and all existing bituminous binder course surfacing and the like shall be removed from the area to be treated as defined in subclause num of this clause .
this requirement shall not apply to work to this clause to correct reflection cracking to existing bituminous surfacing exceeding num mm thickness in rigid composite pavements where so specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num preparatory work to the existing concrete pavement including joints shall comply with clause num .
num num before any tack or bond coating commences the contractor shall ensure that there are adequate stable accurate reference marks delineating all existing transverse pavement joints or sawcuts and that they have been clearly marked and agreed with the overseeing organisation for purposes of accurately locating the positions of sawcuts after overlaying to subclause num of this clause .
the marking procedure and the nature and location of offsets and the means of their establishment shall be agreed in advance with the overseeing organisation in a method statement .
the accuracy of such markings shall be compatible with the specified accuracy of subsequent sawcutting operations to this clause .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num bituminous overlay including tack coat and bond coat num num bituminous overlay shall comply with contract specific appendix num and the relevant clauses of series num .
for the purposes of this clause bituminous overlay shall include all specified regulating course base binder course and surfacing .
tack or bond coating shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
num sawcutting of grooves cleaning and sealing num num sawcutting of grooves cleaning application of bondbreaker tape and sealing of grooves shall be carried out in one continuous operation and shall be completed in its entirety before the surface is opened to site traffic .
this trafficking restriction shall not apply to contractors vehicles and plant necessary to complete the bituminous overlay .
num sawcutting of grooves num num as soon as practicable following the completion of the bituminous overlay in a given area transverse sawcutting of grooves shall be carried out at each of the premarked locations defined in subclause num of this clause .
the positions and dimensions of all such sawcut grooves shall be to the tolerance specified in contract specific appendix num .
the crosssection of sawcut grooves shall comply with figure num .
the sawcut groove shall comprise both the sealant slot and the crackinitiation slot .
the centre line of the crackinitiation slot in the overlay shall be aligned with each existing joint in the underlying concrete pavement to within the tolerance specified in contract specific appendix num .
num sealing num num the area at sawcut grooves in the bituminous overlay at which the sealing material is to be laid shall have been thoroughly cleaned and shall be dry and free from dust detritus or other debris .
the ambient temperature and the temperature of the adjacent bituminous material shall be neither less than numc nor greater than numc .
suitable measures shall be taken to prevent the sealant from entering the crackinitiation slot .
num num sealing at sawcut grooves shall not commence until the line direction and dimensions of each sawcut groove has been verified by the overseeing organisation and the contractor has received written agreement that sealing may commence .
the sawcut grooves shall be sealed to the requirements of clause num with a hotapplied material to clause num .
a sample of the proposed sealant together with the manufacturers certificate and recommendations for its use shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation before any sawcutting commences .
the sealant shall fill the sealant slot to the surface level within the tolerance stated in figure num .
the sealant level and tolerance will be verified within num hours of the application of the sealant .
num num the sealing processes shall be completed after the surfacing course has been completed and before the surface is opened to traffic .
num num preparation of jointed concrete pavements prior to overlaying and sawcut and seal of the bituminous overlays num general num num where specified in contract specific appendix num and shown on the drawings the existing jointed un reinforced or reinforced cementitious pavement shall be prepared in accordance with this clause before receiving a bituminous overlay which will then be sawcut and sealed in accordance with clause num .
num acceptance of the main work num num once the preparation work to this clause has been accepted by the overseeing organisation for a specified portion of the total area the bituminous overlay including any tack or bond coating may proceed .
then the sawcutting and sealing shall be carried out and accepted solely in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num checking and repair of joints num num all joints arrises and temporary repairs shall be checked and repaired in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
num removal of debris brushing and cleaning before overlay num num before work to this clause commences the area shall be cleared of all debris and detritus and then be thoroughly brushed clean .
similar cleaning shall be carried out on completion of work to this clause and prior to tack or bond coating in preparation for overlaying with the specified bituminous material .
num num sawcut crack and seat existing jointed reinforced concrete pavements num general num num where shown on the drawings listed in contract specific appendix num the existing reinforced concrete pavement layers shall be sawcut and cracked and seated with plant and equipment to which the overseeing organisations consent has been given and shall comply with this clause .
the treated surface shall then be prepared in accordance with clause num and tack or bond coated in accordance with contract specific appendix num prior to overlaying in the locations specified in contract specific appendix num .
figure num num detail of sawcut and seal groove with sealant in bituminous overlay num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num num prior to the commencement of any sawcutting operations any existing asphalt overlay and surfacing shall be removed from the area to be treated under this clause to the full width of each lane up to the adjoining longitudinal joints unless directed otherwise by the overseeing organisation .
removal of any overlay shall be completed ahead of the works at a distance of not less than num m from the sawcutting operation .
the contractor shall also ensure that adequate reference location marks based on the overseeing organisations chainage have been clearly marked and agreed with the overseeing organisation for purposes of accurately recording progress and the locations of changes to equipment settings .
num num before any of the main sawcut and crack and seat work is commenced a main trial shall be carried out as specified in subclause num of this clause .
after the main trial the contractor shall locate all bay joints repair joints and any existing transverse cracks and shall preplan and mark the positions of the intended transverse saw cuts using the transverse sawcut spacing determined from the main trial .
if the contractor foresees any difficulty in complying with this subclause he shall immediately inform the overseeing organisation and shall not proceed with sawcutting in such areas until he has received appropriate instructions from the overseeing organisation .
num num unless directed otherwise by the overseeing organisation cracking and seating operations shall not take place unless there is adequate side restraint in place from the adjacent verges and central reserve assisted by any temporary works which may be necessary .
num num compliance with this clause shall be assessed by i examining the concrete surface for spalling ii examining the depth and severity of cracking and the depth of sawcuts by means of core extraction iii measuring the spacing of sawcuts and iv recording the number of passes of the seating roller .
where required in contract specific appendix num the effective stiffness modulus andor joint efficiency of the cracked concrete layer or layers will be calculated from falling weight deflectometer fwd measurements .
the overseeing organisation may then instruct any variation required in the spacing of sawcuts andor method and pattern of cracking andor subsequently confirm or otherwise the thickness of overlay required .
num num the sequence of operations shall be i preplanning and marking of the positions of intended transverse sawcuts ii sawcutting of the concrete pavement at the spacing and depths specified in contract specific appendix num iii verification of sawcut depths iv inducing transverse cracks v extracting cores and vi seating .
the observation of the surface crack pattern and examination of the cores shall be carried out in daylight or under sufficient artificial light provided by the contractor to the satisfaction of the overseeing organisation .
where fwd measurements are specified in contract specific appendix num these will follow the seating operation and shall be made by the contractor in accordance with clause num unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
processing and analysis of the fwd results shall be performed by the contractor in accordance with clause num unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
the road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the overseeing organisations written confirmation that his interpretation of the fwd measurements is complete and that the condition of the treated pavement is in accordance with the design requirements .
num num if for reasons other than those in subclauses num and num of this clause it either i becomes necessary for the contractor to change any plant equipment andor method or ii the contractor makes unplanned use of different or additional plant he shall carry out a special trial which shall be so named but otherwise shall be in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause .
num sawcutting of concrete pavement num num transverse sawcutting of the concrete pavement shall be carried out to comply with this clause including the particular requirements in contract specific appendix num .
num num the position of all sawcuts shall be clearly marked by the contractor on the surface of the concrete prior to cutting .
the spacing of sawcuts to be used for the main trial in subclauses num to num of this clause shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
no sawcuts shall be made within the distance stated in contract specific appendix num from an existing transverse joint or crack .
the sawcuts shall be made at the marked positions and shall be transverse to the longitudinal axis of the carriageway and within the tolerances specified in contract specific appendix num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num num the depth of all sawcuts shall be measured from the top surface of the concrete pavement slab .
the minimum depth of sawcuts shall be just sufficient to cut completely through the longitudinal steel reinforcement but this depth shall in no circumstances exceed num of the nominal depth of the concrete pavement layer .
when such a sawcut fails to fully cut through the reinforcing steel the cracking operation shall not proceed within num m of the incompletely cut bar .
this fact shall be recorded by the contractor who shall report it to the overseeing organisation as soon as practicable .
this report shall be confirmed within num hours .
sawcutting shall also cease immediately and not recommence on the same slab until so instructed by the overseeing organisation .
if there has been any overcutting this shall be remedied in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
num num each sawcut and the carriageway surface adjacent to it shall be thoroughly cleaned of the slurry produced by sawing and any other detritus prior to cracking .
num cracking num num induced cracking of existing pavement layer or layers shall be carried out to comply with this clause including the particular requirements in contract specific appendix num .
num num transverse cracks at the positions of the sawcuts shall be induced by suitable plant with a guillotine action capable of delivering controlled variable preset impact loads to the concrete surface .
the plant used to crack the concrete pavement layer or layers shall be selfpropelled and have all wheels fitted with rubber tyres .
the compressive strength of the existing concrete shall be provided by the overseeing organisation in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall keep records of i the settings to his plant and equipment ii the chainage and iii the time at which each and every adjustment is made to the plant and equipment .
such records shall be in accordance with the pro forma in contract specific appendix num for the cracking plant and equipment progress record and shall be available on demand for inspection by the overseeing organisation .
cracks shall be induced in the concrete underlying the sawcut by one strike of the impacting head of such plant .
the contractor shall take suitable measures to ensure that the plant and impact head are of sufficient mass and geared to prevent both head bounce and any associated surface damage arising therefrom .
the impact force shall be adjustable to achieve the cracking specified and the minimum force consistent with no damage to either the sawcut or to the adjoining concrete surface .
excessive impact forces which cause multiple cracking or shattering of the underside of the concrete slab or to the underlying or adjacent layers shall not be permitted .
if such damage does occur the contractor shall carry out remedial measures in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
num num the induced cracks shall extend from the bottom of the concrete slab to the base of the sawcut and shall be predominantly vertical .
they shall extend the full width of each concrete bay .
the generation of longitudinal cracks is undesirable and those produced within the highway traffic wheel track zones of length greater than the longitudinal spacing of the sawcuts specified in contract specific appendix num or derived from a main trial shall constitute a failure under subclause num of this clause .
num num where the full width of any existing pavement layer can not be cracked transversely with one pass of the crack inducing plant further parallel passes shall be made as necessary so that all subsequent transverse cracks are aligned with those from the preceding pass within the tolerances specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall adjust his equipment and methods so that i full depth fine vertical cracks in the concrete layer or layers are obtained ii shattering of the concrete at the surface andor at the bottom of the slab is avoided and iii treated areas are rendered suitable for overlaying to the satisfaction of the overseeing organisation .
the cracking operation shall not proceed more than num metres beyond the last accepted core in the assessment under subclause num of this clause .
cracking shall not commence on a given sawcut until it has been cut over its entire width to the appropriate depth in accordance with this clause .
num coring num num the contractor shall take cores in accordance with subclauses num num num and num of this clause and with contract specific appendix num at locations selected by the overseeing organisation .
all holes from which core samples have been extracted shall be filled with new hydraulically bound material equivalent to that in the surrounding pavement and adequately compacted in layers each not exceeding num mm thickness .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num seating num num following cracking all the cracked pavement layer shall be seated with a multiwheeled pneumatic tyred roller with a weight of not less than num tonnes compliant with contract specific appendix num and with the number of passes specified in contract specific appendix num .
the load including any ballast shall be distributed uniformly over all the wheels .
the drive gear shall provide a progressive variable speed forward and reversing capability .
such compaction plant shall have articulating wheels on both front and rear axles .
the wheel arrangement shall provide an overlap of not less than num mm with the adjacent wheels .
the internal pressure of the tyres shall be adjustable to provide variable ground contact pressure gcp .
the contractor shall certify in an agreed form on a daily basis the exact extent of work completed under this subclause and shall deliver each such certificate to the overseeing organisation before noon the next day .
num num where voids under the pavement permit rocking at the ends of the slabs that is not remedied by the seating operation under subclause num of this clause this shall be deemed to be unstable seating .
this shall require additional parallel sawcuts followed by cracking at suitable positions sufficient to enable stable seating to be achieved to the satisfaction of the overseeing organisation .
num num once sawcutting and cracking and seating and any remedial work under subclause num of this clause have been completed the pavement shall be prepared to clause num before overlay .
num main trial area num num the contractor shall demonstrate that the plant equipment and method that he proposes for the saw cut and cracking and seating of the existing concrete layer or layers are capable of producing the required depth of sawcut and required type of cracks .
this shall be demonstrated by first executing a main trial over an area neither less than num mnum nor greater than num mnum of existing pavement .
the location and area of the trial shall be as directed by the overseeing organisation and shall include a length of the most heavily trafficked lane .
the contractor shall demonstrate that the sawcutting and cracking operation can achieve consistent compliance with this subclause and with subclauses num num num num num and num of this clause and with contract specific appendix num .
if the road pavement to be treated contains known areas where there are significant differences in the concrete thickness or the concrete strength or in the conditions of the reinforcement or foundations then a main trial shall be conducted in each such area .
the locations of preexisting transverse cracks within the main trial shall be recorded by the contractor .
the work on the main trial length shall proceed as follows i sawcutting and cracking shall proceed in stages as directed by the overseeing organisation .
each stage that is cracked and seated shall be assessed in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
ii stage num of the main trial shall be on num no .
slab .
the contractor shall set up his plant and equipment and demonstrate that he can produce the required pattern and quality of sawcuts and transverse cracks in accordance with this clause including contract specific appendix num .
this shall be assessed in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
iii in stage num and any subsequent stage of the main trial a length encompassed by num no .
sawcuts shall be cracked starting from one end to produce transverse cracks at the sawcut spacing stated in contract specific appendix num .
for each stage the settings of the cracking plant and equipment shall be recorded in accordance with the pro forma in contract specific appendix num .
the cracked pavement shall then be seated in accordance with the method in subclauses num and numv of this clause .
iv seating after cracking the pavement shall be seated with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num as described in subclause num of this clause .
num assessment of main trial num num compliance with the sawcutting and the cracking and seating requirements for the main trial shall be assessed as follows i the depths of the sawcutting shall be checked by the contractor before cracking .
ii the spacing of transverse sawcuts will be checked by the contractor before cracking .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general iii the surface cracking patterns shall be checked by the overseeing organisation either before or after seating by the contractor .
iv the depth of the sawcut and the depth and vertical direction of cracking shall be determined by coring through the full depth of the concrete pavement layer or layers symmetrically at any transverse position along the length of the sawcut .
core diameter shall be in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
in stage num the contractor may select the number and position of cores to be taken .
in stage num and in subsequent stages of the main trial the number of cores shall be in accordance with table num with not less than one core taken from alternate sawcuts .
these shall be at locations selected by the overseeing organisation .
if the depth of sawcut exceeds the specified depth or if any shattering or multiple cracking is present in the extracted core then it is deemed to require remedial work in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
v the contractors seating certificates required under subclause num of this clause will be checked by the overseeing organisation .
if the number of roller passes required for seating is not in accordance with subclause num of this clause the contractor shall roll the entire area again in accordance with subclause num of this clause with not less than the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num fwd testing of effective stiffness modulus shall be performed before sawcutting and after seating in stage num and any subsequent stages of the main trial .
the fwd testing shall be performed by the contractor in accordance with clause num unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num both i before cracking and ii after seating in accordance with this clause .
unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall perform the processing and analysis of the fwd measurements in accordance with clause num and will present the results to the overseeing organisation for interpretation and instruction .
the contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement in the main trial lengths before fwd measurements are made .
sawcutting of stage num or subsequent stages of the main trial shall not commence until the overseeing organisation has interpreted the analysed fwd measurements undertaken before cracking and has confirmed or otherwise the suitability of the area selected for the main trial .
num consent to the method and acceptance of the main trial num num the contractor shall not proceed with the main work until the overseeing organisation has given its consent that the plant equipment and methods used in the main trial length comply with the requirements in table num .
consent to use the plant equipment and methods of sawcutting and cracking and seating will be given by the overseeing organisation following a successful demonstration in the main trial that the sawcutting and the cracking and seating complies with the requirements of this clause and that the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated pavement andor underlying foundation derived from fwd testing meets the design criteria .
when consent by the overseeing organisation to the method has been given the plant equipment and methods shall not be changed thereafter without the prior consent of the overseeing organisation except for normal adjustment and maintenance of plant .
should it be necessary for the contractor to otherwise change any plant equipment andor method the contractor may be required to carry out a further main trial stage .
num main production work num num the sawcutting and cracking operation for the main production work shall proceed using the parameters as determined from the main trial or from any relevant subsequent sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial .
the seating operation shall be completed by rolling the pavement with the number of passes specified in contract specific appendix num .
the main work shall be assessed in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
as required in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall make allowance in his programme for fwd measurements of effective stiffness modulus which will be made by the contractor according to clause num after seating in accordance with this clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor will perform the processing and analysis of the fwd measurements in accordance with clause num unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num and will present the results to the overseeing organisation for interpretation and instruction .
the contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement before fwd measurements are made .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num num the contractor shall be responsible for the continuous observation of the operation .
the location of preexisting transverse cracks shall be recorded by the contractor .
should the results vary from those to which consent was given in the main trial or from any relevant subsequent sawcutting and cracking reassessment trail with the consent of the overseeing organisation the contractor shall adjust the plant and equipment andor sawcut depth in order to produce the agreed results .
the new settings of the plant and equipment shall be recorded by the contractor together with the location at which it was changed .
these particulars shall be delivered to the overseeing organisation within num hours of the changes being completed .
if the agreed surface crack pattern is not restored within num m production cracking shall cease in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
a sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial shall then be carried out in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause before any further production sawcutting and cracking and seating work is executed .
num num the depth of sawcutting shall be measured before cracking .
if the depth is not within the depth as specified in contract specific appendix num the sawcutting shall cease .
if the sawcut is too shallow it shall be re cut until it is within tolerance .
if the sawcut is too deep it shall be deemed noncompliant under subclause numiv of this clause .
the sawcut depth shall be brought within tolerance for subsequent cuts .
num num the depth of the sawcutting and the depth and quality of the induced cracks shall be monitored by inspection of extracted cores .
if there has been any noncompliance with subclause numiv of this clause production sawcutting and cracking shall cease immediately .
the extent of the area affected shall be determined as specified in subclause num of this clause .
num assessment of the main production work num num compliance with the sawcutting and the cracking and seating requirements shall be assessed during the main work in accordance with the following criteria i the spacing and depths of transverse sawcuts will be monitored by the overseeing organisation .
ii the surface pattern of cracking of all areas that have been cracked and seated shall be checked by the contractor and will be monitored by the overseeing organisation .
iii the depth of sawcut and the depth and the vertical direction of cracking through the full depth of the concrete pavement layer or layers shall be determined symmetrically at the sawcut position .
core diameter shall be in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
the minimum frequency for coring of sawcut and cracked and seated concrete is specified in contract specific appendix num. iv the seating shall be assessed in accordance with subclause numv of this clause .
num acceptance of the main production work num num the main work under this clause shall be accepted when it complies fully with the requirements of this clause and table num .
num failure to comply and remedial work num num the results of the sawcut and crack and seat operations of any num m length of jointed reinforced concrete shall be rejected if they fail to comply with any of the criteria in subclause num of this clause .
if i shattering or multiple cracking of concrete material occurs within the extracted core or ii excessive spall damage is caused to be arrises of the sawcuts or iii the length of any longitudinal cracks in the highway traffic wheel tracks are in excess of the spacing of the induced transverse cracks or iv the spacing of the transverse sawcuts is outside the tolerance specified in contract specific appendix num or v the depth of the transverse sawcuts is greater than the depth specified in contract specific appendix num amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general or any combination of these then the following remedial measures shall be taken .
the size of the affected area shall be determined and the rejected sections shall be broken out excavated to full depth and reinstated with equivalent material unless otherwise instructed by the overseeing organisation .
the positions of the highway traffic wheel tracks to which reference is made in this clause shall be as defined in subclause num .
if the number of roller passes required for seating is less than the number of passes specified in contract specific appendix num at each and every point on the pavement then the contractor shall roll the entire area again with not less than the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num unless otherwise instructed by the overseeing organisation .
num num the extent of shattering or multiple cracking or the extent to which the depth of the sawcut is outside the specified tolerance shall be determined by extracting and inspecting cores .
such cores shall be taken through a sawcut within the area between the position of the crackinducing plant and the last core in which the sawcutting and cracking complied with the requirements of subclause num of this clause .
the extent of longitudinal cracking in the highway traffic wheel tracks shall be determined by visual inspection .
num sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial num num when in the opinion of the overseeing organisation the conditions so require a sawcut and cracking reassessment trial shall take place .
the reassessment trial described in this subclause and in subclauses num num num and num of this clause shall require the contractor to demonstrate that the plant equipment and method to which consent was given by the overseeing organisation for use in the main production work are capable of producing the required effective stiffness modulus in the existing concrete layer or layers by executing this trial over an area of neither less than num mnum nor greater than num mnum of existing pavement .
the location of the trial shall be as directed by the overseeing organisation .
the sawcut spacings shall be as directed by the overseeing organisation within the tolerances specified in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall demonstrate that the sawcutting and the cracking operations can achieve consistent compliance with subclause num of this clause .
the sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial length shall be seated with the number of roller passes specified in contract specific appendix num .
where fwd measurements are required by contract specific appendix num the contractor shall make programme allowance for these which shall be made by the contractor according to clause num before sawing and after cracking in accordance with this clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall perform the processing and analysis of the fwd measurements in accordance with clause num and shall present the results to the overseeing organisation for interpretation and instruction .
the contractor shall remove debris from the cracked pavement in the reassessment trial length before fwd measurements are made .
the production cracking reassessment trial length shall be seated with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num .
num assessment of sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial num num compliance with the sawcutting and cracking and seating requirements for the sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial shall be assessed in accordance with subclauses num and num above .
num consent to use the method and acceptance of the sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial num num the contractor shall not resume the main work until the overseeing organisation has given its consent that the plant equipment and methods used in the sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial comply with the requirements given in table num .
consent to the plant equipment and methods will be given by the overseeing organisation following a successful demonstration in the sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial that the sawcutting and cracking and seating complies with the requirements of this clause .
when consent to the method by the overseeing organisation has been given the plant equipment and methods shall not be changed thereafter without the prior consent of the overseeing organisation except for normal adjustment and maintenance of plant .
should it be necessary for the contractor to otherwise change any plant equipment andor method the contractor shall carry out a further saw cutting and cracking reassessment trial .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general table num num sawcut crack and seat existing jointed reinforced concrete pavements assessment criteria for acceptance of trials and for the main production work type of trial or work category criteria transverse spacings and depths of sawcuts num crack quality and extent num coring to determine depth of sawcut and severity depth and vertical direction of cracking num seating num fwd monitoring where required not part of the assessment of contractors work num main trial stage num i as specified in contract specific appendix num ii checked by the contractor .
i no longitudinal crack length sawcut spacing ii monitored by the contractor .
i cores shall be taken through sawcuts at locations chosen by the contractor .
i monitored by the contractor ii roll with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num .
none required .
may be done for by the overseeing organisation at his request .
main trial stage num and subsequent stages i as specified in contract specific appendix num ii monitored by the overseeing organisation .
i no wheeltrack longitudinal crack length sawcut spacing ii monitored by the overseeing organisation .
i cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the overseeing organisation ii not less than num cores in each stage with not less than num core per alternate transverse sawcut .
i monitored by the overseeing organisation ii roll with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor to either a determine and record the minimum effective stiffness modulus from fwd measurements and core details provided by the contractor or b determine vertical movement at joints before and after treatment .
acceptance of main trial stage num and subsequent stages i required tolerance on transverse spacing and depth of sawcutting achieved .
i crack pattern complies with i above .
i no multiple cracks or shattering within the core ii cores shall have a single crack from the bottom of the sawcut to the full depth of the concrete iii cracks shall be predominantly vertical iv depths of sawcut to be within specified tolerances v depth of each sawcut depth to bottom of local transverse steel .
i certification by the contractor that each point has been rolled with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor to either a produce a record of the measured effective stiffness modulus for i the concrete pavement and ii the foundation combination after the saw cutting and cracking andor seating or b produce a record of measurements of vertical movement at joints before and after treatment .
main production work i as specified in contract specific appendix num ii monitored by the contractor .
i no wheeltrack longitudinal crack length sawcut spacing ii monitored by the contractor .
i cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the overseeing organisation ii not less than num core per area specified in contract specific appendix num iii monitored by the contractor .
i roll each point with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num. ii monitored by the contractor .
the contractor to either a determine and record the effective stiffness modulus from fwd measurements and core details provided by the contractor on every num m length after cracking andor seating or b determine the vertical movement at joints after treatment .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general type of trial or work category criteria transverse spacings and depths of sawcuts num crack quality and extent num coring to determine depth of sawcut and severity depth and vertical direction of cracking num seating num fwd monitoring where required not part of the assessment of contractors work num acceptance of the main production work i required tolerance on transverse spacing of saw cutting achieved .
i crack pattern complies with i above .
i no multiple cracks or shattering within the core ii cores shall have a single crack from the bottom of the sawcut to the full depth of the concrete iii cracks shall be predominantly vertical iv depths of sawcut to be within specified tolerances v depth of each saw cut depth to bottom of local transverse steel .
i certification by the contractor that each point has been rolled with not less than the number of passes specified in contract specific appendix num. i not required for compliance monitoring ii required for confirmation of structural design .
sawcutting and cracking reassessment trial i sawcut spacing as specified by the overseeing organisation to the tolerance specified in contract specific appendix num ii monitored by the overseeing organisation .
i no wheeltrack longitudinal crack length transverse crack spacing ii monitored by the overseeing organisation .
i cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the overseeing organisation ii not less than num cores with not less than num core per alternate transverse sawcut iii monitored by the overseeing organisation .
i roll each point with not the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num ii monitored by the overseeing organisation .
the contractor to either a determine and record the minimum effective stiffness modulus on every num m length after seating from fwd measurements and core details provided by the contractor or b determine vertical movement at joints before and after treatment .
acceptance of a saw cutting and cracking reassessment trial i required tolerance on transverse sawcutting achieved .
i crack pattern complies with i above .
i no multiple cracks or shattering within the core ii cores shall have a single crack to the full depth of the concrete iii cracks shall be predominantly vertical iv depths of sawcut to be within specified tolerances v depth of each saw cut depth to bottom of local transverse steel .
i certification by the contractor that each point has been rolled with not less than the number of passes specified in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor to either a produce a record of the measured effective stiffness modulus for i the concrete pavement and ii the foundation combination both before and after the sawcutting and cracking and or seating or b produce a record of measurements of vertical movement at joints before and after treatment .
table num num sawcut crack and seat existing jointed reinforced concrete pavements assessment criteria for acceptance of trials and for the main production work continued num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num num cracking and seating of existing jointed unreinforced concrete pavements and hydraulically bound mixture hbm bases num general num num where shown on the drawings listed in contract specific appendix num the existing unreinforced hydraulically bound pavement layer or layers shall be cracked and seated with plant and equipment to which the overseeing organisations consent has been given and shall comply with this clause .
the treated surface shall be then be prepared in accordance with clause num and tack or bond coated in accordance with contract specific appendix num prior to overlaying where specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num prior to the commencement of any operations to induce cracks any existing asphalt overlay and surfacing shall be removed from the area to be treated for the full width of each lane up to the adjacent longitudinal joints unless directed otherwise by the overseeing organisation .
removal of any overlay shall be completed ahead of the works at a distance of not less than num m from the cracking operation .
the contractor shall also ensure that adequate reference marks based on the overseeing organisations chainage have been clearly marked and agreed with the overseeing organisation for purposes of accurately recording progress and locations of changes to equipment settings .
num num before any of the main crack and seat work is commenced a main trial shall be carried out in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause .
after the main trial the contractor shall locate all bay joints and repair joints or existing cracks in the concrete pavement or hbm and shall preplan and mark the positions of the intended induced cracks at these locations using the transverse crack spacing determined from the main trial .
if the contractor foresees any difficulty in complying with this subclause he shall immediately draw this to the attention of the overseeing organisation and shall not proceed with cracking in such areas until he has received appropriate instructions from the overseeing organisation .
num num cracking and seating operations shall not take place unless there is adequate side restraint in place from the adjacent verges and central reserve assisted by any temporary works which may be necessary .
all cracking and seating operations shall be completed before the commencement of any excavation which in the opinion of the overseeing organisation would remove adequate side restraint in the adjacent verges andor central reserve .
num num compliance with this clause shall be assessed by i examining the generated crack pattern on the surface of the jointed concrete or hbm base layer ii examining the depth and severity of cracking by means of core extraction iii measuring the spacing of the induced cracks and iv recording the number of passes of the seating roller .
the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked hydraulically bound layer or layers and underlaying foundation will be calculated from falling weight deflectometer fwd measurements .
the overseeing organisation may then instruct any variation required in the method and pattern of cracking or subsequently confirm or otherwise the thickness of overlay required .
num num the sequence of operations for the main production work shall be i where necessary preplanning and marking of the positions of induced transverse cracks ii application of clean water to assist examination of the crack pattern iii inducing transverse cracks iv observation of the surface crack pattern v extracting cores and vi seating .
the observation of the surface crack pattern and examination of the cores shall be carried out in daylight or under sufficient artificial light provided by the contractor to the satisfaction of the overseeing organisation .
fwd measurements will follow the seating operation and shall be performed by the contractor in accordance with clause num unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
processing and analysis of the fwd results shall be performed by the contractor in accordance with clause num unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
the road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the overseeing organisations written confirmation that the overseeing organisation has completed its interpretation of the fwd measurements and that the condition of the treated pavement is in accordance with the design requirements .
num num once the main crack and seat operation has commenced its efficacy shall be kept under review by the contractor in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause .
if due to variations in the strength or other physical characteristics of the hydraulically bound pavement layer or of the foundation or otherwise the crack pattern varies from that confirmed in the main trial the equipment shall be adjusted as described in subclauses num and num of this clause to produce the required crack pattern .
if the crack pattern obtained in the main trial is not amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general reestablished within num bays for jointed unreinforced concrete pavements or within num m for hbm bases then production cracking shall stop immediately .
the contractor shall report such circumstances to the overseeing organisation orally within num hour and confirm it in writing within num hours .
a production cracking reassessment trial shall then be carried out in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause before any further cracking and seating work is executed at the relevant area .
num num if for reasons other than those in subclause num of this clause it either i becomes necessary for the contractor to change any plant equipment andor method or ii the contractor makes unplanned use of different or additional plant he shall carry out a special trial which shall be so named but otherwise shall be in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause .
num cracking num num induced cracking of existing pavement layer or layers shall be carried out to comply with this clause including the particular requirements in contract specific appendix num .
num num transverse cracks at the required spacing shall be induced by suitable plant with a guillotine action capable of delivering variable preset impact loads to the concrete surface .
the plant used to crack the hydraulically bound pavement layer or layers shall be selfpropelled and have all wheels fitted with rubber tyres .
the compressive strength of the existing concrete shall be provided by the overseeing organisation in contract specific appendix num .
the required spacing of cracks for the main trial in subclauses num to num of this clause shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
the required spacing thereafter shall be as confirmed by the overseeing organisation on completion of the main trial .
the contractor shall keep records of i the settings to his plant and equipment ii the crack spacing iii the chainage and iv the time at which each and every adjustment is made to the plant and equipment .
such records shall be in accordance with the pro forma in contract specific appendix num for the cracking plant and equipment progress record and shall be available on demand for inspection by the overseeing organisation .
cracks shall be induced by one strike of the impacting head of such plant without producing undue surface shatter .
the plant and impact head shall be of sufficient mass and geared to prevent both head bounce and any associated surface damage arising therefrom .
the impact force shall be adjustable to achieve the cracking specified using the minimum force consistent with no surface shatter .
excessive impact forces which cause multiple cracking or shattering of the underside of the concrete slab or to the underlying or adjacent layers shall not be permitted .
if such damage does occur the contractor shall carry out remedial measures in accordance with subclauses num or num of this clause as appropriate .
num num the induced cracks shall be predominantly vertical and shall be transverse to the direction of the road .
they shall extend the full width of each concrete bay or the lane width of a hbm base .
the generation of longitudinal cracks is undesirable and those produced within the highway traffic wheel track zones of length greater than the spacing of the induced transverse cracks shall constitute a failure under clause num of this clause .
num num where the full width of any existing pavement layer can not be cracked transversely with one pass of the crack inducing plant further parallel passes shall be made as necessary so that all subsequent transverse cracks are aligned with those from the preceding pass within the tolerances specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall be responsible for i adjusting his equipment and methods so that the requisite crack pattern is maintained ii producing full depth fine vertical cracks in the hydraulically bound layer or layers and iii rendering treated areas suitable for overlaying to the satisfaction of the overseeing organisation .
for all trials and for all production cracking operations the contractor shall provide clean water and shall saturate the surface area of the pavement which is to be cracked .
the surface shall be allowed to dry naturally or shall be dried artificially so that it becomes surface dry before visual inspection is made of the induced crack pattern .
the cracking operation shall not proceed more than num metres beyond the last accepted core in the assessment under subclause num of this clause .
num coring num num the contractor shall take cores in accordance with subclauses num num num and num of this clause and with contract specific appendix num at locations selected by the overseeing organisation .
all holes from which core samples have been extracted shall be filled with new hydraulically bound material equivalent to that in the surrounding pavement and adequately compacted in layers each not exceeding num mm thickness .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num seating num num following cracking all of the cracked pavement layer shall be seated with a multiwheeled pneumatic tyred roller with a weight specified in contract specific appendix num and with the number of passes specified in contract specific appendix num .
the load including any ballast shall be distributed uniformly over all the wheels .
the drive gear shall provide a progressive variable speed forward and reversing capability .
such compaction plant shall have articulating wheels on both front and rear axles .
the wheel arrangement shall provide an overlap of not less than num mm with the adjacent wheels .
the internal pressure of the tyres shall be adjustable to provide variable ground contact pressure gcp .
the contractor shall certify in an agreed form on a daily basis the exact extent of work completed under this subclause and shall deliver each such certificate to the overseeing organisation before noon the next day .
num num once cracking and seating and any remedial work under subclause num of this clause have been completed the pavement shall be prepared to clause num before overlay .
num main trial num num the contractor shall demonstrate that the plant equipment and method that he proposes for the cracking and seating of the existing hydraulically bound layer or layers are capable of producing the required type and pattern of cracks .
this shall be demonstrated by first executing a main trial over an area of neither less than num mnum nor greater than num mnum of existing pavement .
the location of the trial shall be as directed by the overseeing organisation and shall include a length of the most heavily trafficked lane .
the contractor shall demonstrate that the cracking operation can achieve consistent compliance with this subclause and with subclauses num and num of this clause and with contract specific appendix num .
if the road pavement to be treated contains known areas where there are differences in the concrete thickness or strength or in the foundation conditions then a main trial shall be conducted in each such area .
the locations of preexisting transverse cracks within the area of the main trial shall be recorded by the contractor .
the work on the main trial length shall proceed as follows i cracking shall proceed in stages as directed by the overseeing organisation in groups of four to six bays in jointed concrete pavements or in lengths of num m for hbm bases .
each group that is cracked and seated shall be assessed in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
ii in stage num of the main trial the contractor shall set up his plant and equipment and demonstrate that he can produce the required pattern and quality of transverse cracks in accordance with this clause including contract specific appendix num .
this shall be assessed in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
iii in stage num and each subsequent stage of the main trial a group of four bays in jointed concrete pavements or a length of num m for hbm bases shall be cracked starting from one end to produce transverse cracks at each of the spacings stated in item numi of contract specific appendix num .
for each stage the settings of the cracking plant and equipment shall be recorded in accordance with the pro forma in contract specific appendix num. iv seating after cracking in both stage num and stage num the pavement shall be seated with the number of roller passes specified in contract specific appendix num and as described in subclause num of this clause .
num assessment of main trial num num compliance with the cracking and seating requirements for the main trial shall be assessed as follows i the surface pattern of cracking shall be checked before seating but after applying clean water and allowing to dry as specified in subclause num of this clause .
ii in stage num of the main trial the induced crack pattern shall be inspected by the contractor .
in stage num and in subsequent stages visual inspection of the crack pattern shall be made by the overseeing organisation .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general iii in stage num and in subsequent stages of the main trial the spacing of transverse cracks will be monitored by the overseeing organisation .
iv the depth and the vertical direction of cracking shall be determined by coring through the full depth of the hydraulically bound pavement layer symmetrically at the crack position .
core diameter shall be in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
in stage num and in subsequent stages of the main trial the number of cores shall be in accordance with table num .
in cases where cracks are not visible in the surface the locations of cores will be generally within the impact points and transversely in line with the impact points .
if any shattering or multiple cracking is present in the extracted core then there is deemed to have been shattering failure .
v the contractors certificates required under subclause num of this clause will be checked by the overseeing organisation .
if the number of roller passes required for seating is not in accordance with subclause num of this clause the contractor shall roll again the entire area in accordance with sub clause num of this clause and with not less than the number of roller passes specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall make allowance in his programme for the undertaking of fwd measurements which will be performed by the contractor in accordance with clause num unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num both i before cracking and ii after seating in accordance with this clause .
unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall perform the processing and analysis of the fwd measurements in accordance with clause num and shall present them to the overseeing organisation for interpretation and instruction .
the contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement in the main trial lengths before fwd measurements are made .
cracking of stage num or subsequent stages of the main trial shall not commence until the overseeing organisation has interpreted the analysed fwd measurements undertaken before cracking and has confirmed or otherwise the suitability of the area selected for the main trial .
num consent to the method and acceptance of the main trial num num the contractor shall not proceed with the main crack and seat work until the overseeing organisation has given its consent that the plant equipment and methods used in the main trial length comply with the requirements in table num .
consent to the plant equipment and methods of cracking and seating will be given by the overseeing organisation following a successful demonstration in the main trial that the cracking and seating complies with the requirements of this clause and that the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated pavement andor underlying foundation derived from fwd testing meets the design criteria .
when consent by the overseeing organisation to the method has been given the plant equipment and methods shall not be changed thereafter without the prior consent of the overseeing organisation except for normal adjustment and maintenance of plant .
should it be necessary for the contractor to otherwise change any plant equipment andor method the contractor may be required to carry out a further main trial stage .
num main production work num num the cracking operation for the main production work shall proceed at the crack spacing determined after the main trial or from any relevant subsequent production cracking reassessment trial .
the seating operation shall be completed by rolling the pavement for the number of passes specified in contract specific appendix num .
the main production work shall be assessed in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
the contractor shall make allowance in his programme for fwd measurements which will be made by the contractor according to clause num after seating in accordance with this clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor will perform the processing and analysis of the fwd measurements in accordance with clause num unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num and will present the results to the overseeing organisation for interpretation and instruction .
the contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement before fwd measurements are made .
num num the surface pattern of cracking shall be checked after applying water as specified in subclause num of this clause .
the contractor shall be responsible for the continuous observation of the crack pattern .
the location of preexisting transverse cracks shall be recorded by the contractor .
if without the prior agreement of the overseeing organisation the crack spacing on the main work is shorter than that specified following the num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general main trial the contractor shall so notify the overseeing organisation in not less than num hours .
should the crack pattern vary from that to which consent was given in the main trial or from any relevant subsequent production cracking reassessment trial with the consent of the overseeing organisation the contractor shall adjust the plant and equipment in order to produce the agreed crack pattern .
the new settings of the plant and equipment shall be recorded by the contractor together with the chainage at which the settings were changed .
these particulars shall be delivered to the overseeing organisation within not more than num hours of the changes being completed .
if the agreed crack pattern is not restored within num bays in jointed concrete pavements or within num m in hbm bases production cracking shall cease in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
a production cracking re assessment trial shall then be carried out in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause before any further production cracking and seating work is executed .
num num the depth and quality of the induced cracks shall be monitored by inspection of extracted cores .
if there has been shattering failure in accordance with subclause numiv of this clause production cracking shall cease immediately .
the extent of the area affected shall be determined as specified in subclause num of this clause .
num assessment of the main production work num num compliance with the cracking and seating requirements shall be assessed during the main work in accordance with the following criteria i the spacing of transverse cracks shall be checked by the contractor and will be monitored by the overseeing organisation .
ii the surface pattern of cracking of all areas that have been cracked shall be checked after applying water as specified in subclause num of this clause .
iii the depth and the vertical direction of cracking shall be determined through the full depth of the hydraulically bound pavement layer or layers symmetrically at the crack position .
core diameter shall be in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
not less than one core shall be extracted in every num mnum of cracked concrete at locations selected by the overseeing organisation .
in cases where cracks are not visible in the surface the locations of cores will be generally in line with the impact points .
iv the seating shall be assessed in accordance with subclause numv of this clause .
num acceptance of the main production work num num the main production work under this clause shall be accepted when it complies fully with the requirements of this clause and with table num .
num failure to comply and remedial work num num the results of the crack and seat operations for any jointed unreinforced concrete slab or any num m length of hbm base shall be rejected if it fails to comply with any of the criteria in subclause num of this clause .
if i shattering or multiple cracking of hydraulically bound material occurs within the extracted core or ii the length of any longitudinal cracks in the highway traffic wheel track zones are in excess of the specified crack spacing of the induced transverse cracks iii the transverse crack spacing determined for the particular portion of the work is outside the tolerance specified in contract specific appendix num or any combination of these then the following remedial measures shall be taken .
the size of the affected area shall be determined and the rejected sections shall be broken out excavated to full depth and reinstated with equivalent material unless otherwise instructed by the overseeing organisation .
the positions of the wheel track zones to which reference is made in this clause shall be as defined in subclause num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general table num num sawcut crack and seat of existing jointed unreinforced concrete pavements and cbm bases assessment criteria for acceptance of trials and for the main production work type of trial or work category criteria surface crack pattern num transverse crack spacing num coring to determine severity depth and vertical direction of cracking num seating num fwd monitoring required by contract specific appendix num not part of the assessment of contractors work num main trial stage num i fine i.e .
nummm wide ii in a transverse direction iii no wheeltrack longitudinal crack length transverse crack spacing iv monitored by the contractor .
as specified in contract specific appendix num .
cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the contractor .
i monitored by the contractor ii roll with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num .
none required .
may be done by the contractor if desired .
main trial stage num and subsequent stages i fine i.e .
nummm wide ii in a transverse direction iii no longitudinal crack length transverse crack spacing iv monitored by the overseeing organisation .
i each stage at one crack spacing as specified in contract specific appendix num ii monitored by the overseeing organisation .
i cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the overseeing organisation ii not less than num cores in each stage with not less than num core from each bay or from a numm length in hbm bases as appropriate .
i monitored by the overseeing organisation ii roll with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num .
unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the contractor to determine and record the minimum effective stiffness modulus from fwd measurements and core details provided by the contractor .
acceptance of main trial stage num and subsequent stages i crack pattern complies with i to iii above .
i required tolerance on transverse crack spacing achieved .
i no multiple cracks or shattering within the core ii cores shall have a single crack to the full depth of the concrete iii cracks shall be predominantly vertical .
certification by the contractor that each point has been rolled with not the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num .
unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the contractor to produce a record of the measured effective stiffness moduli for i the concrete pavement and ii the foundation both before and after cracking andor seating .
main production work i fine i.e .
nummm wide ii in a transverse direction iii no wheeltrack longitudinal crack length transverse crack spacing iv monitored by the contractor .
i crack spacing determined from the main trial or from the reassessment trial as appropriate to the tolerance specified in contract specific appendix num ii monitored by the contractor .
i cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the overseeing organisation ii not less than num core every numsq m iii monitored by the contractor .
i monitored by the contractor ii roll each point with not the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num .
unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the contractor to determine and record the effective stiffness modulus from fwd measurements and core details provided by the contractor on every bay or num m length of hbm base after cracking andor seating .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general type of trial or work category criteria surface crack pattern num transverse crack spacing num coring to determine severity depth and vertical direction of cracking num seating num fwd monitoring required by contract specific appendix num not part of the assessment of contractors work num acceptance of the main production work i crack pattern complies with i to iii above .
i required tolerance on transverse crack spacing achieved i no multiple cracks or shattering within the core ii cores shall have a single crack to the full depth of the hydraulically bound layer iii cracks shall be predominantly vertical .
i certification by the contractor that each point has been rolled with not the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num. i not required for compliance monitoring ii required for confirmation of structural design .
production cracking reassessment trial i fine i.e .
nummm wide ii in a transverse direction iii no wheeltrack longitudinal crack length transverse crack spacing iv monitored by the overseeing organisation .
i crack spacing as specified by the overseeing organisation to the tolerance specified in contract specific appendix num ii monitored by the overseeing organisation .
i cores shall be taken at locations chosen by the overseeing organisation ii not less than num cores with not less than num core from each bay or numm length in hbm bases as appropriate iii monitored by the overseeing organisation .
i monitored by the overseeing organisation ii roll each point with not the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num .
unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the contractor to determine and record the minimum effective stiffness modulus on every bay or num m length of hbm base after cracking andor seating from fwd measurements and core details provided by the contractor .
acceptance of a production cracking reassessment trial i crack pattern complies with i to iii above .
i required tolerance on transverse crack spacing achieved .
i no multiple cracks or shattering within the core ii cores shall have a single crack to the full depth of the hydraulically bound layer iii cracks shall be predominantly vertical .
i certification by the contractor that each point has been rolled with not the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num .
unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the contractor to produce a record of the measured effective stiffness moduli for i the concrete pavement and ii the foundation combination both before and after cracking and seating .
table num num sawcut crack and seat of existing jointed unreinforced concrete pavements and cbm bases assessment criteria for acceptance of trials and for the main production work continued amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general if the number of roller passes required for seating is less than the specified minimum at each and every point on the pavement or less than such other increased number of passes which has been specified by the overseeing organisation following a trial or otherwise then the contractor shall roll the entire area again with not less than the number of passes specified in contract specific appendix num unless otherwise instructed by the overseeing organisation .
num num the extent of shattering or multiple cracking shall be determined by extracting and inspecting cores .
such cores shall be taken at the location of induced transverse cracks within the area between the position of the crackinducing plant and the last core in which the cracking complied with the requirements of subclause num of this clause .
the extent of longitudinal cracking in the wheel track zones shall be determined by visual inspection .
num production cracking reassessment trial num num when in the opinion of the overseeing organisation the conditions so require a production re assessment trial shall take place .
the production cracking reassessment trial described in this subclause and in subclauses num num num and num of this clause shall require the contractor to demonstrate that the plant equipment and method to which consent was given by the overseeing organisation for use in the main work are capable of producing the required type and pattern of cracks in the existing hydraulically bound layer or layers by executing this trial over an area of neither less than num mnum nor greater than num mnum of existing pavement .
the location of the trial shall be as directed by the overseeing organisation .
the crack spacings shall be as directed by the overseeing organisation within the tolerances specified in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall demonstrate that the cracking operation can achieve consistent compliance with subclause num of this clause .
the contractor shall make programme allowance for fwd measurements which shall be made by the contractor according to clause num before cracking and after seating in accordance with this clause unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall perform the processing and analysis of the fwd measurements in accordance with clause num and shall present the results to the overseeing organisation for interpretation and instruction .
the contractor shall remove all debris from the cracked pavement in the reassessment trial length before fwd measurements are made .
the production cracking reassessment trial length shall be seated with the number of passes of the roller specified in contract specific appendix num .
num assessment of production cracking reassessment trial num num compliance with the cracking and seating requirements for the production cracking reassessment trial shall be assessed in accordance with subclauses num and num above .
num consent to the method and acceptance of the production cracking reassessment trial num num the contractor shall not resume the main work until the overseeing organisation has given its consent that the plant equipment and methods used in the production cracking reassessment trial comply with the requirements given in table num .
consent to the plant equipment and methods will be given by the overseeing organisation following a successful demonstration in the production cracking reassessment trial that the cracking and seating complies with the requirements of this clause .
when consent to the method has been given by the overseeing organisation the plant equipment and methods shall not be changed thereafter without the prior consent of the overseeing organisation except for normal adjustment and maintenance of plant .
should it be necessary for the contractor to otherwise change any plant equipment andor method the contractor shall carry out a further production cracking re assessment trial .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num num monitoring of cracked and seated jointed unreinforced concrete pavements and hbm bases using the falling weight deflectometer fwd num general num num this clause specifies the procedures to be followed when the falling weight deflectometer fwd is to be used to acquire the measurements required to determine the loadspreading properties of cracked and seated concrete as required by clause num .
specifically the fwd shall be used to validate whether the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated hydraulically bound layer or layers exceeds the threshold value determined from the structural design calculations .
the type of equipment is specified together with the procedures for its use on site and the parameters to be used to acquire the deflection data .
the effective stiffness moduli of the cracked and seated hydraulically bound layer or layers and of the underlying foundation shall be calculated by the contractor using backanalysis of the fwd measurements obtained by the contractor in accordance with clause num .
num num fwd measurements shall be made on the surface of the concrete after the removal of any existing asphalt overlay or surfacing from the area to be tested .
removal of overlay shall be completed ahead of the fwd testing at a distance of not less than num m from the fwd equipment .
the cracking and seating operation shall be completed ahead of the fwd testing at a distance of not less than num m from the fwd equipment in order to minimise the effect of pavement vibration .
fwd measurements shall follow the seating operation .
the contractor shall ensure that a sufficient frequency of clearlymarked locational reference markers have been put in place to the satisfaction of the overseeing organisation for the purpose of accurately recording the locations of the fwd measurements and therefore correlating the results with the settings used by the cracking plant .
num num the overseeing organisation will use the effective stiffness moduli obtained from the main trial in accordance with clause num in conjunction with the other criteria specified in subclause num of clause num to determine the required transverse crack spacing to be used in the main production work .
num num the overseeing organisation may instruct any variation required in the method and pattern of cracking or subsequently confirm or otherwise the suitability of the proposed thickness of overlay required as a result of the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated hydraulically bound layer or layers determined from fwd measurements .
num num the road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the overseeing organisations written confirmation that the fwd measurements have been assessed and any required remedial action taken .
num measuring equipment num num any fwd used to monitor the effectiveness of the cracking and seating operation as specified in this clause and in clause num shall have the current appropriate certification before it can be used on the overseeing organisations network .
num num evidence of a satisfactory absolute calibration by the equipment manufacturer and consistency checks by the operator shall be provided as required by the overseeing organisation .
the absolute calibration of the deflection sensors load cell and system processor shall be carried out annually .
consistency checks of the dynamic response of the machine as a whole should take place at intervals of six weeks or less during periods of operation and after any major service involving replacement parts .
num num for the monitoring of the crack and seat operation on jointed unreinforced concrete pavements and on hbm bases the load level shall be set at numkn num .
the load pulse shall be applied through a nummm diameter plate and have a rise time from start of pulse to peak of between num and num milliseconds .
most fwds have a num hz smoothing filter option which has been shown to improve the agreement between machines .
where available the smoothing filter shall be activated .
deflections shall be measured to a resolution of at least num micron over the range nummm by a minimum of num sensors situated at radii up to a distance of numm from the centre of the loading plate at positions shown in table num .
while more than num geophones can be fitted to an fwd clause num requires that the data input to the approved backanalysis software program shall contain measurements only from the geophones located at the positions shown in table num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num operation on site num num fwd testing shall not be performed while standing water is present on the surface to be tested .
num num the contractor shall ensure that there is no detritus on the road surface prior to the fwd testing .
care shall be taken to ensure that the whole area of the fwd loading plate is in contact with the pavement surface .
a minimum of num drops plus a small initial drop for settling the load plate should be made at each test point .
the contractor shall make checks for machine consistency during the survey and before analysis .
table num num deflection sensor positions for monitoring cracking and seating type of pavement distance mm from centre of loading plate geophone number dnum dnum dnum dnum dnum dnum dnum jointed unreinforced concrete or hbm base num num num num num num num num num during fwd testing it is essential for subsequent analysis that the deflection values for dnum to dnum decrease as the distance from the applied load increases .
should the deflection measured by a geophone of a higher number see table num be greater than the deflection measured by a geophone of lower number then the fwd shall be moved forwards or backwards by a small distance and the measurement cycle repeated .
if it is not possible to obtain a decreasing deflection bowl after two shifts of position then the measurement should be discarded and the overseeing organisation informed of the location of the test position for possible further investigation .
measurements of pavement temperature at num mm depth should be recorded at no less than hourly intervals .
num main trial area testing num num in stage num and subsequent stages of a main trial fwd measurements shall be made both before and after cracking to determine the reduction in the effective stiffness modulus of the concrete produced by the cracking and seating operation .
stage num and subsequent stages shall consist of an area as described in subclause num of clause num .
the area of concrete to be tested shall be adequately marked to enable fwd testing to be performed on the same locations both before and after cracking and seating .
num num on jointed concrete pavements fwd measurements shall be made along the centre line of the bays .
for each crack spacing specified in contract specific appendix num the location of the centre of the loading plate for the first measurement shall be num m beyond the transverse joint at the start of a bay with all the geophones located within the bay .
subsequent measurements shall be made at intervals of num m along the centre line of the slab up to and including the centre of the slab .
test positions coincident with transverse cracks shall be omitted and the location of the crack recorded by the contractor .
for each measurement the location of the fwd loading plate shall be adequately recorded so that the position of each measurement can be clearly identified .
num num on hbm bases fwd measurements shall be made along the centre line of each traffic lane unless this alignment coincides with a longitudinal shrinkage or construction crack in which case the measuring line shall be shifted towards the nearside wheelpath until the fwd test plate is not located within num m of a longitudinal crack .
the location of the centre of the loading plate for the first measurement shall be numm past the start of the test area for the stage .
subsequent measurements shall be made at intervals of num m along the centre line of the lane until the outer geophone dnum see table num is outside the other end of the test area for the stage .
test positions coincident with transverse cracks shall be omitted and the location of the crack recorded by the contractor .
for each measurement the location of the fwd loading plate shall be adequately recorded such that the position of each measurement can be clearly identified .
num num after completion of the fwd measurements on the main trial the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with clause num and supplemented by ground penetrating radar gpr measurements when required by contract specific appendix num shall be used by the contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with clause num .
the moduli values shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation who will determine the required transverse crack spacing to be used in the main production with reference to the other criteria specified in subclause num of clause num .
for jointed unreinforced concrete pavements the analysis will also provide the location on each bay where fwd measurements shall be made following production cracking and seating in the main works .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num consent to the results of the fwd measurements on the main trial num num the contractor shall not proceed with the main production cracking works until the overseeing organisation has specified the transverse crack spacing and given its consent that the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated concrete exceeds the threshold value required by the structural design .
num num consent to the plant equipment and methods will be given by the overseeing organisation following a successful demonstration in the main trial that the cracking and seating complies with the requirements of clause num and this clause .
when consent by the overseeing organisation to the method has been given the plant equipment and methods shall not be changed thereafter without the prior consent of the overseeing organisation except for normal adjustment and maintenance of plant .
should it be necessary for the contractor to otherwise change any plant equipment andor method the contractor shall carry out a further main trial stage .
num main production work testing num num the cracking operation for the main production work shall proceed at the crack spacing determined from the main trial or from any relevant subsequent production cracking reassessment trial .
the main production work shall be assessed in accordance with subclause num of clause num with reference to subclause num of this clause .
num num fwd measurements shall be made along the centre line of every bay of jointed concrete pavement after cracking and seating at the bay location determined by the overseeing organisation from the results of the main trial .
for hbm bases the fwd measurements shall be made every num m along the centre line of each traffic lane and shifting by num m where necessary to avoid the location of preexisting transverse cracks .
num num if the crack characteristics or patterns vary from those to which consent was given in the main trial or from any relevant subsequent production cracking reassessment trial and are not restored within num bays in jointed concrete pavements or within num m in hbm bases production cracking shall cease in accordance with subclause num of clause num .
a production cracking reassessment trial shall then be carried out in accordance with subclause num of clause num before any further production cracking and seating work is executed .
num num after completion of the fwd measurements on the main production work the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with clause num and supplemented by ground penetrating radar gpr measurements when required by contract specific appendix num shall be used by the contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with clause num .
the moduli values shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation within num hours of the cracking operations .
num acceptance of the main production work testing num num the effective stiffness moduli of the cracked and seated concrete calculated in accordance with clause num from the fwd measurements collected in accordance with this clause shall be assessed by the overseeing organisation in conjunction with the other criteria specified in subclause num of clause num .
the overseeing organisation shall instruct or otherwise on any remedial actions that may be required .
the road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the overseeing organisations written confirmation that he has completed his interpretation of the fwd measurements and that all required remedial actions have been completed .
num production cracking reassessment trial num num should a production cracking reassessment trial be required for the reasons specified in subclause num of clause num then fwd measurements will be required for assessment of the trial .
these measurements shall be made by the contractor in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause both before and after cracking and seating .
num assessment of production cracking reassessment trial num num after completion of the fwd measurements on the reassessment trial the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with clause num shall be used by the contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with clause num .
the overseeing organisation will use these moduli values in conjunction with the other criteria specified in subclause num of clause num to determine the transverse crack spacing to be used in the main production work .
for jointed amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general unreinforced concrete pavements the analysis will also provide the location on individual bays where fwd measurements will be made following cracking and seating in the main works .
num consent to the method and acceptance of the production cracking reassessment trial num num the contractor shall not resume the main crack and seat works until the overseeing organisation has given his consent that the plant equipment and methods used in the production cracking reassessment trial comply with the requirements given in table num of clause num and subclauses num and num of this clause .
num num monitoring of sawcut cracked and seated jointed reinforced concrete pavements using the falling weight deflectometer fwd num general num num this clause specifies the procedures to be followed when the falling weight deflectometer fwd is to be used to acquire the measurements used to determine the loadspreading properties of sawcut cracked and seated reinforced concrete as required by clause num .
specifically the fwd shall be used to validate whether the effective stiffness modulus of the sawcut cracked and seated hydraulically bound layer or layers exceeds the threshold value determined from the structural design calculations .
the type of equipment is specified together with the procedures for its use on site and the parameters required to acquire the deflection data .
the effective stiffness moduli of the sawcut cracked and seated hydraulically bound layer or layers and of the underlying foundation shall be calculated by the contractor using backanalysis of the fwd measurements obtained by the contractor in accordance with clause num .
num num fwd measurements shall be made on the surface of the concrete after the removal of any existing asphalt overlay or surfacing from the area to be tested .
removal of overlay shall be completed ahead of the fwd testing at a distance of not less than num m from the fwd equipment .
the cracking and seating operation shall also be completed ahead of the fwd testing at a distance of not less than num m from the fwd equipment in order to minimise the effect of pavement vibration .
fwd measurements shall follow the seating operation .
the contractor shall ensure that a sufficient frequency of clearlymarked locational reference markers have been put in place to the satisfaction of the overseeing organisation for the purpose of accurately recording the locations of the fwd measurements and therefore correlating the results with the settings used by the cracking plant .
num num the overseeing organisation will use the effective stiffness moduli obtained from the main trial in accordance with clause num in conjunction with the other criteria specified in subclause num of clause num to determine the required transverse crack spacing to be used in the main production work .
num num the overseeing organisation may instruct any variation required in the method and pattern of saw cutting andor cracking or subsequently confirm or otherwise the suitability of the proposed thickness of overlay required as a result of the effective stiffness modulus of the sawcut cracked and seated hydraulically bound layer or layers determined from fwd measurements .
num num the road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the overseeing organisations written confirmation that the fwd measurements have been assessed and any required remedial action taken .
num measuring equipment num num any fwd used to monitor the effectiveness of the sawcut cracking and seating operation as specified in this clause and in clause num shall have the current appropriate certification before it can be used on the overseeing organisations network .
num num evidence of a satisfactory absolute calibration by the equipment manufacturer and consistency checks by the operator shall be provided as required by the overseeing organisation .
the absolute calibration of the deflection sensors load cell and system processor shall be carried out annually .
consistency checks of the dynamic response of the machine as a whole should take place at intervals of six weeks or less during periods of operation and after any major service involving replacement parts .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num num for the monitoring of the sawcut crack and seat operation the load level shall be set at numkn num .
the load pulse shall be applied through a num mm diameter plate and have a rise time from start of pulse to peak of between num and num milliseconds .
most fwds have a num hz smoothing filter option which has been shown to improve the agreement between machines .
where available the smoothing filter shall be activated .
deflections shall be measured to a resolution of at least num micron over the range num mm by a minimum of num sensors situated at radii up to a distance of numm from the centre of the loading plate at positions shown in table num .
while more than num geophones can be fitted to an fwd clause num requires that the data input to the approved backanalysis software program shall contain measurements only from the geophones located at the positions shown in table num .
table num num deflection sensor positions for monitoring cracking and seating type of pavement distance mm from centre of loading plate inner geophone number outer dnum dnum dnum dnum dnum dnum dnum jointed reinforced concrete num num num num num num num num operation on site num num fwd testing shall not be performed while standing water is present on the surface to be tested .
num num the contractor shall ensure that there is no detritus on the road surface prior to the fwd testing .
care shall be taken to ensure that the whole area of the fwd loading plate is in contact with the pavement surface .
a minimum of num drops plus a small initial drop for settling the load plate should be made at each test point .
the contractor shall make checks for machine consistency during the survey and before analysis .
num num during fwd testing it is essential for subsequent analysis that the deflection values for dnum to dnum reduce as the distance from the applied load increases .
should the deflection measured by a geophone of a higher number see table num be greater than the deflection measured by a geophone of a lower number then the fwd shall be moved forwards or backwards by a small distance and the measurement cycle repeated .
if it is not possible to obtain a decreasing deflection bowl after two shifts of position then the measurement should be discarded and the location of the test position noted for further investigation by the overseeing organisation .
num main trial area testing num num in stage num and subsequent stages of the main trial the contractor shall make fwd measurements both before sawcutting and then after cracking and seating in order to determine the reduction in the effective stiffness modulus of the concrete produced by the sawcut cracking and seating operation .
stage num and subsequent stages shall consist of an area as described in subclause num of clause num .
the area of concrete to be tested shall be adequately marked to enable fwd testing to be performed on the same locations both before sawcutting and after cracking .
num num fwd measurements shall be made along the centre line of the reinforced slabs .
for each sawcut spacing the location of the centre of the loading plate for the first measurement shall be at the midpoint between the first two sawcuts .
subsequent measurements shall be made directly on the sawcuts and at the midpoint between adjacent sawcuts .
test positions coincident with transverse cracks should be omitted and the location of the crack recorded by the contractor .
the location of the fwd loading plate shall be adequately recorded so that the location of each measurement can be clearly identified .
num num after completion of the fwd measurements on the main trial the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with clause num and supplemented by ground penetrating radar gpr measurements when required by contract specific appendix num shall be used by the contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with clause num .
the moduli values shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation who will determine the required transverse sawcut spacing to be used in the main production work with reference to the other criteria specified in subclause num of clause num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num consent to the results of the fwd measurements on the main trial num num the contractor shall not proceed with the main sawcut crack and seat works until the overseeing organisation has specified the transverse sawcut spacing and given its consent that the effective stiffness modulus of the cracked and seated concrete exceeds the threshold value required by the structural design .
num num consent to the plant equipment and methods will be given by the overseeing organisation following a successful demonstration in the main trial that the sawcut cracking and seating complies with the requirements of clause num and this clause .
when consent by the overseeing organisation to the method has been given the plant equipment and methods shall not be changed thereafter without the prior consent of the overseeing organisation except for normal adjustment and maintenance of plant .
should it be necessary for the contractor to otherwise change any plant equipment andor method the contractor shall carry out a further main trial stage .
num main production work testing num num the cracking operation for the main production work shall proceed using the sawcut spacing determined from the main trial or from any relevant subsequent production cracking reassessment trial .
the main production work shall be assessed in accordance with subclause num of clause num with reference to subclause num of this clause .
num num fwd measurements shall be made every num m along the centre line of the slabs in each traffic lane and shifting by num m where necessary to avoid the location of preexisting transverse cracks .
num num if the crack characteristics or patterns vary from those to which consent was given in the main trial or from any relevant subsequent production cracking reassessment trial and are not restored within num m production cracking shall cease in accordance with subclause num of clause num .
a production cracking reassessment trial shall then be carried out in accordance with subclause num of clause num before any further production sawcut and cracking and seating work is executed .
num num after completion of the fwd measurements on the main production work the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with clause num and supplemented by ground penetrating radar gpr measurements when required by contract specific appendix num shall be used by the contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with clause num .
the moduli values shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation within num hours of the cracking operations .
num assessment of the main production work testing num num the effective stiffness moduli of the cracked and seated concrete calculated by the contractor in accordance with clause num from the fwd measurements collected in accordance with this clause shall be assessed by the overseeing organisation in conjunction with the other criteria specified in subclause num of clause num .
the overseeing organisation shall instruct or otherwise on any remedial actions that may be required .
the road shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the overseeing organisations written confirmation that he has completed his interpretation of the fwd measurements and that all required remedial actions have been completed .
num production cracking reassessment trial num num should a production cracking reassessment trial be required as specified in subclause num of clause num then fwd measurements will be required for assessment of the trial .
these measurements shall be made by the contractor in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause both before sawcutting and after cracking and seating .
num assessment of production cracking reassessment trial num num after completion of the fwd measurements on the reassessment trial the deflection data and layer thickness details derived from cores taken in accordance with clause num shall be used by the contractor to calculate effective stiffness moduli of the pavement layers in accordance with clause num .
the overseeing organisation will use these moduli values in conjunction with the other criteria specified in subclause num of clause num to determine the transverse crack spacing to be used in the main production work .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num consent to the method and acceptance of the production cracking reassessment trial num num the contractor shall not resume the main sawcut crack and seat works until the overseeing organisation has given its consent that the plant equipment and methods used in the production cracking re assessment trial comply with the requirements given in table num of clause num and subclauses num and num of this clause .
num num backanalysis of falling weight deflectometer fwd measurements made on concrete pavements treated by fractured slab techniques num general num num for the purposes of this clause fractured slab techniques shall comprise the following i crack and seat of jointed unreinforced concrete pavements and hbm bases in accordance with clause num. ii sawcut and crack and seat of jointed reinforced concrete pavements in accordance with clause num .
num num the contractor shall produce the fwd deflection measurements to be used in this clause in accordance with clause num for crack and seat or clause num for sawcut crack and seat .
num num the effective stiffness modulus of the fractured concrete together with that of the foundation shall be derived from the backanalysis of fwd deflection bowl measurements by means of a recognised analysis package .
highways england recognises the modulusha computer program any alternative package proposed must be proven to provide the same output values as modulusha .
modulusha or an approved equivalent shall be used for all backanalysis of fwd measurements performed in accordance with clause num for crack and seat or clause num for sawcut crack and seat .
detailed instructions for the use of this program are contained in its accompanying modulusha user guide .
num num the backanalysis procedure to be used utilises a twolayer model and therefore only the thickness of the bound layers is required .
the unbound layers are modelled as a single layer of infinite depth .
thickness information for the bound layers is obtained from core samples obtained from the assessment of the cracking operations in accordance with clause num or clause num and may be supplemented by ground penetrating radar measurements when required by contract specific appendix num for crack and seat or contract specific appendix num for sawcut crack and seat .
num num the pavement deflection data to be backanalysed shall be divided into uniform sections with similar total thicknesses of hydraulically bound material for the purposes of backanalysis .
the mean total thickness of hydraulically bound material present shall be calculated for each section .
the measured boundlayer thicknesses within a uniform section should lie within num per cent of the boundlayer thickness used for that section .
num num the overseeing organisation may instruct any variation required in the method and pattern of cracking or subsequently confirm or otherwise the suitability of the proposed thickness of overlay required as a result of the effective stiffness modulus of the fractured hydraulically bound layer or layers determined from fwd measurements .
num num following submission of the electronic tables and graphs produced in accordance with subclauses num and num of this clause the contractor shall allow the period of time set out in contract specific appendix num for the overseeing organisation to carry out his assessment and interpretation of the results .
num num the pavement shall be neither overlaid nor reopened to highway traffic without the overseeing organisations written confirmation that he has completed his assessment of the fwd measurements and that any required remedial action has been completed .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general num processing and backanalysis using modulusha num num the contractor shall use modulusha or an approved equivalent to create .out files with the required format from standard .fnum or .fwd output files in accordance with chapter num of the modulusha users guide .
deflection measurements from a maximum of seven geophones shall be used .
the additional parameters required by modulusha or an approved equivalent shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
if the fwd deflection measurement data is not output in .fnum or .fwd file formats then the contractor shall produce suitable .out files containing the measured fwd data with the required structure by an alternative method of his own devising .
num num following production of a suitable .out file the contractor shall backanalyse the fwd deflection data obtained from a length of pavement defined in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
the backanalysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedure set out in chapter num of the modulusha users guide .
the additional parameters required by modulusha or an approved equivalent shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall save the backanalysed data as an ascii data file in accordance with the procedure set out in chapter num of the modulusha users guide .
the structure of the data contained within the output data files shall be as specified in appendix f of the modulusha users guide .
num num the contractor shall compile and present the backanalysed data created by modulusha or an approved equivalent to the overseeing organisation in tabulated form in accordance with the electronic spreadsheet format specified in contract specific appendix num .
for each fwd test point the presented data shall include as a minimum the i station identification eg carriageway lane and chainage .
ii magnitude of the applied load in kn .
iii absolute measured deflections at each geophone position in microns .
iv backanalysed effective stiffness modulus of the hydraulically bound layer in mpa .
v backanalysed effective stiffness modulus of the foundation layer in mpa .
vi calculated thickness of hydraulically bound material used in the backanalysis in mm .
vii root mean square deviation rms .
viii absolute mean deviation amd in microns .
ix estimated depth to a stiff layer bedrock in mm .
the tabulated data shall also contain the actual measured core thicknesses and their locations relative to the fwd test positions .
num backanalysis and presentation of results of fwd monitoring of main trial num num the contractor shall backanalyse and present the results of his fwd testing of the main trial carried out in accordance with clause num for crack and seat or clause num for sawcut crack and seat in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause .
the results shall also be presented graphically .
the layout of the graphs shall display the relationships specified in contract specific appendix num in a format acceptable to the overseeing organisation .
num backanalysis and presentation of results of fwd monitoring of main production works num num the contractor shall backanalyse and present the results of his fwd testing of the main production works carried out in accordance with clause num for crack and seat or clause num for sawcut crack and seat in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause .
the results shall also be presented graphically .
the layout of the graphs shall display the relationships specified in contract specific appendix num in a format acceptable to the overseeing organisation amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general numf num backanalysis and presentation of results of fwd monitoring of production cracking reassessment trials num num the contractor shall backanalyse and present the results of his fwd testing of any production cracking reassessment trial carried out in accordance with clause num for crack and seat or clause num for sawcut crack and seat in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause .
the results shall also be presented graphically .
the layout of the graphs shall display the relationships specified in contract specific appendix num in a format acceptable to the overseeing organisation .
amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general nnum national alterations of the overseeing organisation of northern ireland numni num horizontal alignments surface levels and surface regularity of pavement courses num horizontal alignments num num horizontal alignments shall be determined from one edge of the pavement surface as described in contract specific appendix num .
the edge of the pavement as constructed and all other parallel alignments shall be correct within a tolerance of num mm therefrom except for kerbs and channel blocks which shall be laid with a smooth alignment within a tolerance of num mm .
longitudinal road markings lateral tolerances shall be in accordance with subclause numni .
num surface levels of pavement courses num num the design levels of pavement courses shall be calculated from the vertical profile crossfalls and the pavement course thicknesses described in contract specific appendix num .
the level of any point on the constructed surface of the pavement courses shall be the design level subject to the appropriate tolerances stated in table numni .
table numni num tolerances in surface levels of pavement courses road surfaces general adjacent to a surface water channel num mm num num mm binder course num mm top surface of base in pavements without binder course num mm base num mm subbase under concrete pavement surface slabs laid full thickness in one operation by machines with surface compaction num mm subbases other than above num num mm where a surface water channel is laid before the adjacent road pavement layer the top of that layer measured from the top of the adjacent edge of the surface water channel shall be to the tolerances given in table numni num num notwithstanding the tolerances permitted in surface levels of pavement courses the cumulative tolerance shall not result in a reduction in thickness of the pavement excluding the subbase and filter layer by more than num mm from the specified thickness nor a reduction in the thickness of the bituminous surface course by more than num mm from that specified .
num num for checking compliance with subclause num of this clause measurements of the surface levels of all courses will be taken on a grid of points located as described in contract specific appendix num .
in any length of pavement compliance shall be deemed to be met for all surfaces other than the final road surface when not more than one of ten consecutive measurements taken longitudinally or one in any transverse line exceeds the tolerances permitted in table numni provided that this one measurement shall not exceed by more than num mm the tolerance for the course concerned .
for the final road surface the tolerance given in table numni shall apply to any point on that surface .
num surface regularity num num the longitudinal regularity of the surfaces of surface courses binder courses and concrete slabs shall be such that the number of surface irregularities is within the relevant limits stated in table numni .
amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general nnum an irregularity is a variation of not less than num mm or not less num mm of the profile of the road surface as measured by the rolling straightedge set at num mm or num mm as appropriate or equivalent apparatus capable of measuring irregularities within the same magnitudes over a num m length .
no irregularity exceeding num mm shall be permitted .
num num prior to checking any final road surface binder course or top surface of base in pavements without binder course for level regularity or macrotexture depth it shall be cleaned of loose or extraneous materials .
these operations shall be carried out without damaging the surface of the pavement as soon as possible and within num days of construction of the pavement .
num num compliance with table numni shall be checked by the rolling straightedge along any line or lines parallel to the edge of pavement on sections of num m at regular intervals as stated in contract specific appendix num whether or not it is constructed in shorter lengths .
sections shorter than num m forming part of a longer pavement shall be assessed using the number of irregularities for a num m length prorata to the nearest whole number .
where the total length of pavement is less than num m the measurements shall be taken on num m lengths .
num num pavements shall be measured transversely for irregularities at regular intervals as stated in contract specific appendix num by a num m long straightedge to bs num placed at right angles to the centre line of the road .
the maximum allowable difference between the pavement surface and the straightedge shall be num mm .
num num a straightedge num metres long shall be used to check longitudinal surface regularity in the following cases i for lengths of less than num m of surface course binder course and concrete slabs ii where use of the rolling straightedge or equivalent apparatus is impracticable iii for all lengths of subbase under concrete pavement slabs laid full thickness in one operation by machine with surface compaction .
the maximum allowable difference between the surface and the underside of the straightedge when placed parallel with or at right angles to the centre line of the road shall be for pavement surfaces num mm for binder courses num mm for subbases under concrete pavements as in iii above num mm table numni num maximum permitted number of surface irregularities surfaces of each lane of carriageway each hard strip and each hard shoulder for each irregularity limit surfaces of each lane of bituminous binder courses for carriageway hard strip and hard shoulder for each irregularity limit surfaces of laybys service areas and associated bituminous binder courses for each irregularity limit irregularity limits num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm length m num num num num num num num num num num num num category a roads num num num num num num num num num num num num category b roads num num num num num num num num num num num num the category of each section of road is described in contract specific appendix num .
num rectification num num where any pavement area does not comply with the specification for regularity surface tolerance thickness macrotexture depth material properties or compaction the full extent of the area which does not comply with the specification shall be made good and the surface of the pavement course shall be rectified in the manner described below amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general nnum i unbound and hydraulically bound materials the top num mm shall be scarified reshaped with material added or removed as necessary and re compacted .
the area treated shall be not less than num m long and num m wide or such area as necessary to obtain compliance with the specification .
ii cement bound subbases and bases the method of correction will depend on the period which has elapsed between detection of the error and the time of mixing of the material .
if this is less than num hours the surface shall be scarified to a depth of not less than num mm surplus material removed or freshly mixed material added as necessary and recompacted in accordance with the specification .
if the period is num hours or more the full depth of the layer shall be removed from the pavement and replaced with material in accordance with the specification .
in either case the area treated shall be at least num m long and the full width of the paving laid in one operation .
if the contractor proposes rectification within num days of laying he shall comply with clause num .
alternatively for subbases under concrete pavements the contractor may make up low areas to a level within the tolerances of this clause with a num cement and sand mortar or with an acnum fine surface course complying with clause num. iii bituminous bases with coated macadam or asphalt bases the full depth of the top layer as laid shall be removed and be replaced with fresh material laid and compacted in accordance with the specification .
any area so treated shall be at least num m long and the full width of the paving laid in one operation .
alternatively for low areas in bituminous bases the contractor may make up the level with additional binder course material .
iv surface courses binder courses these shall have the full depth of the course removed and replaced with fresh material laid and compacted in accordance with the specification .
the area rectified shall be the full width of the paving laid in one operation and at least num m long if binder course or base on pavements without binder course or num m if surface course .
where the number of surface irregularities exceeds the limits in table numni the area to be rectified shall be num m or num m long as appropriate and the full width of the lanes affected or such lesser area as necessary to make the number of surface irregularities conform with the limits .
checking of the surface course for compliance with this clause shall be carried out as soon as possible after completion of the surfacing and remedial works completed before the road is opened to traffic .
where the macrotexture depth requirement is not met for a a section num m in lane length or b the full lane length of a section less than num m long as the balance of a complete scheme or c the full lane length of a scheme less than num m long then sufficient num m lengths shall be replaced starting with that length having the least macrotexture depth until the average requirement for the section length is complied with .
a minimum length of num m and the full lane width shall be removed and replaced either a to the full depth of the surface course or b to a depth of num mm when replaced by the repave method process in compliance with clause num .
areas to be removed shall be delineated both longitudinally and transversely by saw cutting prior to the material being removed .
joints shall be formed either by coating the exposed sawn face with hot bitumen or heating by suitable heater .
the heater shall raise the temperature of the full depth of the course immediately before laying the new material to a figure within the range of minimum rolling temperature and maximum temperature at any stage specified for the material and for a width of not less than num mm .
amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general nnum v concrete slabs concrete slabs shall be rectified by planing grinding or bump cutting .
large depressions which can not be dealt with in this way shall be rectified by cutting out the surface and replacing by a thin bonded surface repair complying with clause num .
retexturing of hardened concrete shall be carried out by sawing grooves in accordance with the specification .
texturing of replaced surfaces shall be by brushing in accordance with the specification .
where the slab can not be rectified as above the full depth of slab shall be removed and replaced with a slab constructed in compliance with clause num to the extent required to obtain compliance with the specification .
remedial works involving the placing of fresh concrete shall be completed in sufficient time for the concrete strength to have developed as required in clause num before that section of pavement is opened to traffic .
numni num excavation trimming and reinstatement of existing surfaces num general num num the contractor shall not excavate pits trenches or other openings in paved areas which have been constructed as part of the permanent works in order to construct other parts of the works including statutory undertakers and other service works except with the prior approval of the overseeing organisation .
num num where excavation and trimming of existing paved areas and highways not constructed as part of the permanent works are required in contract specific appendix num they shall be carried out and reinstated in compliance with this clause and with any additional requirements described in contract specific appendix num .
excavations shall be carried out to the dimensions described in contract specific appendix num or if not so described to the minimum dimensions subject to subclause num of this clause necessary to carry out the work .
num excavations num num excavations in existing pavements and other paved areas except those described in subclause num of this clause including surfacing base and subbase shall be cut to neat lines to dimensions at least num mm greater on each side than the dimensions of any further excavation below formation level .
excavations in capping shall be taken at least num mm outside the dimensions of any excavation below .
road surfacing of bituminous material shall be cut back by sawing or planing to a further num mm on each side .
planing shall be carried out in accordance with clause num .
concrete surfacing and concrete roadbases except cbm shall be cut back by sawing by at least num mm on each side to the level of any reinforcement in reinforced slabs and to the full depth of the slab in unreinforced slabs .
if excavations are required to inspect the condition of lower layers each layer shall be excavated separately and cleaned of debris to permit inspection .
num num concrete blocks clay pavers and precast concrete flags kerbs and channels shall be lifted without cutting to the nearest joint satisfying subclause num of this clause and carefully stored for reuse or dealt with as described in contract specific appendix num .
in situ kerbs and channels shall be broken out to at least num mm beyond the excavation .
num num all excavations shall be carried out in compliance with the specification and adequately supported at all times .
support shall be withdrawn as backfilling proceeds .
num backfilling num num backfilling of excavations shall be carried out as quickly as possible after completion of the work for which the excavation is required to formation or subformation in compliance with the appropriate clauses in series num num num num and num or as otherwise described in contract specific appendix num using fill material and compaction described therein .
amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general nnum num reinstatement of paved areas num num the layers of capping and pavement and other paved area materials shall be reinstated consecutively as soon as possible in compliance with the appropriate clauses in the num num num num num and num series to match the thicknesses and constituents of the existing material or as otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
they shall be laid and compacted in compliance with the appropriate clauses in the above series within the tolerances given in table num .
to allow for settlement in backfill under concrete pavements temporary repairs to the pavement shall be carried out using bituminous materials .
alternatively foamed concrete shall be used up to the base of the slab and the slab reinstated as soon as possible .
the reinstatement of the concrete slab shall be carried out as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num block and flag paving and precast and in situ kerbs and channels shall be reinstated in compliance with series num to match the existing construction .
num num where settlement of the reinstatement occurs the surface level shall be brought to correct levels and surface regularity .
where an existing pavement has been trimmed for a new pavement to abut it regulating layers for changes in crossfall or level shall comply with the requirements for the appropriate subbase base or surface layer .
num num immediately before bituminous layers are reinstated the edges of the existing material shall be cleaned of all loose material and be coated with an appropriate hot bituminous binder or equivalent treatment .
where joints in concrete slabs are affected by the excavation they shall be reinstated by cutting back to at least num m on each side of a transverse joint and forming an expansion joint on one side of the excavation and a contraction joint on the other and provide longitudinal joints where necessary in the same line before reinstatement in compliance with series num to match the existing construction .
num reinstatement of unpaved areas and other surfaced highways num num where the excavation affects verges grassed areas footpaths and bridleways they shall be reinstated to match the existing surface after backfilling in compliance with subclause num of this clause to a depth of num mm below the existing surface .
the reinstatement shall be completed by topsoil and seeding or turfing in compliance with the specification in both cases reusing any topsoil or turves cut and stored for reuse or when surfaced with material matching the existing foundation and surface .
num num levels between existing and newly constructed footpaths footways verges and bridleways shall be matched by removing the minimum area of existing material necessary to enable the total thickness of surfacing material to be laid abutting the existing surface .
where settlement of the reinstatement occurs the levels shall be brought up to existing levels .
surfaces may be left proud of the adjacent existing surfaces by an amount not exceeding num mm adequately ramped to avoid sharp changes in level to cater for subsequent settlement .
num junctions between new pavement construction and existing pavement or other paved areas num num where new pavement construction abuts an existing bituminous pavement which has to be reduced in level or overlaid to match alignment and levels the existing surface shall be trimmed by the minimum amount of coldmilling planing to a depth which will allow the specified thickness of new construction to be laid the edge being trimmed and treated in compliance with this clause .
where the difference in level makes it necessary a regulating course as described in contract specific appendix num and specified in clause num shall be provided .
the locations to be trimmed are given in contract specific appendix num .
num num junctions between concrete pavements and between concrete and bituminous pavements shall be constructed as described in contract specific appendix num .
junctions in porous asphalt shall comply also with clause num .
junctions between porous asphalt surfacing and other pavement surfaces shall be constructed as described in contract specific appendix num .
amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements general nnumf num compressed air num num when compressed air is used to clean dust dirt and debris from prepared faces of existing concrete or bituminous pavements which are otherwise ready for reinstatement only oilfree compressed air shall be used and this shall be at a pressure of not less than num nmmnum .
manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendment february num num series num road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures contents clause title page num unbound mixtures for subbase num num general num num num general requirements for unbound mixtures num num num transport laying compaction and trafficking of unbound mixtures num num num type num unbound mixtures num num num type num unbound mixtures num num num type num open graded unbound mixtures num num num category b close graded unbound mixtures num num num type num asphalt arisings unbound mixtures num num num num not used num num cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num num general requirements for cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num num num binder constituents num num num storage of constituents num num num general requirements for production and layer construction num num num mixinplant method of construction using batching by mass num num num mixinplant method of construction using volume batching num num num mixinplace method of construction num num num method statement and demonstration area num num num induced cracking of hbm num num num not used num num num aggregates num clause title page num num cement bound granular mixtures a cbgm a num num num cement bound granular mixtures b cbgm b num num num cement bound granular mixtures c cbgm c num num to num num not used num num num fly ash bound mixture num fabm num and hydraulic road binder bound mixture num hrbbmnum num num num slag bound mixture bnum sbm bnum fly ash bound mixture num fabm num and hydraulic road binder bound mixture num hrbbm num num num num slag bound mixture bnum sbm bnum fly ash bound mixture num fabm num and hydraulic road binder bound mixture num hrbbm num num num num not used num num num fly ash bound mixture num fabm num num num num slag bound mixtures bnum bnum bnum and bnum sbm bnum num num to num num not used num num num soil treated by cement sc soil treated by slag ss soil treated by fly ash sfa and soil treated by hydraulic road binder shrb num num to num num not used num num num testing control and checking of hbm num num num determination of the coefficient of linear thermal expansion num num to num num not used numf num num laboratory mixture design procedure numf volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num num general num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num unbound mixtures for subbase num num general requirements for unbound mixtures num num unbound mixtures shall be made and constructed to conform to bs en num the requirement categories in table num and clauses num to num .
the permitted alternatives for each part of the permanent works shall be as described in contract specific appendix num .
table num num mixture and grading requirement categories for unbound mixtures unbound mixture type num type num type num open graded category b close graded type num asphalt arisings clause num num num num num standard bs en num categories for unbound mixture properties mixture requirement category designation num num num num num maximum fines ufnum ufnum ufnum ufnum ufnum oversize ocnum ocnum ocnum ocnum ocnum grading requirement category overall grading gp ge go gb gp num num unbound mixtures placed within num mm or any other distances described in contract specific appendix num of concrete cement bound materials other cementitious mixtures or stabilised capping forming part of the permanent works shall conform to requirements a and b below .
a mixtures shall conform to the following two criteria i watersoluble sulfate ws content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num shall not exceed num mg of sulfate as sonum per litre ii total sulfur ts content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num expressed as s shall not exceed num for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or num for air cooled blast furnace slag .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num b mixtures shall conform to at least one of the following two options i when described in accordance with bs en num and bs en num annex a limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or ii the sulfide content of the mixture determined in accordance with bs en num clause num is less than num as sonum .
when determining ws ts or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
the mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
this also applies if six to nine results are available .
if ten or more results are available the mean of the highest num of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
the ph of the mixture shall be reported .
num num unbound mixtures placed within nummm or any other distances described in contract specific appendix num of metallic structural elements forming part of the permanent works shall conform to requirements c and d below .
c mixtures shall conform to the following two criteria i watersoluble sulfate ws content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num shall not exceed num mg of sulfate as sonum per litre ii total sulfur ts content determined in accordance with bs en num clause num expressed as s shall not exceed num for aggregates other than air cooled blast furnace slag or num for air cooled blast furnace slag .
d mixtures shall conform to at least one of the following two options i when described in accordance with bs en num and bs en num annex a limestone chalk dolomite blast furnace slag steel slag or crushed concrete are predominant or ii the sulfide content of the mixture determined in accordance with bs en num clause num is less than num as sonum .
when determining ws ts or sulfide content at least five samples of each material shall be tested .
the mean of the highest two values shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
this also applies if six to nine results are available .
if ten or more results are available the mean of the highest num of the results shall be used for comparison with the limiting values .
the ph of the mixture shall be reported .
the requirements in i and ii above shall not apply to metallic items protected by concrete and ancillary metallic items such as the tops of chambers and gullies .
num num the properties of aggregates used in unbound mixtures shall comply with the selected requirements of bs en num listed in table num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num table num num requirements for aggregates used in unbound mixtures unbound mixture type num type num type num open graded category b close graded type num asphalt arisings clause num num num num num standard bs en num categories for aggregate properties crushed or broken and totally rounded particles crushed rock crushed manufactured and crushed recycled aggregates see note num crushed gravel cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum see note num cnr no requirement not permitted not permitted resistance to fragmentation los angeles test la num la num la num la num resistance to wear micro deval test mdenr no requirement .
the supplier shall state the value for the aggregate used .
resistance to freezing and thawing magnesium sulfate soundness msnum water absorption wanumnr no requirement .
the supplier shall state the value for the aggregate used .
volume stability of blast furnace slags free from dicalcium silicate and iron disintegration .
volume stability of steel bof and eaf slags vnum not permitted vnum all other bs en num aggregate requirements category nr no requirement .
notes num .
bs en num assumes that crushed rock aggregates comply with category cnum without further testing .
num .
where permitted by contract specific appendix num .
num num where recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate is used in unbound mixtures in accordance with clauses num to num as appropriate it shall have been tested in accordance with clause num .
recycled coarse aggregate and recycled concrete aggregate used in unbound mixtures in accordance with clauses num num and num shall also comply with the additional requirements of table num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num table num num additional requirements for recycled coarse aggregate and recycled concrete aggregate used in type num type num and type num unbound mixtures unbound mixture type num type num type num asphalt arisings component identified by clause num maximum permitted content by mass asphalt class ra num num num glass class rg num other materials class x including wood plastic and metal num num num when required by contract specific appendix num and clauses num and num as appropriate the unbound mixture shall satisfy the minimum cbr requirement of contract specific appendix num when tested in accordance with clause num of bs num with surcharge discs .
the specimens shall be tested in a soaked condition .
the mixture shall be tested at the density and moisture content likely to develop in equilibrium field conditions which shall be taken as being the density relating to the uniform air voids content of num and the value of optimum water content declared when tested as required by bs en num .
num frost heave num num subject to the tolerances given in table num and unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num material shall not be frost susceptible if it is used within num mm of the designed final surface of a road or paved central reserve or num mm if the mean annual frost index mafi of the site is less than num .
num num material shall be classified as nonfrostsusceptible if the mean heave is num mm or less when tested in accordance with bs num .
comparator specimens in accordance with annex b of bs num shall be used .
num num transport laying compaction and trafficking of unbound mixtures num transporting num num unbound mixtures shall be protected from drying out and segregation both during transit to the point where it is to be laid and whilst awaiting tipping .
num laying num num unbound mixtures in a frozen condition shall not be incorporated in the works but may be used if acceptable when thawed .
unbound mixtures shall not be laid on any surface which is frozen or covered with ice .
num num all unbound mixtures shall be placed and spread evenly .
spreading shall be undertaken either concurrently with placing or without delay .
unbound mixtures shall be spread using a paving machine or a suitable spreader box and operated with a mechanism which levels off the material to an even depth .
num num except where otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num material up to num mm compacted thickness shall be spread in one layer so that after compaction the total thickness is as specified .
material of compacted thickness greater than num mm shall be laid in two or more layers and the minimum compacted thickness of any such layer shall be num mm .
where the layers of unbound mixtures are of unequal thickness the lowest layer shall be the thickest layer .
num compaction num num compaction shall be completed as soon as possible after the mixture has been spread and in accordance with the requirements for the individual mixtures .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num num num full compaction shall be obtained over the full area including in the vicinity of both longitudinal and transverse joints .
num num compaction of unbound mixtures shall be carried out by a method specified in table num unless the contractor demonstrates at site trials that a state of compaction achieved by an alternative method is equivalent to or better than that using the specified method .
num num the surface of any layer of material shall on completion of compaction and immediately before overlaying be well closed free from movement under construction plant and from ridges cracks loose material pot holes ruts or other defects .
all loose segregated or otherwise defective areas shall be removed to the full thickness of the layer and new material laid and compacted .
num num for the purposes of table num the following shall apply i the number of passes is the number of times that each point on the surface of the layer being compacted shall be traversed by the item of compaction plant in its operating mode or struck in the case of power rammers .
ii the compaction plant in table num is categorised in terms of static mass .
the mass per metre width of roll is the total mass on the roll divided by the total roll width .
where a smoothwheeled roller has more than one axle the category of the machine shall be determined on the basis of the axle giving the highest value of mass per metre width .
iii for pneumatictyred rollers the mass per wheel is the total mass of the roller divided by the number of wheels .
in assessing the number of passes of pneumatictyred rollers the effective width shall be the sum of the widths of the individual wheel tracks together with the sum of the spacings between the wheel tracks provided that each spacing does not exceed num mm .
where the spacings exceed num mm the effective width shall be the sum of the widths of the individual wheel tracks only .
iv vibratory rollers are selfpropelled or towed smoothwheeled rollers having means of applying mechanical vibration to one or more rolls a the requirements for vibratory rollers are based on the use of the lowest gear on a self propelled machine with mechanical transmission and a speed of num kmh for a towed machine or a selfpropelled machine with hydrostatic transmission .
if higher gears or speeds are used an increased number of passes shall be provided in proportion to the increase in speed of travel .
b where the mechanical vibration is applied to two rolls in tandem the minimum number of passes shall be half the number given in table num for the appropriate mass per metre width of one vibrating roll but if one roll differs in mass per metre width from the other the number of passes shall be calculated as for the roll with the smaller value .
alternatively the minimum number of passes may be determined by treating the machine as having a single vibrating roll with a mass per metre width equal to that of the roll with the higher value .
c vibratory rollers operating without vibration shall be classified as smoothwheeled rollers .
d vibratory rollers shall be operated with their vibratory mechanism operating at the frequency of vibration recommended by the manufacturer .
all such rollers shall be equipped or provided with devices indicating the frequency at which the mechanism is operating and the speed of travel .
both devices shall be capable of being safely read by an inspector alongside the machine .
v vibratingplate compactors are machines having a baseplate to which is attached a source of vibration consisting of one or two eccentricallyweighted shafts a the mass per square metre of baseplate of a vibratingplate compactor is calculated by dividing the total mass of the machine in its working condition by its area in contact with compacted material .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num b vibratingplate compactors shall be operated at the frequency of vibration recommended by the manufacturer .
they shall normally be operated at travelling speeds of less than num kmh but if higher speeds are necessary the number of passes shall be increased in proportion to the increase in speed of travel .
vi vibrotampers are machines in which an engine driven reciprocating mechanism acts on a spring system through which oscillations are set up in a baseplate .
vii power rammers are machines which are actuated by explosions in an internal combustion cylinder each explosion being controlled manually by the operator .
one pass of a power rammer shall be considered to have been made when the compacting shoe has made one strike on the area in question .
viii combinations of different types of plant or different categories of the same plant will be permitted in which case the number of passes for each shall be such proportion of the appropriate number in table num as will together produce the same total compactive effort as any one operated singly in accordance with table num .
table num num compaction requirements for unbound mixtures type of compaction plant category number of passes for layers not exceeding the following compacted thicknesses num mm num mm num mm smoothwheeled roller or vibratory roller operating without vibration mass per metre width of roll over num kg up to num kg over num g num num unsuitable num unsuitable unsuitable pneumatictyred roller mass per wheel over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg num num num num unsuitable unsuitable num num unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable unsuitable vibratory roller mass per metre width of vibrating roll over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg num num num num num num num num unsuitable num num num num num num num unsuitable unsuitable num num num num num num vibratingplate compactor mass per square metre of base plate over num kgm up to num kgm over num kgm up to num kgm over num kgm num num num unsuitable num num unsuitable unsuitable num vibrotamper mass over num kg up to num kg over num kg up to num kg over num kg num num num num num num unsuitable num num power rammer mass num kgnum kg over num kg num num num num unsuitable num num use of surfaces by construction plant and other traffic num num construction plant and other traffic used on pavements under construction shall be suitable in relation to the material condition and thickness of the courses it traverses so that damage is not caused to the subgrade or the pavement courses already constructed .
the wheels or tracks of plant moving over the various pavement courses shall be kept free from deleterious materials .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num num num where the contractor proposes to use the unbound mixture layers for construction plant he shall improve these layers where necessary to accommodate the method of construction and the type of plant and vehicles which he proposes to use in order to avoid damage to the laid layers any capping and the subgrade .
any permanent thickening shall be across the whole width of the pavement .
temporary thickening shall not impede drainage of any layer or the subgrade .
num trafficking trial num num when required by contract specific appendix num the contractor shall undertake a trafficking trial incorporating the unbound mixture proposed for use in the permanent works .
a trial area shall be constructed trafficked and assessed in accordance with the procedure described in subclauses num to num of this clause .
the mean vertical deformation after num equivalent standard axles shall be less than num mm when measured in accordance with the procedure stated in subclause num of this clause .
proposals for trafficking trials shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation for review and acceptance five days in advance of construction .
num trial procedure num num the trial area shall be located on a formation prepared in accordance with the specification .
the trial area may be located so that it can be incorporated within the permanent works if the resistance to wheel track rutting is demonstrated to comply with subclause num of this clause .
num num the trial area shall be at least num m long and of sufficient width that when trafficked the wheel paths of the test vehicle shall be at least num m from either edge of the top of the unbound mixture layer .
the unbound mixture layer shall be compacted to the thickness specified in contract specific appendix num .
the formation shall extend for a further num m either side of the unbound mixture layer .
num num a sufficient run offrun on area shall be constructed at each end of the trial area of the same width and compacted to the same level as the trial area to ensure correct tracking by the test vehicle and minimise dynamic effects of the vehicle bouncing on its springs .
suitable guidance shall be given to assist the driver in maintaining the same track in each pass and to achieve channelled trafficking .
examples of suitable guides would be a string or painted line .
num mixtures num num the unbound mixture used in the trial shall be transported laid and compacted using the equipment proposed for use in the works .
num num maximum vertical deformation shall be measured in both wheel tracks using optical or laser levels at predetermined monitoring points on five transverse lines spaced equally along the length of the trial bay .
the transverse lines at the ends of the trial area shall be at least num m from the run offrun on areas .
the average deformation of the two wheel tracks after num standard axles shall be recorded .
num reporting and acceptance of trafficking trial area num num the contractor shall provide the overseeing organisation for acceptance with a report on the trafficking trial stating how the use of the unbound mixture was validated .
the main construction of the permanent works shall not start until the trafficking trial area has been accepted by the overseeing organisation within two working days of receiving the trafficking trial area report .
num num type num unbound mixtures num num type num unbound mixture shall be made from crushed rock crushed slag crushed concrete recycled aggregates or well burnt nonplastic shale and may contain up to num by mass of natural sand that passes the num mm test sieve .
where permitted by contract specific appendix num crushed gravel complying with subclause num may be used .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num num num the mixture shall comply with bs en num and the requirements of table num .
the grading requirements for the mixture are summarised in table num .
table num num summary grading requirements for type num and type num unbound mixtures percentage by mass passing sieve size mm overall grading range supplier declared value grading range tolerance on the supplier declared value num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num grading of individual batches differences in values passing selected sieves retained sieve size mm passing sieve size mm percentage by mass passing not less than not more than num num num num num num num num num num the properties of aggregates used in the mixture shall be in accordance with bs en num and the requirements of table num .
num num the size fraction of the unbound mixture passing the num mm size test sieve shall be nonplastic as defined by bs num and tested in compliance therewith .
num num where the mixture contains recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate it shall comply with subclause num .
num num the mixture shall be transported laid and compacted without drying out or segregation .
num additional requirements for mixtures containing crushed gravel num num for the purposes of this clause gravel is defined as aggregate derived from a natural unconsolidated coarsegrained sedimentary deposit consisting of waterworn rock fragments .
crushed gravel aggregate shall be derived from natural cobbles retained on the num mm test sieve and comply with the crushed broken and totally rounded particles requirement in table num .
num num where required by contract specific appendix num mixtures containing crushed gravel coarse aggregate shall comply with the minimum cbr requirement in subclause num .
where required by contract specific appendix num mixtures containing crushed gravel coarse aggregate shall be assessed using a trafficking trial complying with subclause num .
num num type num unbound mixtures num num type num unbound mixture shall be made from natural sands gravels crushed rock crushed slag crushed concrete recycled aggregates or well burnt nonplastic shale .
num num the mixture shall comply with bs en num and the requirements of table num .
the grading requirements for the mixture are summarised in table num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num table num num summary grading requirements for type num unbound mixtures percentage by mass passing sieve size mm overall grading range supplier declared value grading range tolerance on the supplier declared value num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no requirement no requirement grading of individual batches differences in values passing selected sieves retained sieve size mm passing sieve size mm percentage by mass passing not less than not more than num num num num num num num num num num the properties of aggregates used in the mixture shall be in accordance with bs en num and the requirements of table num .
num num the size fraction of the unbound mixture passing the num mm size test sieve when tested in compliance with bs num shall have a plasticity index of less than num .
num num where the mixture contains recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate it shall comply with subclause num .
num num where required by contract specific appendix num the mixture shall satisfy the minimum cbr requirement when tested in accordance with subclause num .
num num the mixture shall be transported laid and compacted without drying out or segregation at a moisture content within the range num above to num below the declared value of optimum water content when tested as required by bs en num .
num num type num open graded unbound mixtures num num type num open graded unbound mixture shall be made from crushed rock crushed blast furnace slag or recycled concrete aggregate .
when tested in accordance with clause num recycled concrete aggregate used in type num open graded unbound mixtures shall not contain more than num asphalt class ra and not more than num other materials class x .
num num the mixture shall comply with bs en num and the requirements of table num .
the grading requirements for the mixture are summarised in table num .
num num the properties of aggregates used in the mixture shall be in accordance with bs en num and the requirements of table num .
num num the size fraction of the unbound mixture passing the num mm size test sieve shall be nonplastic as defined by bs num and tested in compliance therewith .
num num the mixture shall be transported laid and compacted without drying out or segregation .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num table num num summary grading requirements for type num open graded unbound mixtures percentage by mass passing sieve size mm overall grading range supplier declared value grading range tolerance on the supplier declared value num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num grading of individual batches differences in values passing selected sieves retained sieve size mm passing sieve size mm percentage by mass passing not less than not more than num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num category b close graded unbound mixtures num num category b close graded unbound mixture shall be made from crushed rock crushed blast furnace slag or recycled concrete aggregate .
when tested in accordance with clause num recycled concrete aggregate used in category b close graded unbound mixtures shall not contain more than num asphalt class ra and not more than num other materials class x .
num num the mixture shall comply with bs en num and the requirements of table num .
the grading requirements for the mixture are summarised in table num .
table num num summary grading requirements for category b close graded unbound mixtures percentage by mass passing sieve size mm overall grading range supplier declared value grading range tolerance on the supplier declared value num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num grading of individual batches differences in values passing selected sieves retained sieve size mm passing sieve size mm percentage by mass passing not less than not more than num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num num num the properties of aggregates used in the mixture shall be in accordance with bs en num and the requirements of table num .
num num the size fraction of the unbound mixture passing the num mm size test sieve shall be nonplastic as defined by bs num and tested in compliance therewith .
num num the mixture shall be transported laid and compacted without drying out or segregation .
num num type num asphalt arisings unbound mixtures num num type num unbound mixture shall be made from recycled aggregates containing asphalt arisings and may contain crushed rock crushed slag crushed concrete or well burnt nonplastic shale and up to num by mass of natural sand that passes the num mm size test sieve .
num num asphalt arisings shall be either asphalt road planings or granulated asphalt but excluding materials contaminated with tar or tarbitumen binders .
asphalt planings are defined as materials derived from the asphalt layers of the pavement using a mobile machine fitted with milling cutters .
granulated asphalt is defined as asphalt bound material recycled from roads under reconstruction or surplus asphalt material destined for bound pavement layers but unused which has been granulated .
num num type num unbound mixture shall have an asphalt class ra content greater than num when tested in accordance with clause num and the recovered bitumen content of the asphalt shall be not more than num when tested in accordance with bs en num .
num num type num unbound mixture shall comply with bs en num and the requirements of table num .
the grading requirements for the mixture are summarised in table num .
num num the properties of aggregates used in the mixture shall be in accordance with bs en num and the requirements of table num .
num num the size fraction of the unbound mixture passing the num mm size test sieve shall be nonplastic as defined by bs num and tested in compliance therewith .
num num where the mixture contains recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate it shall comply with subclause num .
num num the mixture shall be transported laid and compacted without drying out or segregation at a moisture content within the range num above to num below the declared value of optimum water content when tested as required by bs en num .
the moisture content shall be determined by oven drying at a reduced temperature setting of numc to numc .
num num where required by contract specific appendix num type num unbound mixtures shall be assessed using a trafficking trial complying with subclause num .
num and num num not used num cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num num general requirements for cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num num cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures hbm shall be produced constructed and tested in accordance with the following clauses .
the permitted alternatives for each part of the works shall be as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num attributes shall be deemed to have a no requirement classification unless stated otherwise .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num num num the terms listed below shall apply to the hbm clauses of this specification ass air cooled steel slag cbgm cement bound granular mixture cbr california bearing ratio cfa cement treated fly ash e modulus of elasticity fa fly ash also known as pulverized fuel ash fabm fly ash bound mixture gvxx volumetric expansion category gbs granulated blast furnace slag ggbs ground granulated blast furnace slag hbm hydraulically bound mixture hrb hydraulic road binder factory blended hydraulic binder for road use hrbbm hydraulic road binder bound mixture ibi immediate bearing index immxx immersion category ipixx immediate bearing index category la los angeles coefficient lfa lime treated fly ash mcv moisture condition value nr no requirement owc optimum water content ptr pneumatic tyred roller pulvxx pulverisation category rc compressive strength rt direct tensile strength rit indirect tensile strength rte method of performance classification based on the combination rt and e. classes of rte are designated tnum to tnum in bs en num where t designates rte and the number indicates the performance class sbm slag bound mixture sc soil treated by cement sfa soil treated by fly ash shrb soil treated by hydraulic road binder ss soil treated by slag t time hours at constant temperature in defining maturity for calculating the construction period tc ambient air temperature in defining maturity for calculating construction period wxx water content category volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num num num hbm shall be tested in accordance with clause num and the test methods specified in the following clauses .
num num before work commences the contractor shall submit a statement to the overseeing organisation that includes i the information detailed in the designation and description clause of the relevant bs en standard for the specified hbm confirming compliance with the requirements of this series and contract specific appendix num. ii target proportions of constituents including water .
iii mixture design details and results in accordance with clause num. iv method statement for the demonstration area and the main works in accordance with clause num .
num num when required by contract specific appendix num the coefficient of linear expansion of the mixture shall be determined in accordance with clause num .
num num binder constituents num num binder constituents shall comply with bs en num except that unless otherwise agreed by the overseeing organisation i fly ash shall be siliceous fly ash complying with bs en num ii quicklime shall comply with bs en num and have a grading that complies with particle size category num .
num num the binder content shall comply with table num unless otherwise agreed by the overseeing organisation .
the mixture proportions used for production shall be based on a laboratory mixture design procedure in accordance with clause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num table num num minimum binder or binder constituent additions for hbm binder or binder constituent application minimum addition for mixin plant method of construction using batching by mass by dry mass of mixture minimum addition for mixin plant method of construction using volume batching and for mixinplace construction by dry mass of mixture lime quicklime or hydrated lime when used with another binder constituent num num when used as the only binder in fabm num num num cement when used with another binder constituent num num when used as the only binder constituent in cbgm the appropriate value from bs en num table num num the appropriate value from bs en num table num when used as the only binder constituent in soil treated by cement sc num num ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbs when used with cement num num when used with lime num num aircooled steel slag ass when used with gbs see note num num dry fly ash fa when used with cement num num when used with lime num num granulated blast furnace slag gbs when used with lime num num when used with ass see note num num wet conditioned fly ash fa all applications num num hydraulic road binder all applications num num note when gbs and ass are used in combination the sum of the two shall be not less than num .
num num storage of constituents num num aggregates shall be stored on a firm and clean substrate avoiding contamination with other constituents .
fine aggregate shall be stored at the production location for at least num hours before use .
num num lime cement ggbs hrb and dry fa shall be stored in silos .
num num wet conditioned fa shall have no agglomerations greater than num mm size .
this shall be determined by sieving samples through a num mm size test sieve using not more than num seconds of gentle agitation by hand .
wet conditioned fly ash shall be stored at the source or at the production location for at least num hours before use and have a minimum water content of num .
num num gbs and ass shall be stored as specified in subclause num and used within num months of delivery to the production location .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num num num general requirements for production and layer construction num num hbm shall be produced and laid using one of the following methods as specified in the following mixture clauses i mixinplant method of construction using batching by mass in accordance with clause num ii mixinplant method of construction using volume batching in accordance with clause num iii mixinplace method of construction in accordance with clause num .
num num construction of layers including multiple lift layers and any reworking and reuse shall be completed within the lesser of num hours the construction period specified in table num or the mixture setting time .
the time shall be measured from the addition event defined in table num to completion of compaction .
num num the construction period in degree hours shall be the summation of the products of the average air temperature above numc t c and time for each period t hours i.e .
construction period limit t.t .
the air temperature during the interval t shall not fluctuate by more than numc .
table num num construction period for hbm layers binder addition event defining the start time for calculating maximum construction period maximum construction period c hours cement cement with fa or cement with ggbs addition of cement num lime with gbs or fa addition of lime num lime and gypsum for fabm num addition of lime and gypsum num gbs ass addition of ass and gbs num lime with ggbs addition of ggbs num if ggbs added after lime num if ggbs added before lime hrb addition of hrb workability period at numc determined in accordance with bs en num multiplied by num num num mixtures used in base layers shall be batched by mass and paver laid in a single lift .
construction of bases by other methods shall only be permitted in confined spaces where it is impracticable for a paver to operate when agreed by the overseeing organisation .
num num when quicklime is used full hydration shall be complete prior to final compaction .
num num laying shall be carried out in a way that avoids segregation and drying of the surface .
the temporary intermediate surfaces within a multiple lift layer shall be sprayed with water to prevent surface drying .
num num the minimum compacted lift thickness in a multiple lift layer shall be num mm .
num num makingup of level after initial compaction shall not be permitted for single lift working or the uppermost lift of multiple lift working .
num num the edge of previously compacted hbm or other material shall be vertical and straight before fresh hbm is laid against it .
num num compaction of hbm layers including the intermediate lifts of multiple lift working shall be completed without drying out and before setting of any part of the layer and shall meet the requirements for density in clause num .
num num compaction of hbm other than fabm num shall be carried out by vibrating roller andor pneumatic tyred roller ptr .
where vibrating roller compaction is used on mixtures specified in clauses num to num it shall be followed by at least num passes of a ptr with a wheel loading of not less than numkn .
only ptr compaction with a wheel loading of not less than numkn shall be applied to fabm num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num num num on completion of compaction the surface shall be closed free from ridges cracks loose material visible voids ruts shear planes and other defects .
all defective areas shall be rectified within the time period specified in subclause num .
if rectification is not completed within the specified time period the defective area shall be removed to the full thickness of the layer and new mixture laid and compacted .
num cold and wet weather working num num during cold weather i the temperature of hbm shall not be less than numc at the time of laying ii hbm shall not be laid on a frozen surface iii laying of hbm shall cease when the air temperature falls below numc and laying shall not be resumed until the rising air temperature reaches numc iv the laying of hbm using binders containing less than num of cem num cement by dry mass of mixture shall be restricted in use to the period from num may to num september unless otherwise agreed by the overseeing organisation .
num num in the case of heavy or persistent rain production shall cease and any laid material shall be compacted immediately .
num curing protection and trafficking num num on completion of compaction the layer shall be cured to prevent loss of moisture by i application of a bitumen emulsion spray complying with class cnumbnum as specified in the national foreword to bs en num to produce an even and complete coverage of at least num kgmnum of residual bitumen .
before spraying commences the surface shall be free of all loose material and standing water .
the curing membrane shall be protected from any damage until the construction of the overlaying layer ii application of a mistfoglight spray of water sufficient to keep the surface continuously wet until the specified strength of the hbm has been developed or the layer is overlaid .
num num trafficking of hbm layers shall comply with the requirements set out in table num and subclause num .
should any hbm layer exhibit signs of damage trafficking shall cease immediately and shall only be resumed once the layer has gained sufficient stability to resist damage .
table num num trafficking of hbm layers hbm designation clause reference trafficking cbgm num num and num subclause num .
hbm num num and num not restricted .
num not restricted provided that the ibi requirement of sub clause num is satisfied .
fabm num with cement num not permitted for num days unless overlaid by at least nummm of bound material within the construction period .
fabm num with lime num only the minimum amount of traffic required to construct the next layer is permitted .
sc ss shrb and sfa num not restricted provided that the ibi requirements of table num are satisfied .
for mixtures containing cohesive soil or chalk the test specimens made at the same time as the specimens required in clause num but cured under the same conditions as the insitu treated soil shall also have achieved an average strength of at least class cnum .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num num num cbgm shall not be trafficked for num days unless the layer complies with the following i the layer is compacted by both vibrating roller and ptr in accordance with subclause num to comply with the requirements of subclause num ii the mixture contains at least num by mass of coarse aggregate complying with bs en num category cnum for crushed or broken particles iii test specimens made at the same time as the specimens required in clause num but cured under the same conditions as the insitu cbgm have achieved an average strength of at least class cnum .
num num surface contamination shall be avoided as far as is practicable and any unavoidable contamination shall be removed prior to overlaying .
reworking and recompaction of the layer shall only be permitted within the construction period set out in table num .
reworking shall only be permitted when the water content requirements of the reworked material are maintained within the limits stated in the method statement .
num num before overlaying any loose material shall be removed and replaced to the full depth of the layer or if within the construction period set out in table num reworked as specified in subclause num .
num num daily record sheets complying with subclause num shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation by start of work on the next working day detailing i spread ratebatching record results ii depth measurements iii density test measurements iv sample and test locations v construction period records showing the times of mixing water addition completion of compaction and application of curing membrane .
num num mixinplant method of construction using batching by mass num num the hbm shall be produced in a stationary mixing plant that batches by mass and mixes in a forced action mixer allowing sufficient time in the mixer to produce a homogenous mixture .
num num the mixing plant shall have an automated surveillance and data collection system .
num num hbm shall be transported directly to the point where it is to be laid and protected from the weather during transit and whilst awaiting tipping unless otherwise agreed by the overseeing organisation .
num num mixinplant method of construction using volume batching num num the hbm shall be produced in a stationary mixing plant that batches by volume and mixes in a forced action mixer allowing sufficient time in the mixer to produce a homogenous mixture .
num num hbm shall be transported directly to the point where it is to be laid and protected from the weather during transit and whilst awaiting tipping unless otherwise agreed by the overseeing organisation .
num num dispensing accuracy shall be verified by reconciliation between constituent deliveries and the area and depth of completed layer for each num mnum of work or part thereof during each days operations .
num num mixinplace method of construction num num mixedinplace hbm shall be produced by an insitu pulverizingmixing process with the added mixing water injected directly into the mixture during the mixing process .
the pulverizingmixing process shall be repeated until a homogenous mixture is produced .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num num num when binder constituents are dispensed onto the surface to be pulverizedmixed the rate of spread shall be confirmed by site checks carried out in accordance with clause num .
for each group of num readings the mean rate of spread of material shall be within num of the stated target rate and each individual value shall be within num of the mean value of the group of num readings .
num num the accuracy of the system used to dispense binder constituents shall be verified by reconciliation between constituent deliveries and the area and depth of completed layer for each num mnum of work or part thereof during each days operations .
num num mixing of fresh material shall ensure a minimum overlap of num mm with previously mixed material .
num num where lime is used to granulate cohesive soils it shall be added and mixed with the soil using at least two passes of the pulverizermixer between num and num hours before the subsequent addition of cement fa hrb or ggbs .
the surface of the layer shall be sealed by rolling immediately after adding and mixing lime .
the mcv during this period known as the mellowing period shall comply with clause num .
num num method statement and demonstration area num method statement num num at least num days prior to constructing the demonstration area specified in subclause num the contractor shall provide a full method statement for the approval of the overseeing organisation .
the statement shall detail the operatives plant materials and procedures for the construction of demonstration areas and of the works including procedures .
the statement shall also include procedures for induced cracking if required by contract specific appendix num and the procedures to be applied during inclement weather plant breakdowns and other unscheduled events .
num num the method statement shall include the intended mixture proportions with supporting data from trial mix results andor historic records to justify the proportions the water content or mcv limits and if applicable spread rates for all stages of the work .
num num where multiple lift working is used the method statement shall detail the methods used to assure that bond between the individual lifts is achieved .
the method statement shall also detail the procedures to be used to confirm that bond has been achieved in the demonstration area and in the works .
num num the method statement shall include a sample record sheet for the submission of the data required by subclause num .
num demonstration area num num prior to the commencement of the main works the contractor shall construct a demonstration area of at least num mnum conforming to the submitted method statement .
the demonstration area shall include a transverse end ofday joint and if appropriate multiple lift working .
the demonstration area may be accepted into the permanent works where agreed by the overseeing organisation .
where the contractor can produce documentary evidence of similar work carried out to this specification during the previous num months the overseeing organisation may allow the works to proceed without the demonstration area .
num num where multiple lift working is used the demonstration area shall confirm the effectiveness of the procedures used to assure that bond between the individual lifts can be achieved .
num num where induced cracking is required the demonstration area shall include crack induction at the specified spacing .
the effectiveness of the procedure used shall be checked within num days of construction by recovering four evenly spaced num mm dia cores from the line of the induced cracks and assessing each core for compliance with subclause num .
num num the mixture constituents proportions laying and compaction plant and construction procedures used for the demonstration area shall not be changed unless the contractor lays a further demonstration area or the changes are agreed by the overseeing organisation .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num num num induced cracking of hbm num num where required by contract specific appendix num transverse cracks shall be formed at the specified spacing with a tolerance of num mm .
where the pavement is made up of two or more layers of hbm with induced cracks the cracks in the overlying hbm layer shall align with the induced cracks in the layer below with a tolerance of num mm .
num num cracks shall be induced in fresh material after initial compaction .
the transverse cracks shall be induced by grooving the fresh material to form straight vertical grooves not more than num mm wide to a depth of between one half and two thirds of the layer thickness over the full width of the pavement .
bitumen emulsion shall be poured or sprayed into the grooves prior to final compaction to form a crack inducing membrane .
the bitumen emulsion shall comply with class cnumbnum as specified in the national foreword to bs en num .
during final compaction of the mixture the surface of the groove shall be fully closed throughout its full length .
the bitumen in the groove shall be fully encased and remain continuous with not less than num of the sides of the groove coated with bitumen .
num num where required by contract specific appendix num longitudinal cracks shall be induced using the procedure specified in subclause num .
num num not used num num aggregates num num the aggregates used in hbm shall comply with bs en num and the selected requirements listed in table num .
where recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate is used in hbm it shall also be tested in accordance with clause num and comply with the additional requirements for the proportion of the components listed in table num .
num num when required by contract specific appendix num an existing pavement layer that is to used to produce hbm shall be tested to confirm compliance with subclause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num table num num aggregate requirements for hbm clause reference num num num num num num num hbm designation cbgm a cbgm b cbgm c fabm num hrbbm num sbm bnum fabm num hrbbm num sbm bnum fabm num hrbbm num sbm bnum bnum bnum bnum categories for aggregate properties bs en num crushed or broken particles and totally rounded particles in coarse aggregate cnr note num cnr unless otherwise specified in contract specific appendix num cnum or cnum as specified in contract specific appendix num note num cnr note num cnum or cnum as specified in contract specific appendix num resistance to fragmentation of coarse aggregate lanr lanum or lanum as specified in contract specific appendix num lanum lanum or lanum as specified in contract specific appendix num lanum lanr lanum acidsoluble sulfate content note num aircooled blastfurnace slag asnum other aggregates asnum total sulfur content note num aircooled blastfurnace slag snum other aggregates snum other requirements bs num fines quality note num nr note num nonplastic nr note num nonplastic proportion of components clause num maximum glass content classrgg num num num num num num num maximum impurities content class x num num num num num num num notes num .
the suffix nr denotes that the no requirement category applies .
num .
cnr if fabm num contains at least num cem num cement by dry mass of the mixture and trafficking is prevented for num days .
num .
where the contractor is able to provide evidence of mixture stability over an extended period then the overseeing organisation may consider the use of higher limits .
num .
where required the size fraction of the aggregate passing the num mm size test sieve shall be nonplastic as defined by and tested in compliance with bs num .
num num cement bound granular mixtures a cbgm a num num cement bound granular mixtures a cbgm a shall comply with bs en num and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of clause num .
num num aggregate shall comply with the requirements of clause num and shall have a combined grading that complies with envelope a from bs en num figure num .
num num the strength after immersion shall be at least num of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in clause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num num num the method of construction shall be in accordance with clause num and either clause num clause num or clause num .
num num the laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num when sampled and tested in accordance with clause num .
num num cement bound granular mixtures b cbgm b num num cement bound granular mixtures b cbgm b shall comply with bs en num and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of clause num .
num num aggregates shall comply with the requirements of clause num and shall have a combined grading that complies with envelope b from bs en num figure num .
alternatively the total mixture grading shall comply with the grading envelope category gnum from bs en num annex b figure bnum .
num num the strength after immersion shall be at least num of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in clause num .
num num the method of construction shall be in accordance with clause num and clause num .
num num the laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num when sampled and tested in accordance with clause num .
num num cement bound granular mixtures c cbgm c num num cement bound granular mixtures c cbgm c shall comply with bs en num and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of clause num .
num num aggregates shall comply with the requirements of clause num and shall have a total mixture grading that complies with grading envelope category gnum from bs en num annex b figure bnum for num size mixtures figure bnum for num mm size mixtures or figure bnum for num mm size mixtures .
num num the compacity of the mixture shall be at least num when calculated in accordance with bs en num annex c. the maximum dry density value used for the calculation shall be determined in accordance with bs en num using the modified proctor num kg rammer procedure from bs en num .
num num the strength after immersion shall be at least num of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in clause num .
num num the method of construction shall be in accordance with clause num and clause num .
num num the laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num when sampled and tested in accordance with clause num .
num to num num not used num num fly ash bound mixture num fabm num and hydraulic road binder bound mixture num hrbbm num num num the mixture shall comply with the requirements of bs en num for fly ash bound mixture num or the requirements of bs en num for hydraulic road binder bound mixture num as specified in contract specific appendix num and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of clause num .
num num aggregate shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num num num the strength after immersion shall be at least num of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in clause num .
num num the method of construction shall comply with clause num and clause num .
num num the laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the contract specific requirements of appendix num when sampled and tested in accordance with clause num .
num num slag bound mixture bnum sbm bnum fly ash bound mixture num fabm num and hydraulic road binder bound mixture num hrbbm num num num the mixture shall comply with the requirements of bs en num for slag bound mixture bnum or the requirements of bs en num for fly ash bound mixture num or the requirements of bs en num for hydraulic road binder bound mixture num as specified in contract specific appendix num and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of clause num .
num num aggregate shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
num num sbm bnum shall have a total mixture grading that complies with grading envelope category gnum or gnum from bs en num figure num for num size mixtures figure num for num mm size mixtures or figure num for num mm size mixtures .
num num fabm num shall have a total mixture grading that complies with grading envelope category gnum or gnum from bs en num figure num for num size mixtures figure num for num mm size mixtures or figure num for num mm size mixtures .
num num hrbbm num shall have a total mixture grading that complies with grading envelope category gnum or gnum from bs en num figure num for num mm size mixtures figure num for num mm size mixtures and figure num for num mm size mixtures num num the strength after immersion shall be at least num of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in clause num .
num num the method of construction shall be in accordance with clauses num and num .
num num the laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num when sampled and tested in accordance with clause num .
num num slag bound mixture bnum sbm bnum fly ash bound mixture num fabm num and hydraulic road binder bound mixture num hrbbm num num num the mixture shall comply with the requirements of bs en num for slag bound mixture bnum or the requirements of bs en num for fly ash bound mixture num or the requirements of bs en num for hydraulic road binder bound mixture num as specified in contract specific appendix num and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of clause num .
num num aggregate shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
num num the strength after immersion shall be at least num of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in clause num .
num num the method of construction shall be in accordance with clause num and either clause num clause num or clause num .
num num the laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num when sampled and tested in accordance with clause num .
num num the mixture design procedures specified in clause num shall include the determination of the immediate bearing at the target water and binder content .
the mixture shall comply with immediate bearing index category ipinum .
when approved by the overseeing organisation and where the mixture is not subject to direct trafficking the mixture shall comply with immediate bearing index category ipinum .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num num num the requirements of clause num shall not apply if the mixture contains at least num cement by mass of the dry mixture and traffic is not permitted to use the layer for the first num days .
num num not used num num fly ash bound mixture num fabm num num num the mixture shall comply with bs en num for fly ash bound mixture num and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of clause num .
num num the strength after immersion shall be at least num of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in clause num .
num num for limetreated fly ash mixtures with gypsum added as an additional constituent the method of construction shall be in accordance with clause num and num .
for other mixtures the method of construction permitted shall comply with clause num and either clause num clause num or clause num .
num num the laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num when sampled and tested in accordance with clause num .
num num slag bound mixtures bnum bnum bnum and bnum sbm bnum num num the mixture shall comply with bs en num for sbm bnum sbm bnum sbm bnum or sbm bnum num as specified in contract specific appendix num and have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of clause num .
num num aggregates shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
num num the strength after immersion shall be at least num of the nonimmersed strength when tested in accordance with the laboratory mixture design requirements specified in clause num .
num num the method of construction shall be in accordance with clause num and num .
num num the laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num when sampled and tested in accordance with clause num .
num to num num not used num num soil treated by cement sc soil treated by slag ss soil treated by fly ash sfa and soil treated by hydraulic road binder shrb num num the mixture shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num and comply with the appropriate requirements selected from table num and the following i bs en num for soil treated by cement sc ii bs en num for soil treated by slag ss iii bs en num for soil treated with hydraulic road binder shrb iv bs en num for soil treated by fly ash sfa .
the mixture shall also have binder constituent proportions complying with the requirements of clause num .
num num not less than num of the soil shall pass the num mm size test sieve when tested in accordance with bs en num and the maximum particle size of the soil shall not exceed num of the layer depth .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num num num when tested in accordance with bs en num clause num soil with a total potential sulfate tps content less than num sulfate as sonum shall be deemed suitable for treatment if the laboratory mixture design procedure confirms that the mixture complies with the resistance to water requirements specified in table num .
soil with a total potential sulfate tps equal to or greater than num sulfate as sonum shall only be deemed suitable for treatment where agreed by the overseeing organisation .
num num the method of construction shall be in accordance with clause num and either clause num clause num or clause num .
num num the laboratory mechanical performance shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num when sampled and tested in accordance with clause num .
table num num requirements for soil treated by cement sc slag ss and fly ash sfa mixture parameter requirement category bs en num num num num num reference noncohesive soil mixtures cohesive soil mixtures and chalk mixtures minimum water content expressed as a proportion of the optimum water content determined in accordance with bs en num vibrating hammer method wnum wnr note num table num wnum for mixtures containing quicklime degree of pulverization determined in accordance with bs en num pulvnr note num pulvnum table num immediate bearing index note num determined in accordance with clause num ipinum note num ipinum table num moisture condition value determined in accordance with bs en num mcvnr note num mcvnum at final mixing and compaction note num table num laboratory mechanical performance compressive strength or tensile strength rc or rte as specified in contract specific appendix num table num for rc figure num for rte resistance to water strength after immersion rir ratio determined in accordance with clause num inum table num resistance to water volumetric swelling determined in accordance with bs en num nr note num sc gvnum table num bs en num ss srb and sfa gv to be not greater than num clause num bs en num num and num notes num .
the suffix nr denotes that the no requirement category applies .
num .
where sc is not to be trafficked within num days ipinr may be used .
num .
ipinum where the mixture is not subject to direct trafficking .
num .
for cohesive soil mixtures the requirement also applies during the mellowing period .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num num to num num not used num num testing control and checking of hbm num general num num tests controls and checks shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements in table num and the following subclauses at locations determined by the overseeing organisation unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num .
where the overseeing organisation is satisfied that a consistent quality of work is being achieved it may order the frequency of testing to be reduced to half that required in table num .
where a test reference is shown in table num the testing shall be carried out in compliance with the requirements of clause num and be undertaken by an organisation accredited in accordance with bs en isoiec num for the test method .
num sampling num num sampling shall be in accordance with bs num .
where a bulk sample of hbm is taken from a layer it shall be taken from the full depth of the layer used without further mixing and not combined with other bulk samples .
num spread checks for the mixinplace method of construction num num the rate of spread of added constituents shall be determined by weighing the amount of material retained on five trays or mats of known area laid in the path of the spreading machine .
the trays or mats shall be positioned at points equally spaced along a diagonal bisecting line the area of coverage so as to assess the full width of discharge from the spreading machine .
num depth of mixing for the mixinplace method of construction num num the depth of mixing shall be checked by excavation and inspection on completion of each stage of the pulverizingmixing process .
the depth of mixing shall be referenced to the design levels for the pavement by precise leveling of the stabilized soil interface or other techniques approved by the overseeing organisation to ensure that the level at the underside of the stabilized layer is in accordance with the specified requirements .
num standardisation of nuclear density gauges and measurement of insitu wet density num num the insitu wet density of a compacted mixture shall be measured using a calibrated nuclear density gauge in accordance with bs num and the following subclauses except that each test shall consist of at least num measurements at num degrees to each other using the same source rod hole and the density taken as the average of the higher num results .
num num the operation warmingup period if any and standardisation of the gauge shall be carried out in compliance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the gauge shall be calibrated in accordance with bs num immediately prior to the construction of the demonstration area and at least once every num days thereafter .
num num the gauge shall be used in the direct transmission mode of operation with the source rod lowered to within num mm of the bottom surface of the layer .
the insitu wet density shall be determined within two hours of completing compaction .
num num the insitu wet density of a subbase layer shall be taken as the average value of five determinations equally spaced along a line that bisects each num mnum or part thereof laid each day .
the first and fifth positions shall be located num mm from the edges of the laid area or other positions agreed by the overseeing organisation .
num num for a subbase layer the average insitu wet density of the area specified in subclause num shall be not less than num of the average wet density of the test specimens taken to determine the laboratory mechanical performance of the same area .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num num num for a base layer the average insitu wet density of the area specified in subclause num shall be not less than num of the wet density of the hbm at its optimum moisture content measured using the vibrating hammer method detailed in bs en num .
the result of each single determination of insitu wet density shall be not less than num of the wet density of the hbm at its optimum moisture content .
num laboratory mechanical performance num num a bulk sample of hbm shall be taken from each of the locations in subclause num after the insitu wet density has been determined .
test specimens used to determine laboratory mechanical performance shall be made using vibratory hammer compaction in accordance with bs en num .
where cubes are used for the determination of compressive strength the specimens shall be num mm size unless agreed otherwise by the overseeing organisation .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num table num num requirements for testing control and checking of hbm testcontrolcheck test frequency test reference water content of aggregate or soil sources on site num per num mnum bs num clause num grading of aggregate or soil sources on site num per num mnum aggregates bs en num soils bs num clause num plasticity of aggregate or soil sources on site num per num mnum bs num clause num constituents sourced offsite aggregates results of routine control tests from the factory production control system required by bs en num annex c to be provided weekly .
cement certificates to be provided monthly for each cement type in accordance with bs en num national annex nb .
slag certificates to be provided weekly to confirm the declared values required by bs en num clause num .
fly ash certificates to be provided weekly to confirm compliance with the requirements of bs en num .
other constituents certificates to be provided weekly to confirm compliance with the specification agreed as part of the factory production control system for the mixture .
batching records for mixinplant method of construction using batching by mass continuously using the automated surveillance and data collection system batching records for mixinplant method of construction using batching by volume and mixinplace dispensing accuracy shall be verified by reconciliation between constituent deliveries and the area and depth of completed layer for each nummnum of work or part thereof during each days operation spread checks for mixinplace method of construction at each stage of the mixing process subclause num num determination per num mnum but not less than num per day mixture grading including binder num per num mnum but not less than num per day bs en num water content at final compaction num per num mnum but not less than num per day bs num clause num mcv at mixing and final compaction and in the case of cohesive mixtures during the mellowing period num per num mnum but not less than num per day bs en num pulverization cohesive mixtures only num per num mnum but not less than num per day bs en num depth of mixing for mixinplace method of construction at each stage of the mixing process subclause num num per num mnum but not less than num per day insitu wet density num per num mnum or part thereof laid each day measured at the locations detailed in subclause num subclause num laboratory mechanical performance num per num mnum or part thereof laid each day with test specimens prepared from a bulk sample taken from each of the locations detailed in subclause num as required by table num strength after immersion in water laboratory mixture design procedure as required by clause num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num num table num num laboratory mechanical performance testing requirements for hbm clause mixture curing regime curing temperature test method age at test num num num gbgm a cbgm b and cbgm c regime a from bs en num annex c numc rc bs en num num days or other age agreed by the overseeing organisation see note num num num num sbm hrbbm and fabm except fabm num bs en num numc num fabm num treated with lime bs en num numc rit bs en num fabm num treated with cement bs en num numc num sc regime anum from bs en num annex b numc ec bs en num ss sfa bs en num numc note for site control purposed hbm may be assessed on the basis of num days strength or other agreed age where the contractor so requests provided that a robust correlation is established between num days and num days strength using representative samples of the aggregates and binder used in the works .
num num compliance of the area specified in subclause num shall be assessed using the results for test specimens that are cured and tested in accordance with table num using either compression or indirect tensile testing as appropriate to the class of mechanical performance specified in contract specific appendix num .
assessment shall be made using the following criteria i compressive strength the requirement specified in contract specific appendix num shall be deemed to be satisfied if the average compressive strength of the group of specimens in table num is equal to or greater than the minimum for the specified rc class and no individual test result is less than num of the minimum strength requirement for the rc class .
ii indirect tensile strength the requirement specified in contract specific appendix num shall be deemed to be satisfied if the average indirect tensile strength of the group of specimens in table num is equal to or greater than the minimum requirement and no individual result is less than num of the minimum requirement appropriate to the e value determined during the laboratory mixture design procedure specified in clause num .
for the purposes of this specification any reference to characteristic strength in bs ennum shall be superseded by the requirements of this subclause .
num num determination of the coefficient of linear thermal expansion num scope num num the test method described in this clause shall be used to determine the coefficient of linear thermal expansion of hbm within the normal range of temperature for pavement layers .
the test method shall be carried out using hardened specimens .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures num amendment february num num apparatus num num the following apparatus shall be used i a water bath with sufficient capacity to accommodate three test specimens and capable of maintaining predetermined temperatures between numc and numc .
ii a device capable of measuring linear dimensions of not less than num mm to an accuracy of num mm with a known temperature correction factor .
iii vibrating hammer compaction apparatus capable of producing num mm diameter cylindrical test specimens in accordance with bs en num .
the apparatus shall be suitably modified to manufacture num mm long test specimens .
num test procedure num num the following test procedure shall be followed i compact three num mm diameter test specimens num mm in length in accordance with bs en num but using six layers each with a nominal depth of num mm .
ii mark each specimen with num pairs of permanent reference points aligned longitudinally .
one of each pair shall be at opposite ends of the specimen .
each pair shall be located at num around the circumference of the specimens aligned parallel to the axis and not more than num mm from each end of the specimen .
iii cure the specimens using the procedure specified for the determination of mechanical laboratory performance in table num. iv saturate the test specimens either at atmospheric pressure or under vacuum until the increase in the surface dried mass of each specimen determined using two readings taken at least num hours apart is less than num. v immerse the specimens in the water bath at a constant temperature tnum maintained to an accuracy of numc for num num hours .
then measure the length lnum of each test specimen at the locations defined by the three pairs of reference points .
repeat the measurement of length every num hours until the change in length between successive measurements is less than num mm .
vi raise the temperature of the water bath by at least numc and record the temperature tnum .
tnum shall not exceed numc .
maintain the temperature at tnum numc for num num hours and measure the length lnum using the procedure in v. vii lower the temperature of the water bath by at least numc and record the temperature tnum .
maintain the temperature at tnum numc for num num hours and measure the final length lnum using the procedure in v. num calculations num num calculate the coefficient of linear thermal expansion cle as follows i for each pair of reference points for the heating sequence calculate cle lnum lnum tnum tnum giving num results in total .
ii reject the highest and lowest results and record the mean value of cle for the remaining num results .
iii for each pair of reference points for the cooling sequence calculate cle lnum lnum tnum tnum giving num results in total .
iv reject the highest and lowest results and record the mean value of cle for the remaining num results .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements unbound cement and other hydraulically bound mixtures amendment february num numf v calculate cle num mean value of cle mean value of cle .
vi check that the mean values of cle and cle lie in the range numcle to numcle .
if the mean values lie outside this range repeat the procedure in subclause num .
num reporting of results num num report the value of cle using units of m.numc expressed to the nearest whole number .
num to num num not used num num laboratory mixture design procedure num num prior to the commencement of the work or any change in mixture constituents the contractor shall determine the target proportions of the constituents including water for the specified hbm based on the mixture design procedure described in this clause .
num num the mixture design procedure shall determine the properties of the hbm at a minimum of num values of binder contents and a minimum of num values of water content for each value of binder content .
num immediate stability num num when required the mixture design procedure shall include the determination of the immediate bearing index ibi at the selected design water and binder content measured in accordance with bs en num .
the ibi value shall be taken as the average value for a set of num test specimens .
num resistance to water strength after immersion num num the strength after immersion in water shall be assessed by comparing the average strength and condition of i num specimens initially cured in a sealed condition for num days at the test temperature and then removed from their moulds and immersed in aerated water for num days at the same test temperature .
ii num specimens cured in sealed condition for num days at the same test temperature .
the immersed specimens shall be unconfined and have water in contact with all surfaces .
on completion of the immersion stage of the test the specimens shall show no signs of cracking or swelling .
num num for mixtures containing less than num by dry mass of the mixture of cement the test temperature shall be num numc .
for mixtures containing num or more cement the test temperature shall be num numc .
num resistance to frost heave num num hbm shall be deemed resistant to frost heave where the compressive strength class is cnum or greater or rit is greater than num mpa when cured in accordance with table num .
manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendment may num num series num road pavements bituminous bound materials contents clause title page num num general num num num bituminous mixtures num num num reclaimed asphalt num num num placing and compaction of bituminous mixtures num num num hot rolled asphalt base num num num hot rolled asphalt binder course recipe mixtures num num num dense base and binder course asphalt concrete with paving grade bitumen recipe mixtures num num num regulating course num num num not used num num num num mm dense asphalt concrete surface course num num num hot rolled asphalt surface course recipe mixtures num num num hot rolled asphalt surface course design mixtures num num num close graded asphalt concrete surface course num num num not used num num num fine graded asphalt concrete surface course num num num coated chippings for application to hot rolled asphalt surfacings num num num num not used num num num slurry surfacing incorporating microsurfacing num num num surface dressing recipe specification num num num bond coats tack coats and other bituminous sprays num num num surface macrotexture of bituminous surface courses num num clause title page num num surface dressing design application and end product performance num num num cold applied ultrathin surfacing num num num high friction surfaces num num num testing of bituminous mixtures num num num in situ recycling the repave process num num num num not used num num num dense base and binder course asphalt concrete design mixtures num num num emenum base and binder course asphalt concrete num num to num num not used num num num stone mastic asphalt sma binder course and regulating course num num num porous asphalt num num to num num not used num num num thin surface course systems num num num hot rolled asphalt surface course and binder course performance related design mixtures num num num not used num num num weather conditions for laying of bituminous mixtures num num num local repairs num num num in situ cold recycled bound material num num num ex situ cold recycled bound material num num num not used num num num surface preservation systems num num num torque bond test num num num num not used num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works num amendment may num clause title page num num method for laboratory determination of interface properties usingthemodifiedleutnersheartest num num numageingprofiletestusinga modifiedrollingthinfilmoventest mrtfot num num num num not used num num nummodifiedbinderstorage stability test num national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland clause title page numtswg num hot rolled asphalt surface course design mixtures numf numts num stone mastic asphalt surface course tsnum numf denotesaclauseorsamplecontractspecificappendixwhich hasasubstitutenationalclauseorsamplecontractspecific appendix for one or more of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales or northern ireland .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num road pavements bituminous bound materials num num general num numthisseriesispartofthespecificationforhighwayworks.whilstthisseriesisparticularlyrelevantto the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and withallotherseriesrelevanttothespecificationfortheparticularworkstobeundertaken .
num num bituminous pavement mixtures num general num num this clause gives general requirements for the properties of the aggregates and bitumen used in plantproduced bituminous mixtures .
these requirements apply to all plant produced bituminous mixtures unless otherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumorwhereotherrequirementsaregiveninspecificclausesin this series .
num num bituminous mixtures shall be laid by organisations registered to and operating in compliance with the sector scheme num for the laying of asphalt mixes listed in appendix a .
all mixtures supplied in accordance with bs en num shall be ce marked and the contractor shall submit the declaration of performance which shall demonstratethatthemixtureprovidestheperformancerequiredbythespecification .
num aggregates for bituminous mixtures num numnaturalrecycledunboundandmanufacturedartificialaggregatesshallbecleanhardanddurableand shall comply with bs en num and be ce marked and have a declared performance which demonstrates that theaggregatemeetstherequirementsofthespecification.whererecycledcoarseaggregateorrecycledconcrete aggregate is used in bituminous mixtures it shall have been tested in accordance with clause num and the content of other materials class x including wood plastic and metal shall not exceed num by mass .
reclaimed asphalt shall comply with clause num .
num num the use of aggregate derived as a byproduct during the extraction of china clay is permitted .
it shall comply with the requirements of this clause bs en num and the examples of the relevant annex of bsi pd num .
num num the use of crushed slate aggregate is permitted in base and binder course layers .
it shall comply with the requirements of this clause bs en num and the examples of the relevant annex of bsi pd num except for theflakinesscategorywhichshallbesubjecttopriorapprovalbytheoverseeingorganisation.mixturesofcrushed slate aggregate with coarse aggregate of a different geological type shall not be permitted .
num resistance to fragmentation hardness num numunlessotherwisestatedincontractspecificappendixnumthecoarseaggregatesforbituminousmixtures shall meet the following criteria i theresistancetofragmentationcategoryofthecoarseaggregateasdefinedinclausenumof bs en num shall be lanum or better for natural aggregates and lanum or better for blast furnace slag or ii crushed rock aggregate has a los angeles value greater than num but less than num where evidence can be presented to the overseeing organisation of previous satisfactory use of the source in asphalt .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num naturalandmanufacturedartificialaggregatesrecoveredfromaprevioususeinanunboundformshallcomply with the requirements of this clause .
num resistance to freezing and thawing durability num numwhenrequiredincontractspecificappendixnumtheresistanceofthecoarseaggregatetofreezing andthawingshallbedeclared.thefreezingandthawingsoundnesscategoryasdefinedinbsennum clause num shall be msnumunlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.thewaterabsorption value of the coarse aggregate shall be determined in accordance with bs en num clause num .
if the water absorption value of the coarse aggregate is greater than wanum the soundness test shall be carried out on the material delivered to site .
the requirements for water absorption do not apply to blast furnace slag aggregate .
num cleanness num numunlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumtheproportionofcoarseandfine aggregatesforbituminousmixturespassingthenummmtestsievefinescontentshallnotexceedthelimits stated in bsi pd num annex b annex c and annex d when tested in accordance with the washing and sieving method of bs en num .
num resistance to polishing and surface abrasion num numwhenspecifiedintheappropriateclauseorcontractspecificappendixnumtheaggregateshallconform to the required declared psv category in accordance with bs en num clause num and bsi pd num clause num .
num num the resistance to surface abrasion of coarse aggregate used in surface courses in accordance with bs en num clause num and bsi pd num clause num shall conform to category aavnum unless otherwise specifiedintheappropriateclauseorincontractspecificappendixnum .
num chemical requirements num dicalcium silicate disintegration num num aircooled blast furnace slag aggregates shall be free from iron dicalcium silicate disintegration as definedinbsennumclausenum .
num iron disintegration num numaircooledblastfurnaceslagaggregatesshallbefreefromirondisintegrationasdefinedin bs en num clause num .
num volume stability num numthevolumestabilitycategoryofsteelslagaggregatesasdefinedinbsennumclausenumshall not exceed vnum .
num bitumen num num paving grade bitumen shall comply with bs en num .
num numpolymermodifiedbitumenshallcomplywithbsennum .
num asphalt durability num num the durability of adhesion in base and binder course mixtures designed in accordance with clause num and to be used on trunk roads including motorways shall be determined by testing in accordance with bs en num .
the sats durability index of the mix components shall be above num .
num nummixturesthatincludenumhydratedlimefilleraredeemedtosatisfythisrequirementandsatstestingis notrequired.hydratedlimefillershallbecaohnum in the form of hydrated lime type cl nums .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num num reclaimed asphalt num num the requirements of this clause apply to all bituminous mixtures containing reclaimed asphalt .
num num reclaimed asphalt may be used in the production of bituminous surface course binder course regulatingcourseandbase.unlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumtheuseofreclaimed asphalt shall be in accordance with i clausenumforsurfacecoursemixturesspecifiedinclausenum ii bsi pd num b.num for asphalt concrete mixtures macadams iii bsi pd num c.num for hot rolled asphalt mixtures iv bsi pd num d.num for stone mastic asphalt mixtures .
other recycled materials shall only be used in bituminous mixtures with the approval of the overseeing organisation .
the mixed material shall comply with the requirements of all the relevant clauses in this series .
num reclaimed feedstock num num all reclaimed material shall be pretreated before use such that it is homogeneously mixed and the maximumparticlesizedoesnotexceednummm .
num properties of binder num num the fresh bitumen added to the mixture shall not be more than two grades softer than the nominal grade for the mixture given in table num of bsi pd num .
checks on the penetration of the binder recovered from the reclaimed asphalt together with a calculation of the properties of the combined binder shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant parts of bs en num .
when more than num of reclaimed asphalt is incorporated in a mixture tests on binder recovered from the mixture shall be carried out following the example in bsi pd num num .
the results shall be within the limits set out in bsi pd num num .
num mixed materials containing more than num reclaimed asphalt num num when more than num of reclaimed asphalt is incorporated in a designed base or binder course mixture cores taken to assess compliance with clause num or clause num shall also be tested for stiffness in accordance with bs en num itsm method numc .
the frequency of testing shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation prior to the commencement of works and shall comply with the requirements of contract specificappendicesnumandnum .
num num the stiffness of the mixture shall comply with the appropriate category from table num .
table num num stiffness categories for designed base and binder course mixtures incorporating greater than num reclaimed asphalt nominal binder grade of mixture stiffness category smin num num num num num num num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num num placing and compaction of bituminous mixtures num general num num this clause gives general requirements for the placing and compaction of bituminous mixtures which are complementary and additional to the requirements of bs num .
these requirements and the requirements ofbsnumapplytoallbituminousmixturesunlessotherwisespecifiedintheotherclausesinthisseriesorin contractspecificappendixnum .
num numbituminouspavementsshallbeconstructedusingthematerialsspecifiedincontractspecific appendix num and shall be laid by contractors that are registered to the bs en iso num sector scheme num for the laying of asphalt mixes listed in appendix a .
num num in order to exclude moisture from interfaces and ensure full interlayer bonding the surface of all bituminous material shall be kept clean and uncontaminated .
unless agreed with the overseeing organisation the onlytrafficpermittedtorunonthesurfaceofbituminousmaterialtobeoverlaidshallbethatengagedinlaying and compacting the next course or where a binder course is to be blinded or surface dressed that is engaged on such surface treatment .
if any surface becomes contaminated it shall be made good by cleaning and if this proves impracticablebyrectificationincompliancewithclausenum .
num num prior to placing bituminous material on any new or existing bound substrate a bond coat or tack coat shall be applied in accordance with clauses num or num as appropriate .
num num before work commences the contractor shall submit a method statement to the overseeing organisation that includes i layingandcompactionproceduresforeachlayerincludingpavingspeedandpavedwidthsizetype and number of rollers and number of roller passes .
ii the joint formation procedures for each layer including the location of longitudinal and transverse joints and the methods of treating upstanding edges .
num transporting num num hot bituminous mixtures shall be transported in accordance with the requirements of bs num and shall remain covered whilst awaiting tipping .
num laying num numhotbituminousmixturesotherthanthosespecifiedunderclausenumshallbelaidinaccordancewith therequirementsofbsnumandsubclausesnumtonumofthisclause.surfacingsspecifiedunderclausenumshall be laid in accordance with the requirements of that clause and subclauses num to num of this clause .
num num wherever practicable hot bituminous mixtures shall be spread levelled and tamped by a selfpropelled paving machine .
the rate of delivery of material to the paver shall be regulated to enable the paver to operate continuously .
num num hand placing of hot bituminous mixtures shall be restricted to the following circumstances i for laying regulating courses of irregular shape and varying thickness .
ii inconfinedspaceswhereitisimpracticableforapavertooperate .
iii for footways .
iv at the approaches to expansion joints at bridges viaducts or other structures .
v for laying mastic asphalt .
num num handraking of surface course material or the addition of such material by handspreading to the paved area for adjustment of level shall be restricted to the following circumstances i at the edges of the layers of material and at gullies manholes and other ironwork .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num ii at the approaches to expansion joints at bridges viaducts or other structures .
num numthemethodoflayingshallbesuchthatthefinishedmatisfreefromdraggingtearingandsegregation of the material .
num num when laying mixtures from more than one source the mixtures shall have equivalent laying and compaction characteristics so that surface evenness is not compromised .
num num when paving adjacent to an expansion joint of a structure the joint or joint cavity shall be kept clear of material .
when laying binder course or surface course the paver shall be taken out of use whilst laying the remainder of the pavement up to the joint and the corresponding area beyond it .
num numwhenpavingdirectlyontobridgedeckwaterproofingsystemsanyspecialrequirementswhichapplyto that system shall be complied with .
num compaction num num the compaction of hot bituminous mixtures shall be in accordance with bs num and the requirementsforspecificmixturesin i clause num for dense base and binder course asphalt concrete design mixtures .
ii clause num for emenum mixtures .
iii clause num for thin surface course systems .
num numexceptwhereotherwisespecifiedrollersshallcomplywiththegeneralrequirementsofbsnum except that the minimum mass of deadweight smooth wheeled rollers shall be num tonnes .
multiwheeled pneumatic tyred rollers and vibratory rollers may be used if they are capable of achieving at least the standard of compaction of an numtonnes deadweight roller .
num num where compaction is to be determined in accordance with clauses num and num the requirements to prove the performance of rollers do not apply .
in such cases the contractor may use any plant to achieve the specifiedlevelofcompactionandshallfinishcompactionattemperaturesabovetheminimumspecifiedrolling temperature .
num num vibratory rollers shall not be used in vibrating mode on bridge decks .
num chippings num num the application of coated chippings to areas of surface course shall be by a mechanical spreader capable of distributing chippings to an even rate of spread .
addition of chippings by hand operation shall only be permitted in the following circumstances i inconfinedspaceswhereitisimpracticableforachippingspreadertooperate .
ii as a temporary expedient when adjustments have to be made to the spreader distribution mechanism .
iii when hand laying of the surface course is permitted .
iv to correct uneven distribution of chippings .
num num chippings shall be applied uniformly and rolled into the surface so they are effectively held and provide theinitialmacrotexturedepthspecifiedinclausenum .
num joints num num for new pavement construction all longitudinal joints in all layers shall be situated outside wheel trackzones.whereanexistingroadpavementisresurfacedjointsinthesurfacecourseshallcoincidewitheither thelaneedgethelanemarkingorthemiddleofatrafficlanewhicheverisappropriate.jointsshallnotcoincide withthewheelpath.forthepurposesofthisclausethewheeltrackzonesshallbetakentobebetweennummand nummandbetweennummandnummfromthecentreofthenearsidelanemarkingsforeachtrafficlaneorinthe absence of lane markings lane edges .
all joints shall be offset at least num mm from parallel joints in the layer beneath .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num numunlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumthefacesofallcoldupstandingedges including previously laid asphalt against which hot bituminous mixtures are to be laid to form joints shall be treated with one of the following i hot bituminous binder with a penetration of not less than num pen ii hotelastomericpolymermodifiedbituminousbindercomplyingwithbsennumwithapenetration of not less than num pen iii coldappliedthixotropicbituminouscompoundofsimilarbitumenorpolymermodifiedbitumengrade iv polymermodifiedadhesivebitumenstripwithaminimumthicknessofnummm .
this operation shall be done so that the binder adheres to both the cold and the warm upstanding edges when the asphalt is placed .
num numunlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumjointsinbindercoursesandbasesshall be compacted such that the air voids content measured from core pairs whose centres are not more than num mm fromthefinaljointisnotgreaterthannumabovethemaximumpermittedlimitforcorepairsinthebodyofthemat .
the air voids content shall be calculated in accordance with bs en num using the relevant bulk and maximum densitiesdefinedinappendixbofbsennumfortherelevantmixturetype .
num num within num hours of the joint being formed a sealant shall be applied to the top surface of all base and binder course joints such that there is not less than num kgmnum of residual bitumen num mm either side of the joint unlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.thesealantwhichmaycontainmineralfillerto bs en num shall be one of the following i hotelastomericpolymermodifiedbituminousbindercomplyingwithbsennumwithapenetration of not less than num pen ii bitumen emulsion with a cohesion by pendulum of class num or above in accordance with bs en num iii slurry surfacing complying with clause num .
num numunlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumasealantasspecifiedinsubclausenumof thisclauseshallbeappliedtothewholeofanyfreestandingedgeontheoutsideofthefinishedpavementonthe highsideofthecamberandwhenspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumonthelowside .
num regulating course num num regulating course material shall be made and laid in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
num use of surfaces by traffic num numwhereanewbituminouslayerotherthanthesurfacecourseistobeopenedtohighwaytrafficasa temporary running surface it shall either i be surface dressed in accordance with clause num using chippings of category not less than psvnum unlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumor ii contain a coarse aggregate of category of not less than psvnumunlessotherwisespecifiedincontract specificappendixnum .
num numconstructionplantandtrafficusedonpavementsunderconstructionshallbesuitableinrelationtothe material condition and thickness of the courses it traverses so that damage is not caused to the subgrade or the pavement courses already constructed .
the wheels or tracks of plant moving over the various pavement courses shall be kept free from deleterious materials .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num num hot rolled asphalt base num num hot rolled asphalt base recipe mixes shall conform to bs en num the detailed requirements of theexampleinbsipdnumannexcandrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.themixture designation shall be one of the following i hra num base num. ii hra num base num. iii hra num base num. iv hra num base num .
num num hot rolled asphalt binder course recipe mixtures num num hot rolled asphalt binder course recipe mixes shall conform to bs en num the example in bsipdnumannexcandrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.themixturedesignationshall be one of the following i hra num bin num. ii hra num bin num. iii hra num bin num. iv hra num bin num .
num num dense base and binder course asphalt concrete recipe mixtures num num dense base and binder course asphalt concrete formerly macadam recipe mixtures shall be asphalt concrete conforming to bs en num the detailed requirements from bsi pd num annex b and requirements specifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.themixturedesignationshallbeoneofthefollowing i ac num dense base num rec .
ii ac num dense base num rec .
iii ac num dense base num rec .
iv ac num dense bin num rec .
v ac num dense bin num rec .
vi ac num dense bin num rec .
vii ac num dense bin num rec .
viii ac num dense bin num rec .
ix ac num dense bin num rec .
num num regulating course num num regulating courses which may consist of one or more layers of a bituminous material shall have their finishedsurfaceslaidtoachievetheappropriatetolerancesforhorizontalalignmentssurfacelevelsandsurface regularity for pavement layers in accordance with clause num .
num numunlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumstonemasticasphaltcomplyingwith clause num or base or binder course asphalt concrete complying with clause num or hot rolled asphalt complying with clause num shall be used for regulating courses immediately below surface courses .
bituminous mixtures for regulatingcoursesshallmeettherequirementsfortheappropriatematerialasspecifiedabove .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num num where the total depth of a regulating course exceeds num mm then the course shall be laid so that each regulating layer has a compacted thickness of between num mm and num mm .
num num not used num num num mm dense asphalt concrete surface course num num num mm dense asphalt concrete formerly macadam surface course shall be asphalt concrete conforming tobsennumtheexampleinbsipdnumannexbandrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecific appendix num .
the mixture designation shall be one of the following i ac num dense surf num. ii ac num dense surf num .
num coarse aggregate num num to ensure adequate resistance to polishing and abrasion the coarse aggregate shall have a minimum declaredpsvasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnuminaccordancewithbsennumclausenum .
andbsipdnumandshallhaveamaximumdeclaredaavasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumin accordance with bs en num clause num and bsi pd num .
num num hot rolled asphalt surface course recipe mixtures num num hot rolled asphalt surface course recipe mixtures shall conform to bs en num the example ofbsipdnumannexcandtherequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.unlessotherwise specifiedincontractspecificappendixnumthemixturedesignationshallbeoneofthefollowing i hra num f surf num. ii hra num f surf num. iii hra num f surf num. iv hra num f surf num. v hra num f surf num .
whenthemixturedesignationisnotspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumthemixtureselectedbythe contractorshallbenotifiedtotheoverseeingorganisationpriortoitsuseintheworks .
num coarse aggregate num num the resistance to polishing of the coarse aggregate for chipped mixtures shall be category psvnum as definedinbsennumclausenum.forunchippedmixturesthecoarseaggregateshallhaveaminimum declaredpsvandamaximumaavasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num coated chippings num numwhenrequiredcoatedchippingsshallbeeithernummmornummmasspecifiedincontractspecific appendix num and comply with clause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num num hot rolled asphalt surface course design mixtures num num hot rolled asphalt surface course design mixes shall conform to bs en num the example of bsipdnumannexcandrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.themixturedesignationshall be one of the following i hra num f surf xxyy des .
ii hra num f surf xxyy des .
iii hra num f surf xxyy des .
iv hra num f surf xxyy des .
v hra num f surf xxyy des .
vi hra num c surf xxyy des .
vii hra num c surf xxyy des .
viii hra num c surf xxyy des .
ix hra num c surf xxyy des .
x hra num c surf xxyy des .
unlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumthegradeofbitumenrequiredxxyyshallbenum .
num coarse aggregate num num the resistance to polishing of the coarse aggregate for chipped mixtures shall be category psvnum as definedinbsennumclausenum.forunchippedmixturesthecoarseaggregateshallhaveaminimum declaredpsvandamaximumaavasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num coated chippings num num when required coated chippings shall be either num mm or num mm in accordance with bsipdnumasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.coatedchippingsshallalsocomplywith clause num .
num num close graded asphalt concrete surface course num num close graded asphalt concrete formerly macadam surface course recipe mixes shall be asphalt concrete conformingtobsennumtheexampleofbsipdnumannexbandrequirementsspecifiedincontract specificappendixnum.themixturedesignationshallbeoneofthefollowing i ac num close surf num. ii ac num close surf num. iii ac num close surf num. iv ac num close surf num .
num coarse aggregate num num to ensure adequate resistance to polishing and abrasion the coarse aggregate shall have a minimum declaredpsvandamaximumaavasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num num not used num num fine graded asphalt concrete surface course num num fine graded asphalt concrete formerly macadam surface course recipe mixes shall be asphalt concrete conformingtobsennumtheexampleofbsipdnumannexbandrequirementsspecifiedincontract specificappendixnum.themixturedesignationshallbeoneofthefollowing i acnumfinesurfnum .
ii acnumfinesurfnum .
num coarse aggregate num num to ensure adequate resistance to polishing and abrasion the coarse aggregate shall have a minimum declaredpsvandamaximumaavasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num num coated chippings for application to hot rolled asphalt surfacings num num coated chippings for rolling into the surface of hot rolled asphalt shall conform to bs en num the exampleinbsipdnumannexcclausec.numandrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num num to ensure adequate resistance to polishing and abrasion the coarse aggregate shall have a minimum declaredpsvandamaximumaavasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num num the shape of the chippings shall comply with category finumasdefinedinbsennum clause num .
num num num not used num num slurry surfacing incorporating microsurfacing num num the contractor shall be responsible for the design of the slurry surfacing choice of materials techniquesandprocessesbasedonsiteandtrafficdataspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumandtheschedule ofconstraintsonsiteavailabilityincontractspecificappendixnum .
num num the contractor shall i provide a design proposal to achieve the performance requirements in terms of texture and maximum levelsofdefectsassetoutinthisclauseandincontractspecificappendixnumensuringthattheslurry surfacinghasaninitialstabilitysuchthatitiscapableofwithstandingthenormaltrafficforthesite whenfirstopened .
ii state the estimated design life of the slurry surfacing in the design proposal .
iii provide a quality plan .
iv carry out the slurry surfacing in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions and the designproposaltothethicknessandtolerancesspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num num the contractor shall guarantee the design materials and workmanship against defects and against failuretomeettheendperformancerequirementsforaperiodoftwoyearsorasotherwisespecifiedincontract specificappendixnumfromthedateofcompletionofthework.thecontractorshallrectifyanydefectsidentified during the guarantee period .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num the system num num the proposed slurry surfacing shall comply with bs en num and it shall be ce marked .
the contractor shall provide the declaration of performance and installation information as required in this clause and contractspecificappendixnum .
thedeclarationofperformanceshalldemonstratethatthesystemmeetstherequirementsofthespecificationand providesperformancecategoriesforalloftheitemsidentifiedinthisclauseandincontractspecificappendixnum .
num aggregates num numtheaggregateshallbecrushedrockslaggravelorcalcinedbauxitecomplyingwiththisspecification .
thecoarseaggregateshallhaveaminimumdeclaredpsvandamaximumaavasspecifiedincontractspecific appendix num .
in the design proposal the contractor shall provide the declaration of performance for the aggregate whichshalldemonstratethattheaggregateshallmeettherequirementsofthespecificationincludingtheproperties detailedincontractspecificappendixnum.thegradingandbindercontentshallnotdifferfromtheproposedtarget values by more than the tolerances detailed in the design proposal .
num binder num num the contractor shall provide with his design proposal the declaration of performance for the binder whichshalldemonstratethatthebindershallmeettherequirementsofthespecificationincludingtheproperties detailedincontractspecificappendixnum .
contractcompliancetestingshallbecarriedoutbythecontractorasdetailedincontractspecificappendix num .
the recovery of the binder shall be carried out in accordance with clause num .
the test to determine vialit pendulum cohesion shall be carried out in accordance with bs en num .
the contractor shall provide rheological productidentificationdataformodifiedbindersinaccordancewithbsennum .
num coloured materials num numwhererequiredincontractspecificappendixnumacolouredslurrysurfacingshallbeprovided.all coloured slurry surfacings shall be approved by the overseeing organisation .
they shall conform in all respects with the requirements of this clause .
num equipment num num the mixing machine shall be capable of uniform application and the provision of a continuous surface without ridges or segregation .
num health and safety num num health and safety information and safe handling guidance shall be provided by the contractor to the overseeing organisation .
num layer thickness num numwhenrequiredtheminimumandormaximumthicknessoftheslurrysurfacingshallbeasspecifiedin contractspecificappendixnum .
num preparation num num any necessary remedial works to the road surface and structure shall be completed either prior to the commencement of works or as part of the contract and agreed as acceptable by the overseeing organisation and the contractor before slurry surfacing commences .
num numstreetfurnitureandwherespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumroadmarkingsandkerbsshall bemaskedusingselfadhesivemaskingmaterialorothermaterialfirmlysecuredagainstthepassageofthespreader box or the tools used for hand laying .
any packed mud or other deposits on the road surface shall be removed all organic growth shall be removed by suitable means and the road surface shall be swept free of all loose material .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num num a bond coat complying with clause num shall be applied prior to the slurry surfacing with or without grit or chippings in order to seal the existing substrate and to enhance the bond to the existing road surface unless thecontractorcandemonstratethatsufficientbondwillbedevelopedwithoutitsuse.thistreatmentshallbein accordance with the contractors method statement contained within his design proposal .
num traffic safety and management num numtrafficsafetyandmanagementshallbestrictlyinaccordancewiththerequirementsofseriesnumand thesitespecificrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumandtheconstraintsdescribedincontract specificappendixnum .
num mixing num numtheslurrysurfacingshallbemixedinacontinuousflowmixingmachineanddischargeddirectlyinto the spreader box .
where the material is to be hand laid the slurry surfacing may be mixed in a batch mixer or supplied to site premixed in suitable containers .
the quality plan shall detail the precautions to be taken to achieve a homogeneous mixture .
num application num numapplicationrestrictionstobeobservedintheeventofadverseweathershallbeasspecifiedinthis clausethecontractorsmethodstatementandanyadditionalrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecific appendix num .
num numtransversejointsshallbeformedwithspreadingstartingandfinishingonaprotectivestripnotless thannummmwideateachendofthelanelengthorareabeingtreatedorsuchothermethodasdefinedinthe contractors method statement to produce an equivalent standard .
transverse joints shall be formed such that there shall be no ridges or bare strips .
num num unless otherwise agreed with the overseeing organisation longitudinal joints where the material is laid on a road shall coincide with lane markings .
longitudinal joints shall be formed such that there shall be no ridges or bare strips .
num num handwork around street furniture and other ironwork shall meet the same performance requirements and form a homogeneous surface with the rest of the treated carriageway .
num numfootwaysandotherconfinedareasmaybespreadbyhandusingsqueegeesandbrooms.kerbedges and other areas not being treated shall be suitably masked with selfadhesive masking material .
footways shall befinishedbydraggingadampenedbroomtransverselyoverthefootwayunderitsownweightorothermethod producingasimilarmacrotextureorasstatedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num numallvoidscracksandsurfaceirregularitiesshallbecompletelyfilled.spreadingshallnotbeundertaken on carriageways when the temperature falls below numc or when standing water is present on the surface .
in warm dry weather the surface immediately ahead of the spreading shall be slightly damped by mist water spray applied mechanically or for hand laying by a hand operated pressure sprayer unless otherwise agreed by the overseeing organisation .
num numthefinishedslurrysurfacingshallhaveauniformsurfacemacrotexturethroughouttheworkwithout variations of macrotexture within the lane width or from area to area .
num numthefinishedsurfaceshallbefreefromblowholesandsurfaceirregularitiesduetoscrapingscabbing score marks dragging droppings excess overlapping or badly aligned longitudinal or transverse joints damage by rain or frost or other defects which remain num hours after laying .
slurry surfacing which does not comply with this clauseorisnonuniforminsurfacemacrotextureorcolournumhoursafterlayingshallberectifiedbyremovaland replacement or superimposed if this is impractical with fresh material in compliance with this clause .
areas so treated shall be not less than num m long and not less than one lane wide or the full width if less than a lane wide .
all areasbeingworkedonshallbekeptfreeoftrafficuntilthematerialhassetsufficientlytocarrythetraffic .
num num the contractor shall record the amount of slurry surfacing used and the area covered for each run or section completed .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num num the contractor shall facilitate duplicate or joint testing by the overseeing organisation if required .
num aftercare num num masking shall be removed after the slurry surfacing has been applied without damage to the edge of thesurfacingandbeforeopeningtheroadorfootwaytotraffic.theironworkshallberesetifnecessarywithin num hours of application of the slurry surfacing .
num num the contractor shall remove surplus aggregate from the treated areas using a method stated in the quality plan .
the contractor shall monitor the slurry surfacing closely for a minimum period of num hours and if necessary the lane shall be swept again .
the monitoring shall continue until the slurry surfacing has reached sufficientstabilitytocarryunrestrictedtraffic.iftherearesignsofdistressthecontractorshallreinstatetraffic safety and management procedures or other such remedial action where necessary in order to prevent further damage .
num num further operations to remove subsequently loosened aggregate shall be carried out over the next num hours .
the areas treated and adjacent side roads footways and paved areas shall be kept substantially free of loose aggregate for a period of num days after completion of the work .
num as built manual num num not more than num days after completion of the work the contractor shall provide a record of the progress of the work in the form of an as built manual incorporating all relevant information including all contract compliance test results volumes of slurry surfacing used and areas covered with calculated thickness record of trafficcontrolcarriedoutweatherinformationunforeseenproblemsalistofcomplaintsifanyfromthegeneral public or road users and any other information that the overseeing organisation may reasonably require to be included .
num performance standards for slurry surfacing during the guarantee period num surface macrotexture num num the contractor is responsible for maintaining the surface macrotexture requirements set out in contract specificappendixnumthroughouttheguaranteeperiod .
thedefinitivetestisthevolumetricpatchtechniquemeasuredinaccordancewithbsennumexceptthat numindividualmeasurementsshallbemadeonthenearsideinsidewheeltrackofthemostheavilytraffickedlane orforlowtrafficcategorysitesthetrackcarryingthemoststress.theaveragemacrotexturedepthofeachlane kilometreorthecompletecarriagewaylanewherethisislessthannummetresshallbeasspecifiedincontract specificappendixnum.theaverageofeachsetofnumindividualmeasurementsshallbenotlessthannumofthe minimum permitted .
num surface profile num numthesurfaceprofileoftheslurrysurfacingwhenmeasuredinaccordancewithseriesnumshallmeetthe requirementsspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumforbothtransverseandlongitudinalprofile .
num defects num num when the extent of area and linear defects is monitored using the visual method of assessment in accordance with bs en num the slurry surfacing shall have less than the permitted maximum level of defects asdescribedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num num coloured materials shall retain their colour throughout the guarantee period to the level stated in the contractspecificappendixnum .
num numanysectionfailingtomeettherequiredstandardasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumshallbe subject to remedial action by the contractor .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num num surface dressing recipe specification num num the contractor shall i carryoutthesurfacedressinginaccordancewiththedesigndescribedincontractspecific appendix numsubjecttothescheduleofconstraintsonsiteavailabilitysetoutincontractspecific appendix num .
the supply and application of surface dressing to road surfaces shall be undertaken by organisations registered to the national highways sector scheme num for the supply and application of surface treatments to road surfaces listed in appendix a. ii be responsible for the choice of materials techniques and processes subject to the requirements describedincontractspecificappendixnum.thetolerancespermittedforthisworkshallbeasspecified incontractspecificappendixnum .
iii provide a quality plan which may be subject to audit by the overseeing organisation with respect to the method of executing the work .
iv guaranteethematerialsandworkmanshipagainstdefectsandagainstfailuretomeetthespecification foraperiodofoneyearorasotherwisedescribedincontractspecificappendixnumfromthedateof completion of the work .
num materials and equipment binder num numthebindershallbeofthetypeandgradespecifiedinthecontractspecificappendixnumcomplying with bs ennum and be ce marked .
num numthecontractorshallprovideabinderdatasheetgivingdetailsofthepropertiesspecifiedincontract specificappendixnumforeachbinderproposed.contractcompliancetestingshallbecarriedoutasdetailed incontractspecificappendixnum.thetesttodeterminethevialitpendulumcohesionshallbecarriedoutin accordancewithbsennum.thecontractorshallproviderheologicalproductidentificationdataformodified binders in accordance with bs en num .
health and safety information and a safe handling guide from the manufacturer shall be provided together with details of any weather restrictions placed upon the use of the binder .
num num the binder sprayer shall be capable of uniform application at the designed rate of spread over a variable orfixedwidthsufficienttoallowafulllanewidthtobeproducedinasinglepass.beforesprayingbeginsthe contractorshallprovidetheoverseeingorganisationwithatestcertificateshowingtestresultsforrateofspread and accuracy of spread of binder carried out in accordance with the test methods in bs en num issued by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subclause num for those tests demonstrating that the binder sprayer has been tested using the binder to be used in the contract not more than six weeks before the commencementoftheworkandthatitcomplieswiththerequirementssetoutincontractspecificappendixnum .
num materials and equipment chippings num num the chippings shall be crushed rock slag gravel or calcined bauxite complying with bs en num andshallbecemarkedandbeofthesizespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.inhisproposalsthe contractor shall state the source and characteristics of chippings to be used and the coating if any .
the coarse aggregateshallhaveaminimumdeclaredpsvandamaximumaavasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
the shape of the chipping shall comply with category finumasdefinedinbsennumclausenum.contract compliancetestingshallbecarriedoutasrequiredandatthefrequencyspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num numthechippingspreadershallhavecontrolledmeteringandbecapableofvariableorfixedwidthapplication to match the binder sprayer .
before a spreader is used the contractor shall provide to the overseeing organisation a testcertificateshowingtestresultsforrateofspreadandaccuracyofspreadofchippingsinaccordancewiththetest methods in bs en num issued by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subclause num for those tests or tests carried out under his own quality management scheme demonstrating that the chipping spreader has been tested using chippings similar to those to be used in the contract not more than six weeks before the commencementoftheworkandthatitcomplieswiththerequirementssetoutincontractspecificappendixnum .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num preparation num num any necessary remedial works to the road surface and structure shall be completed either prior to commencement of the works or as part of the contract and agreed as acceptable by the overseeing organisation and the contractor before surface dressing commences .
num num before binder is applied street furniture shall be masked using selfadhesive masking material .
oil sand or similar materials shall not be used .
any packed mud or other deposits on the road surface shall be removed and the road surface shall be swept free of all loose material .
num numtrafficsafetyandmanagementshallbeinaccordancewiththerequirementsofseriesnumandthesite specificrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumandtheconstraintsdescribedincontractspecific appendix num .
num application num numbindershallbeappliedtotheroadsurfaceattheratesspecifiedinthedesign.thecontractorshallmark out areas where an adjusted binder rate is needed because of localised conditions and note such changes in the as builtmanual.applicationrestrictionstobeobservedintheeventofadverseweathershallbeasspecifiedbelow togetherwithanyadditionallimitationssetoutincontractspecificappendixnum .
i when there is precipitation .
ii when there is free water on the surface .
iii when the air temperature is at or below the values given in table num. iv for emulsion binders when the relative humidity exceeds num. v when the road surface temperature exceeds numc for roads carrying over num cvlaneday or numc below thattrafficlevel .
table num num air temperature for spraying binder uncoated chippings coated chippings minimum c minimum c bitumen emulsion num all modified binders and fluxed binders manufacturers recommendation manufacturers recommendation num numtransversejointsshallbeformedwithsprayingstartingandfinishingonaprotectivestripnotlessthan num metre wide at each end of the lane length being treated .
transverse joints shall be of binder overlap only and not wider than num mm .
there shall be no ridges or bare strips .
longitudinal joints shall coincide with lane markings .
longitudinal joints shall be of binder overlap only while ensuring that the proposed rate of spread is achieved across the joint .
for quartering using a part of the spraybar the overlap may be extended to a maximum of num mm .
there shall be no ridges or bare strips .
num num the contractor shall carry out the tests for rates of spread and accuracy of application of binder and chippingsinaccordancewiththetestmethodsinbsennumatthefrequencyspecifiedincontractspecific appendix num and report the results verbally to the overseeing organisation within num hours of carrying out thetestandconfirminwritingwithinnumdays.thecontractorshallfacilitateduplicatetestingbytheoverseeing organisation if required .
num num rolling shall be performed by rubber coated vibratory steel rollers andor pneumatic tyred rollers as specifiedinclausenum.therollersshallhavefullyoperatingsprinklersystemssprayingwaterorotherrelease agent onto the drum or tyres so that if the chippings start to move under the roller exposing binder the sprinklers are available immediately .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num aftercare num num masking shall be removed after the surface dressing has been applied and before opening the road to unrestrictedtraffic.thecontractorshallremovesurpluschippingsfromtheroadbysuctionsweepingbeforeitis openedtounrestrictedtraffic .
num num the contractor shall monitor the surface dressing closely for a minimum period of num hours or as specifiedincontractspecificappendixnumaftertheroadisopenedtotraffic.thecontractorshallreinstatetraffic safety and management procedures or institute other remedial action where necessary such as dusting if there are signs of distress such as turning of the chippings in order to prevent further damage to the surface dressing .
num num further operations to remove subsequently loosened chippings shall be carried out over the next num hours .
the road and adjacent side roads footways and paved areas shall be kept substantially free of loose chippings for a period of num days after completion of the work .
num numanydefectsarisingfromdeficienciesinthematerialsworkmanshipandaftercaremanifestduringorat theendofthemaintenanceperiodshallberectifiedbythecontractorathisownexpense .
num as built manual num num not more than num days after completion of the work the contractor shall provide a record of the progress of the work in the form of an as built manual incorporating all relevant information including all test results variations to the design and those necessitated by localised site conditions weather information unforeseen problems a list of complaints if any from the general public or road users and any such other information that the overseeing organisation may reasonably require to be included .
num num bond coats tack coats and other bituminous sprays num num bond coats and tack coats used in conjunction with bituminous mixtures other than those covered by clausenumshallbeinaccordancewiththisclauseandtherequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum and num .
num bond coats num numbondcoatsforbituminousmixturesshallbecationicpolymermodifiedbitumenemulsionscomplying withbsennumorpolymermodifiedbitumencomplyingwithbsennumwithaminimumpeakcohesion valueofnumjcmnum when tested in accordance with bs en num .
they shall be ce marked and the contractor shall submit the declaration of performance to the overseeing organisation prior to their application .
the declaration of performanceshalldemonstratethatthebondcoatmeetstherequirementsofthespecification .
num tack coats num numtackcoatsforbituminousmixturesshallbeunmodifiedbitumenemulsioncomplyingwith bs en num .
they shall be ce marked and the contractor shall submit the declaration of performance to the overseeing organisation prior to their application .
the declaration of performance shall demonstrate that the tack coatmeetstherequirementsofthespecification .
num bituminous sprays num num bituminous sprays used to facilitate sealing and curing shall consist of either bitumen emulsion complying with bs en num or paving grade bitumen complying with bs en num .
they shall be ce marked and the contractor shall submit the declaration of performance to the overseeing organisation prior to their application .
the declaration of performance shall demonstrate that the spray meets the requirements of the specification .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num product information num numforbondcoatstackcoatsandbituminousspraysthecontractorshallprovidetheinformationspecified incontractspecificappendixnumandsupplyacopytotheoverseeingorganisationpriortotheapplicationofthe product .
num preparation num num the contractor shall comply with any limitations on area availability and timing or other constraints fortheworkasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.beforesprayingiscommencedthesurfaceshallbe freeofallloosematerialandstandingwaterandshallcomplywithanyrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecific appendixnum.whenspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumstreetfurnitureironworkanddropkerbsshallbe masked using selfadhesive masking material before application starts and removed on completion of the works .
num application num num application shall be by metered mechanical spraying equipment spray tanker or spraying device integral with the paving machine .
the spraying equipment used shall not cause permanent deformation in the surface .
for small or inaccessible areas application may be by hand held sprayer with the agreement of the overseeing organisation .
num num the target rates of spread of bond coats or tack coats below bituminous mixtures shall be in accordance withbsnumclausenum.forotherapplicationsunmodifiedbitumenemulsionsshallbesprayedattherateof spreadspecifiedinbsnumorasstatedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num accuracy of application num num spray application shall be uniform .
before spraying begins the contractor shall provide the overseeing organisationwithatestcertificateshowingtheresultsforrateofspreadandaccuracyofspread.thesetestsshall be carried out in accordance with bs en num by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subclausenumforthosetests.thecertificateshalldemonstratethatthesprayingdevicehasbeentestedusing the product to be used in the contract not more than six weeks before commencement of the work .
the tolerance onthespecifiedrateofspreadshallnotexceednumandthecoefficientofvariationofthetransversedistribution shall not exceed num .
during the works the contractor shall repeat the tests for rate of spread and accuracy of applicationatthefrequencyspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.theresultsshallbereportedverballytothe overseeing organisation within num hours of carrying out a test and in writing within num days .
where application is by hand held sprayer the rate of spread shall be measured by calculating the volume applied per square metre and evenness shall be visually assessed .
num joints num num there shall be no bare strips or areas having less than the minimum permitted rate of spread .
transverse joints shall have an overlap not wider than num mm .
longitudinal joints shall have an overlap to ensure that the minimum permitted rate of spread is achieved across the joint .
for quartering using part of the spraybar the longitudinal joint overlap width may be extended to a maximum of num mm .
paver integral sprayers shall provide a wet edge to ensure spray overlap under adjacent overlays such that the minimum permitted rate of spread is achieved across the longitudinal joint .
where the longitudinal spray overlap causes the effective rate of spread to be increasedbymorethannumofthespecifiedratethenthewidthofoverlapshallnotbegreaterthannummmand shall be outside the location of the wheel tracks for the lane .
num overlaying concrete surfaces num num the contractor shall submit evidence of the suitability of the bond or tack coats he intends to use when overlaying concrete surfaces to the overseeing organisation prior to the commencement of the work .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num blinding material for bituminous sprays num numwhenspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumblindingmaterialshallconsistofhardcleancrushed fineaggregateorslagfineaggregateorsandcontainingnotmorethannumbymassretainedonanummmsieve.it shall be distributed over the sprayed area and left .
blinding used on cementitious materials shall be light in colour to minimise solar gain .
all loose material on a sprayed surface including nonadhered blinding material shall be removed prior to the application of an overlay .
num chipping to prevent binder pickup num num when chippings are used to prevent tack or bond coat pickup on vehicle tyres they shall consist of hard clean aggregate num mm or num mm gc num .
the rate of application of aggregate shall be the minimum necessary and shall be distributed by metered mechanical means .
bond coat shall be visible after aggregate application to ensure bond is still achieved between the pavement layers .
num num surface macrotexture of bituminous surface courses num num surface macrotexture of bituminous surface courses other than those covered by clause num shall be inaccordancewiththisclausewhereunlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.initialsurface macrotexture for bituminous surface courses shall be measured using the volumetric patch method described in bs en num .
num num texture depth shall be measured by num individual measurements taken at approximately num m spacing alongadiagonallineacrossthelanewidth.unlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumatleast one set of num measurements shall be made for each num m section of carriageway lane .
the average texture depth for each set of num individual measurements and the average texture depth of each num m section or complete carriageway lane where this is less than num m shall not be less than the appropriate values shown in table num unlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num table num num requirements for initial texture depth for materials other than those covered by clause num road type surfacing type average per num m section mm average for a set of num measurements mm minimum minimum maximum high speed roads postedspeedlimitnummiles hr num kmhr cold applied ultra thin surface course systems to clause num num num num chipped hot rolled asphalt and all other surfacings num num num lower speed roads postedspeedlimitnummiles hr num kmhr cold applied ultra thin surface course systems to clause num num num num chipped hot rolled asphalt and all other surfacings num num num roundabouts on high speed roads postedspeedlimitnummiles hr num kmhr chipped hot rolled asphalt and all other surfacings num num num roundabouts on lower speed roads postedspeedlimitnummiles hr num kmhr chipped hot rolled asphalt and all other surfacings num num num num num surface dressing design application and end product performance num num the contractor shall be responsible for the design of the surface dressing choice of materials techniquesandprocessesbasedonsiteandtrafficdataspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumandtheschedule ofconstraintsonsiteavailabilityincontractspecificappendixnum .
num num the contractor shall i provide a design proposal to achieve the performance requirements in terms of macrotexture and maximumlevelsofdefectsassetoutinthisclauseandincontractspecificappendixnumensuringthat thesurfacedressinghasaninitialstabilitysuchthatitiscapableofwithstandingthenormaltrafficfor thesitewhenfirstopened .
ii state the estimated design life of the surface dressing in the design proposal .
iii provide a quality plan .
iv carry out the surface dressing in accordance with bs en num and the design proposal to the tolerancesspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num num the contractor shall guarantee the design materials and workmanship against defects and against failuretomeettheendproductperformancerequirementsforaperiodoftwoyearsorasotherwisespecifiedin contractspecificappendixnumfromthedateofcompletionofthework.thecontractorshallrectifyanydefects identifiedduringtheguaranteeperiod .
num the system num num the proposed surface dressing shall comply with bs en num and it shall be ce marked .
the contractor shall provide the declaration of performance and installation information as required in this clause and contractspecificappendixnum .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num thedeclarationofperformanceshalldemonstratethatthesystemmeetstherequirementsofthespecificationand providesperformancecategoriesforalloftheitemsidentifiedinthisclauseandcontractspecificappendixnum .
num materials and equipment binder num num the binder shall be bitumen emulsion complying with bs en num and be ce marked and comply withrequirementsstatedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num num the contractor shall provide with his design proposal the declaration of performance for the binder whichshalldemonstratethatthebindershallmeettherequirementsofthespecificationincludingtheproperties detailedincontractspecificappendixnum .
contractcompliancetestingshallbecarriedoutasdetailedincontractspecificappendixnum.therecoveryofthe binder shall be carried out in accordance with clause num .
the test to determine vialit pendulum cohesion shall becarriedoutinaccordancewithbsennum.thecontractorshallproviderheologicalproductidentification dataformodifiedbindersinaccordancewithbsennum.thedataprovidedshallbenotmorethannummonthsold and obtained on samples of binder representative of binder manufactured and supplied using the same source and processes as the proposed binder .
health and safety information and a safe handling guide from the manufacturer shall be provided together with details of any weather restrictions placed upon use of the binder .
num numthebinderapplicationshallbeuniformandformotorwaystrunkroadsandheavilytraffickedand highlystressedroadsshallbeofsufficientwidthtoallowafulllanetobedressedinasinglepass.beforespraying beginsthecontractorshallprovidetheoverseeingorganisationwithatestcertificateshowingtestresultsfor rate of spread and accuracy of spread of binder carried out in accordance with the test methods in bs en num num and issued by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subclause num for those tests demonstrating that the binder sprayer has been tested using the binder to be used in the contract not more than six weeks before the commencement of the work and that it complies with the requirements set out in contract specificappendixnum .
num materials and equipment chippings num num the chippings shall be crushed rock slag gravel or calcined bauxite complying with the general requirements of bs en num .
the aggregate shall have a minimum declared psv and a maximum aav as specifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num numchippingspreadersshallhavecontrolledmeteringandbecapableofvariableorfixedwidthapplication to match the binder sprayer .
before a spreader is used the contractor shall provide the overseeing organisation withatestcertificateshowingtestresultsforrateofspreadandaccuracyofspreadofchippingscarriedoutin accordance with the test methods in bs en num and issued by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subclause num for those tests demonstrating that the chipping spreader has been tested using chippings similar to those to be used in the contract not more than six weeks before the commencement of the workandthatitcomplieswiththerequirementssetoutincontractspecificappendixnum .
num preparation num num any necessary remedial works to the road surface and structure shall be completed prior to or as part of the contract and agreed as acceptable by the overseeing organisation and the contractor before surface dressing commences .
num num before binder is applied street furniture shall be masked using selfadhesive masking material .
oil sand or similar materials shall not be used .
any packed mud or other deposits on the road surface shall be removed and the road surface shall be swept free of all loose material .
num traffic safety and management num numtrafficsafetyandmanagementshallbeinaccordancewiththerequirementsofseriesnumandthe sitespecificrequirementsspecifiedincontractappendixnumandtheconstraintsdescribedincontractspecific appendix num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num application num numrestrictionstobeobservedintheeventofadverseweathershallbeasspecifiedincontractspecific appendixnum.transversejointsshallbeformedwithsprayingstartingandfinishingonaprotectivestripnotless than num metre wide at each end of the lane length being treated .
transverse joints shall be of binder overlap only and not wider than num mm .
there shall be no ridges or bare strips .
longitudinal joints shall coincide with lane markings .
longitudinal joints shall be of binder overlap only while ensuring that the proposed rate of spread is achieved across the joint for quartering using a part of the spraybar the overlap may be extended to a maximum of num mm .
there shall be no ridges or bare strips .
num num the contractor shall carry out the tests for rates of spread and accuracy of application of binder and chippingsinaccordancewiththetestmethodsinbsennumatthefrequencyspecifiedincontractspecific appendix num and report the results verbally to the overseeing organisation within twentyfour hours of carrying outthetestandconfirminwritingwithinsevendays.thecontractorshallfacilitateduplicatetestingbythe overseeing organisation if required .
num aftercare num num masking shall be removed after the surface dressing has been applied and before opening the road to unrestrictedtraffic.thetimeperiodbeforeunrestrictedtrafficmayusethesurfacedressingshallnotexceedthat specifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.thecontractorshallremovesurpluschippingsfromtheroadbysuction sweepingbeforeitisopenedtounrestrictedtraffic .
num num the contractor shall monitor the surface dressing closely for a minimum period of num hours or as specifiedincontractspecificappendixnumaftertheroadisopenedtotraffic.thecontractorshallreinstatetraffic safety and management procedures or institute other such remedial action where necessary such as dusting if there are signs of distress such as turning of the chippings in order to prevent further damage to the surface dressing .
num num further operations to remove subsequently loosened chippings shall be carried out over the next num hours .
the road and adjacent side roads footways and paved areas shall be kept substantially free of loose chippings for a period of num days after completion of the work .
num as built manual num num not more than num days after completion of the work the contractor shall provide a record of the progress of the work in the form of an as built manual incorporating all relevant information including all contract compliance test results variations to the design proposal and those necessitated by localised site conditions a recordoftrafficcontrolcarriedoutweatherinformationunforeseenproblemsalistofcomplaintsifanyfromthe general public or road users and any other information that the overseeing organisation may reasonably require to be included .
num performance standards during the guarantee period num surface macrotexture num num the contractor is responsible for maintaining the surface macrotexture requirements set out in contract specificappendixnumthroughouttheguaranteeperiod .
thedefinitivetestisthevolumetricpatchtechniquemeasuredinaccordancewithbsennumexceptthat numindividualmeasurementsshallbemadeonthenearsideinsidewheeltrackofthemostheavilytrafficked lane .
the average macrotexture depth of each lane kilometre or the complete carriageway lane where this is less thannummetresshallbeasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.theaverageofeachsetofnumindividual measurements shall be not less than num of the minimum permitted .
theoverseeingorganisationwillusethetrafficspeedconditionsurveytracsorothersuitableequipment to determine the sensor measured texture depth smtd for trunk roads including motorways and other highly traffickedorhighlystressedroads.measurementsofsmtdshallbemadeinthenearsideandoffsidewheeltracks of all lanes .
for other roads where road closure is less critical the volumetric patch technique or other measuring device such as the mini texture meter may be used .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num the smtd or results from other devices shall be calibrated for the particular surface dressing product design and condition against volumetric patch values to provide the volumetric patch equivalent value .
the macrotexture depths will be measured after num months and before num months and additionally for two year guarantee period contractsafternummonthsandbeforenummonthsunlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.when required the contractor shall design the surface dressing to limit the maximum macrotexture after four weeks traffickingtothatspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumandthemacrotexturedepthswillbemeasuredforthis purposebetweenthreeweeksandfiveweeksaftercompletionoftheworks .
num defects num num the extent of chipping loss or other defects will be monitored using a visual method of assessment .
the performance standard is that any section of the works shall be deemed as having failed if the areas of defects do not complywiththeclassesspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.ifthereisafailedsectionthecontractorshall agree remedial measures with the overseeing organisation and undertake the remedial measures .
in the event that the contractor and overseeing organisation are unable to reach agreement on whether a section has failed by qualitative visual assessment described in bs en num the level of defects shall be determined in accordance with the quantitative test methods in bs en num .
any section failing to meet the required standard asspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumshallbesubjecttoremedialactionbythecontractorafteragreement of the overseeing organisation .
num num cold applied ultra thin surfacing num general num num the cold applied ultra thin surfacing shall meet the product performance requirements under the combinationsoftrafficlevelandsiteclassificationspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumanditshallmeetthe following criteria .
i where the product falls under the scope of a harmonised european standard under the construction products regulation the cold applied ultra thin surfacing shall have a declaration of performance and be ce marked in accordance with the relevant british adopted european standard .
ii where the product does not fall under the scope of a harmonised european standard under the construction products regulation it shall either a have a declaration of performance and be ce marked in accordance with a european technical assessment or b becertifiedunderaproductacceptanceschemeasdetailedinsubclausesnumandnumsuch ashapascertification .
thecontractorshallsupplythecertificationordeclarationofperformancetotheoverseeingorganisationitshall demonstratethatthecoldappliedultrathinsurfacingshallmeettherequirementsofthespecification .
theinstallationofthesurfacingshallbecertifiedunderaproductacceptanceschemeasdetailedinsubclauses numandnumsuchashapascertification .
num num cold applied ultra thin surfacing systems that are supplied in accordance with subclause num paragraph ii b shall be produced and installed by organisations that are registered to the national highways sector scheme num for the supply and application of surface treatments to road surfaces as listed in appendix a .
num documentation test certificates and material samples num num the contractor shall supply a quality plan and installation method statement to the overseeing organisation .
num numtestcertificatesstatingthepropertiesoftheaggregatetobeusedshallbesuppliedtotheoverseeing organisation unless the values are declared in the declaration of performance under the ce mark .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num num the details of the component materials and their relative proportions andor spread rates for use in the permanentworksshallbenotifiedtotheoverseeingorganisation.thecomponentmaterialslistedshallincludeas appropriatecoarseaggregatesfineaggregatesfilleradditivesincludingfibresbindermodifierandbondcoat and shall be subdivided into layers if applied .
num numwhenrequiredincontractspecificappendixnumsamplesofaggregatebondcoatorbindermodified orunmodifiedbitumenfromeitherthespraybarorstoragetankormixedbituminousmaterialsfromthepavement surface or other suitable sampling point shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation .
num aggregates num num coarse aggregate shall be crushed rock or steel slag complying with clause num when tested in accordance with the procedures of bs en num .
the coarse aggregate shall additionally have the following properties .
i polishedstonevaluepsvasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumbsennum ii aggregateabrasionvalueaavasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumbsennum iii losangelescoefficientlanotgreaterthanlanum .
bs en num iv flakiness index fi not more than finum .
bs en num .
num performance levels num numcoldappliedultrathinsurfacingispermittedonsitecategoriesbcdefandgasdefinedin table num .
table num num site stress level classification site category site definition stress level a motorway main line num b dual carriageway all purpose nonevent sections num c single carriageway nonevent sections num d dual carriageway all purpose minor junctions num e single carriageway minor junctions num f approaches to and across major junctions all limbs num g gradient num longer than num m dual downhill single uphill and downhill num hnum bend not subject to num mph or lower speed limit radius num num m num hnum bend not subject to num mph or lower speed limit radius num m num l roundabout num j approach to roundabout num k approach to traffic signals pedestrian crossing railway level crossing and similar num num numtheroadtyrenoiselevelofthecoldappliedultrathinsurfaceshallbeasspecifiedincontractspecific appendixnumasdefinedintablenum .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num table num num roadtyre noise levels level road surface influence rsi num num dba nr no requirement num layer thickness num num the minimum andor maximum compacted thickness of the cold applied ultra thin surfacing system shallbeasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.theinstalledlayerthicknessmustnotbelessthanthe permittedminimumthicknessstatedinthehapascertificateorequivalentcertificationforaparticularsystem .
num surface preparation num numwhenrequiredincontractspecificappendixnumasiteinspectionshallbeundertakenpriortothemain works jointly by representatives of the overseeing organisation and the contractor to agree suitable preparation works e.g .
patching .
num num surface preparation shall be in accordance with bs num clause num and num and the installation method statement provided in accordance with subclause num .
num transportation num num transportation of the cold applied ultra thin surfacing andor its components shall be in accordance with the installation method statement provided in accordance with subclause num .
num sweeping and early life monitoring of cold applied ultra thin surfacings num num sweeping of newly laid cold applied ultra thin surfacing shall be in accordance with the hapas or equivalentcertificationandtheinstallationmethodstatement .
num num notwithstanding the above suction sweeping shall be undertaken immediately before the newly laid coldappliedultrathinsurfacingisopenedtotraffic .
num num the installation shall be monitored closely for a minimum period of num hours after the road is opened to traffic.trafficsafetyandmanagementproceduresshallbereinstatedorothersuchremedialactionsinstigatedif there are signs of distress in the surfacing such as turning of the chippings in order to prevent further damage to the installation .
num numwheredetailedincontractspecificappendixnumamandatoryspeedlimitshallbeimplementedduring installation and for a period of num days after installation .
num num further operations to remove subsequently loosened chippings shall be carried out over the next num hours .
the road and adjacent side roads footways and paved areas shall be kept substantially free of loose chippings for a period of num days after completion of the surfacing work .
num surface macrotexture untrafficked num num the macrotexture depth of the cold applied ultra thin surfacing after compaction has been completed and beforeopeningtotrafficshallbeinaccordancewithclausenum .
num surface macrotexture performance guarantee num numforaperiodoftwoyearsfromthedateofopeningtotraffictheaveragemacrotexturemeasuredusing the volumetric patch technique described in bs en num will be maintained above an average per numm of nummmunlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num num where measurement is necessary to demonstrate compliance during the guarantee period the macrotextureshallbemeasuredinaccordancewithbsennuminthemostheavilytraffickedlaneatnumm intervals .
the average value of a set of num individual measurements taken along the centre of the most heavily worn wheeltrackshallnotbelessthantheappropriatevaluestatedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num surfacing integrity performance guarantee num numunlessotherwisestatedincontractspecificappendixnumaguaranteeshallbeprovidedfortheintegrity ofthesurfacingandtheworkmanshipforaperiodoffiveyearsfromthedateofopeningtotraffic .
num numthefiveyearguaranteeshallincludefordefectssuchasfrettingravellingstrippingandlossof chippings .
replacement of the surfacing or other remedial measures agreed with the overseeing organisation shall beexecutedifthesurfacingisinasuspectpoororbadconditionasdefinedinappendixaoftrlreport trlnum durability of thin surfacing systems part num final report after nine years monitoring trl report num .
num num high friction surfaces num numhighfrictionsurfacingsystemsshallhavecurrenthapascertificateorequivalentproductacceptance schemecertificationasdescribedinsubclausesnumandnum .
num num high friction surfacing shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the hapas or equivalentproductacceptanceschemecertification .
num numthehighfrictionsurfacingsystemhapasorequivalentproductacceptanceschemecertificationtype classificationrequiredforeachlocationshallbeasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num aggregate num num aggregate used in high friction surfacing systems shall have the minimum declared psv category specifiedincontractspecificappendixnuminaccordancewithbsennumclausenum.theresistance toabrasionofcoarseaggregateshallhavethemaximumaavspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumin accordance with bs en num clause num .
the contractor shall provide before work commences the declaration of performance for the aggregate to the overseeing organisation .
the declaration of performance shall demonstratethattheaggregateshallmeettherequirementsofthespecification .
num installation and quality control procedures num num the installation and quality control procedures shall be in accordance with the hapas or equivalent productacceptanceschemecertificationforeachsystemandthecurrentmethodstatement.theresultsofallquality control checks carried out on site by the contractor and quality management information compiled in accordance withtherequirementsofthecertificateincludingresultsfromsurveillancevisitsshallbemadeavailabletothe overseeing organisation on request .
num system coverage num num for each location where high friction surfacing is applied the total quantities of each system component used the measured area of the surface treated and the calculated coverage rate in kgmnum shall be reported to the overseeing organisation within three days of completion at that location .
for systems in which aggregate is broadcastoverafilmofbinderappliedtothesurfacethecalculatedcoveragerateshallbethatofthebinderfilm and shall not include the mass of the aggregate .
num guarantee num num the contractor shall guarantee the high friction surfacing materials and workmanship for a period of twoyearsfromthedateofopeningthesurfacingtotraffic.thisguaranteeshallcoverfailuretomeettheminimum requirementssetoutintablenumofthehapasdocumentguidelinedocumentfortheassessmentandcertification of high friction surfaces for highways .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num num testing of bituminous mixtures num num the contract compliance sampling and testing of bituminous mixtures shall comply with bs en num exceptwhereotherwisespecifiedinthisseries .
num numadditionaltestingshallbecarriedoutasspecifiedincontractspecificappendicesnumandnum .
num num in situ recycling the repave process num num where milling is required it shall be carried out in accordance with clause num and as described in contractspecificappendixnum .
num heating and scarifying num num surfaces to be treated shall be heated by plant with heating surfaces insulated and fully enclosed .
the heatedwidthofsurfacingshallexceedthescarifiedwidthbyatleastnummmoneachsideexceptagainsttheedge of the carriageway or kerb face .
when new surfacing material is spilt onto the road surface it shall be removed beforetheexistingsurfaceisheatedandscarified.areasofunscarifiedmaterialshallnotexceednummmxnummm .
num numthedepthofscarificationshallbesuchthatthebottomofthescarifiedlayerisparalleltoandbelowthe finishedroadsurfacelevelbythethicknessofsurfacecoursematerialspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
atoleranceofnummmispermissible .
num num where ironwork and other obstructions occur these shall be suitably protected or removed and the void covered .
surface dressings and large areas of road markings shall be removed by milling planing scarifying or similar .
num numtheheatedsurfaceshallbeevenlyscarifiedtocomplywiththerequirementsofsubclausenumofthis clause.whenironworkisleftinplaceorraisedtheadjacentareasshallbescarifiedbyothermeanswiththe material either left in place or removed prior to passage of the machine .
if ironwork needs to be relevelled on completion of work the new surface course material shall be used to make good the road surface for a maximum width of num mm around the ironwork .
num num during the reheating process the surface temperature of the road shall not exceed numc for more than num minutes .
num new surfacing num numnewsurfacecourseshallconformtoclausesnumornumasdescribedincontractspecific appendix num .
num numthenewsurfacingmaterialshallbelaidonandcompactedwiththereprofiledsurfacingwhichshall be at a temperature within the range of numc to numc .
num num num not used num num dense base and binder course asphalt concrete design mixtures num num designed dense base and binder course asphalt concrete formerly macadams including hdm and hmb shall be asphalt concrete conforming to bs en num the example of bsi pd num annex b for the selectedmixtureandrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.themixturedesignationshallbe one of the following i ac num hdm base num des .
ii ac num dense base num des .
iii ac num hmb base num des .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num iv ac num hdm bin num des .
v ac num hdm bin num des .
vi ac num dense bin num des .
vii ac num dense bin num des .
viii ac num hmb bin num des .
ix ac num hmb bin num des .
num num the volumetric properties of mixtures shall follow the example in bsi pd num clause b.num for designed base mixtures and bsi pd num clause b.num for designed binder course mixtures .
num numwhenspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumthevolumetricpropertiesofthemixtureshallbe monitored by determining the void content of cores compacted to refusal .
core pairs and samples of loose mix shall be taken every num lane metres and tested in accordance with bs num clauses c.num c.num c.num c.num and c.num .
if the mean air void content at refusal of any three consecutive pairs of cores falls below num the mixture target composition shall be reviewed and the type test revalidated in accordance with bs num annex c. num deformation resistance num num the resistance to permanent deformation of the mixture shall be in accordance with the appropriate class selectedfromtabled.numofpdnumasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num numwhenspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumtheresistancetopermanentdeformationofmaterial laid in the permanent works shall be monitored by testing in accordance with clauses d num num and num of bsnumannexd.sixcoresshallbetakenfromthefirstkilometrelengthofmaterialfromeachmixingplant and thereafter one further core from each subsequent lane kilometre .
results shall be assessed on successive rolling meansofsetsofsixconsecutiveresultsandshallbedeemedtoconformifthemeanisnogreaterthanthespecified valueandindividualvaluesnotmorethannumgreaterthanthespecifiedvalue .
num stiffness num num stiffness of the mixture shall be assessed in accordance with bs num annex e. mixtures with num grade binder shall conform to category smin numasdefinedinbsennumclausenum .
mixtures with num grade binder shall conform to category smin numasdefinedinbsennumclausenum .
num compaction control for the permanent works num num compaction shall be controlled and monitored in accordance with the general requirements of bsnumandthespecificrequirementsofthisclause .
num num compaction shall be continuously assessed using an indirect density gauge in accordance with bs num num with readings taken at num m intervals in alternate wheeltracks .
gauge readings shall also be takenateachcorelocationspecifiedinsubclausesnumandnum.eachgaugeshallbeindividuallycalibratedoneach mixture from each mixing plant and the calibrations shall be continually checked and updated based on correlations between gauge readings and core densities at the same locations .
num num for each location the in situ void content shall be determined in accordance with bs en num using the bulk density from the gauge reading and a maximum density taken from the mixture type testing data and updated with values from testing in accordance with subclause num .
num num the average in situ void content calculated from any six consecutive indirect gauge readings shall not exceed num .
num num in the event of a failure to meet the requirements in subclause num cores shall be taken at each location and void contents determined as described in subclause num and the evaluation of the extent of any nonconformity shall be based on these .
if it is necessary to remove and replace any material to restore conformity this shall be in lengths not less than num m unless otherwise agreed by the overseeing organisation .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num num for the material from each mixing plant a pair of cores shall be taken from every num linear metres laid and the void content shall be determined in accordance with bs num clause num .
num num the average in situ air voids for each core pair shall not exceed num .
num num for the material from each mixing plant a pair of cores shall be taken every num linear metres laid centrednummmfromthefinaljointpositionatanyunsupportededgeandtheairvoidshallbedeterminedin accordance with bs num clause num .
num num the average in situ void content for each of these pairs shall not exceed num .
num num in the event of nonconformity with subclauses num or num then density readings with indirect gauges and if necessary further cores shall be taken to establish the extent .
if it is necessary to remove and replace any material to restore conformity this shall be in lengths not less than num m unless otherwise agreed by the overseeing organisation .
num num each core extracted shall be examined for evidence of excessive voids below the depth to which the indirect density gauge penetrates .
if excessive voids are observed further cores shall be taken to determine its extent .
num numtwocopiesofthefinalindirectdensitytestresultsobtainedandtheircorrelationwithinsituairvoid contents shall be passed to the overseeing organisation within num hours .
num num emenum base and binder course asphalt concrete num num emenum base and binder course asphalt concrete shall conform to bs en num the example in bsipdnumannexbfortheselectedmixturetherequirementsofthisclauseandthosespecifiedincontract specificappendixnum.themixturedesignationshallbeoneofthefollowing i ac num emenum binbase num des .
ii ac num emenum binbase num des .
iii ac num emenum binbase num des .
iv ac num emenum binbase num des .
v ac num emenum binbase num des .
vi ac num emenum binbase num des .
num num the binder shall be hard paving grade bitumen in accordance with bs en num and the requirements specifiedintablesnumandnum .
num num emenum mixtures otherwise conforming to bs en num and the example in bsi pd num annex b butusingalternativepavinggradebitumensorpolymermodifiedpavinggradebitumensshallnotbeusedwithout prior approval by the overseeing organisation .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num table num num initial binder characteristics as supplied characteristic test method unit hard grade binders for emenum fpc num pen num pen test frequency penetration at numc en num nummm num num num num d softening point en num c num num target value num maxnum num num target value num maxnum w penetration index max en num annex a num target value num maxnum num target value num maxnum w fraass breaking point max en num c target meannum num max range num to num target meannum num max range num to num q viscosity at numc min en num mmnums num num a flash point minimum en num c num num a solubility minimum en num mm num num a notes num target max value based on a rolling mean of the last num consecutive results in fpc .
num target max value based on a rolling mean of the last num consecutive results in fpc .
all tests to be carried out on subsamples of a single bulk sample of binder .
minimum test frequency d daily w weekly q quarterly a annually .
indicated frequencies apply only if product is in regular supply .
table num num binder characteristics after shortterm ageing to en num rtfot characteristic test method unit hard grade binders for emenum fpc num pen num pen test frequency change of mass max num num a retained pen numc en num num num q increase in softening point maximum en num c num num a notes num target minimum value based on a rolling mean of the last num consecutive results in fpc .
all tests to be carried out on subsamples of a single bulk sample of binder .
minimum test frequency a annually q quarterly .
indicated frequencies apply only if product is in regular supply .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num table num num binder characteristics to be reported characteristic test method unit binder for emenum fpc frequency as sta lta brookfield viscosity t numcp en num c tbr a t numcp c tbr a t numcp c tbr a g and phase angle bs en num graphical output pa degrees tbr a a a vet temperature gg at num hz c tbr a a a g at the vet temperature pa tbr a a a g and g mastercurves numc to numc graphical output tbr a a a gandphaseangleatnumcnumhz andnumcnumhz pa degrees tbr a a a t snum mpa by bbr bs en num c tbr a a a t mnum by bbr c tbr a a a pendulum cohesion min bs en num jcmnum tbr a a a fraass breaking point min en num c tbr a notes as as supplied sta after en num rtfot lta after pavnum an ageing profile determined in accordance with clause num is an acceptable alternative to sta and pavnum .
all tests to be carried out on subsamples of a single bulk sample of binder .
minimum test frequency a annually .
indicated frequencies apply only if product is in regular supply .
num num the properties of mixtures shall follow the example in bsi pd num annex b clause num to clause num inclusive .
num num a separate assessment shall be made of the conformity of soluble binder content analysis results of emenum mixtures using the principles of the mean of four results approach used in bs en num .
binder content shall be assessed on a continuous basis by taking the mean value of the previous four analysis results .
this will give a rolling mean binder content .
in addition to the analysis results meeting all of the standard conformity requirementsofennumthisrollingmeanbindercontentshallcomplywiththetargetcompositionnum .
num compaction num num emenum shall be delivered to site at a temperature which enables laying with a minimum paverout temperature of numc .
num num emenum mixtures shall be compacted with either i steel rollers exceeding num tonnes provided compaction is speedily undertaken .
any vibration shall be switched off when traversing compacted material to avoid microcracking the cooling surface ii pneumatictyredrollersptrsweightedataminimumofnumtonneperwheelfinishingwithwidesteel nonvibrating rollers and numpoint rollers .
num num compaction shall be substantially completed before the temperature falls below numc .
limited rolling withoutvibrationmaybecarriedoutbelowthistemperaturetoimprovethefinish .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num compaction control for the permanent works num num compaction shall be controlled and monitored in accordance with the general requirements of bsnumandthespecificrequirementsofthisclause .
num num compaction shall be continuously assessed using an indirect density gauge in accordance with bs num num with readings taken at num m intervals in alternate wheeltracks .
gauge readings shall also be takenateachcorelocationspecifiedinsubclausesnumandnum.eachgaugeshallbeindividuallycalibratedoneach mixture from each mixing plant and the calibrations shall be continually checked and updated based on correlations between gauge readings and core densities at the same locations .
num num for each location determine the in situ void content in accordance with bs en num using the bulk density from the gauge reading and a maximum density taken from the mixture type testing data and updated with values from testing in accordance with subclauses num and num .
num num the average in situ void content calculated from any six consecutive indirect gauge readings shall not exceed num .
num num in the event of a failure to meet the requirements in subclause num cores shall be taken and void contents determined in accordance with bs num clause num and the evaluation of the extent of any non conformity shall be based on these .
if it is necessary to remove and replace any material to restore conformity this shall be in lengths not less than num m unless otherwise agreed by the overseeing organisation .
num num for the material from each mixing plant a pair of cores shall be taken from the wheeltracks every num metres laid and the void content shall be determined in accordance with bs num clause num .
num num the average in situ air voids for each core pair shall not exceed num .
num num for the material from each mixing plant a pair of cores shall be taken every num metres laid centred nummmfromthefinaljointpositionatanyunsupportededgeandtheairvoidshallbedeterminedinaccordance with bs num clause num .
num num the average in situ void content for each of these pairs shall not exceed num num num in the event of nonconformity with subclauses num or num then density readings with indirect gauges and if necessary further cores shall be taken to establish the extent .
if it is necessary to remove and replace any material to restore conformity this shall be in lengths not less than num m unless otherwise agreed by the overseeing organisation .
num num each core extracted shall be examined for evidence of excessive voids below the depth to which the indirect density gauge penetrates .
if excessive voids are observed further cores shall be taken to determine its extent .
num numtwocopiesofthefinalindirectdensitytestresultsobtainedandtheircorrelationwithinsituairvoid contents shall be passed to the overseeing organisation within num hours of the material being laid .
num to num num not used num num stone mastic asphalt sma binder course and regulating course num general num num stone mastic asphalt binder course and regulating course shall conform to bs ennum the example frombsipdnumannexdfortheselectedmixturetherequirementsofthisclauseandthosespecifiedincontract specificappendixnum.themixturedesignationshallbeoneofthefollowing i sma num bin num. ii sma num bin num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num iii sma num bin num. iv sma num bin pmb .
v sma num bin num. vi sma num bin num. vii sma num bin num. viii sma num bin pmb .
ix sma num bin num. x sma num bin num. xi sma num bin num. xii sma num bin pmb .
xiii sma num bin num. xiv sma num bin num. xv sma num bin num. xvi sma num bin pmb .
num binder modification num numpolymermodifiedbitumensshallcomplywithbsennum.thecontractorshallprovidethe declarationofperformanceforthepolymermodifiedbitumentotheoverseeingorganisation.thedeclaration ofperformanceshalldemonstratethatthebindermeetstherequirementsofthespecificationincludingthe requirementsstatedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num num for premixed binders not covered by bs en num or bs en num the contractor shall provide data sheetsgivingdetailsofthepropertiesofthemodifiedbindersoradditivesproposedincludingthosespecifiedin contractspecificappendixnum.theseshallincluderheologicaldataforpreblendedpolymermodifiedbindersin accordance with bs en num and cohesion in accordance with bs en num .
num deformation resistance num num the resistance to permanent deformation of the mixture shall be in accordance with the appropriate class selectedfromtabled.numofbsipdnumasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num numwhenspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumtheresistancetopermanentdeformationofmaterial laid in the permanent works shall be monitored by testing in accordance with bs num clause g num num and num .
sixcoresshallbetakenfromthefirstkilometrelengthofmaterialfromeachmixingplantandthereafteronefurther core from each subsequent lane kilometre .
results shall be assessed on successive rolling means of sets of six consecutiveresultsandshallbedeemedtoconformifthemeanisnogreaterthanthespecifiedvalueandindividual valuesnotmorethannumgreaterthanthespecifiedvalue .
num compaction control for permanent works num num compaction shall be controlled by monitoring density and air void content in accordance with bs num clause num and the requirements of this clause .
num num density shall be continuously assessed using an indirect density gauge in accordance with bs num clause num with readings taken at num m intervals in the centre of the mat .
gauge readings shall also be taken at eachcorelocationspecifiedinbsnumclausenumandatthelocationofcoresrequiredbysubclausenum .
each gauge shall be individually calibrated on each mixture from each mixing plant and the calibrations shall be continually checked and updated based on correlations between gauge readings and core densities at the same locations .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num num for each location the in situ void content shall be determined in accordance with en num using the bulk density from the indirect gauge reading and a maximum density taken from the mixture type testing data and updated with values from testing in accordance with subclause num .
num num the average in situ void content calculated from any six consecutive indirect gauge readings shall not exceed num or for regulating course less than num mm in thickness shall not exceed num .
num num in the event of a failure to meet the requirements in subclause num cores shall be taken at each location and void contents determined .
testing of cores shall be carried out in accordance with bs num section num and assessment of conformity shall be in accordance with bs num clause num num num in the event of nonconformity with the requirements of subclause num then density readings with indirect gauges and if necessary further cores shall be taken to establish the extent of the nonconformity .
if it is necessary to remove and replace any material to restore conformity this shall be in lengths not less than num m unless otherwise agreed by the overseeing organisation .
num num if the density readings taken with the indirect density gauge indicate that the air voids content may be less than num one num mm diameter core shall be cut at that chainage and the resistance to permanent deformation checked in accordance with subclause num .
num bond coat num numwherethethicknessofthestonemasticasphaltislessthannummmpolymermodifiedbondcoatsshall be used .
num num porous asphalt num numporousasphaltshallconformtobsennumasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num to num num not used num num thin surface course systems num general num num thin surface course systems shall be provided and installed in accordance with the requirements stated inthisclauseandthosegivenincontractspecificappendixnum .
num numthinsurfacecoursesystemsspecifiedunderthisclauseshallbebetweennummmandnummmthick .
num overall performance requirements num num the contractor shall guarantee the installed thin surface course for a period of num years from the date of openingtotraffic.fortheperiodoftheguaranteethethinsurfacecourseshallmeettheperformancerequirements statedinthisclauseandcontractspecificappendixnum.theguaranteeshallexcludedefectsarisingfrom accidental damage or damage caused by settlement subsidence or failure of the underlying carriageway on which the surfacing material has been laid .
replacement of the surfacing or other remedial measures agreed with the overseeingorganisationshallbeexecutedifthesurfacingisinasuspectpoororbadconditionasdefined in appendix a of trl report trlnum durability of thin surfacing systems part num final report after nine years monitoring trl report num .
num num the contractor shall demonstrate that the as installed thin surface course system can meet the requirementsofthespecification.thisshallbedemonstratedbythesystemmeetingthestatedmaterial requirements and by having undergone a system installation performance trial sipt to cover the aspects of the installation not covered by the materials declaration of performance .
the sipt shall comply with the requirements of subclauses num to num of this clause .
an acceptable approach for the sipt would be to use a scheme in volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num accordance with subclause num .
the contractor shall submit details of the sipt for the systems to be used in the contract as required in subclause num to the overseeing organisation for acceptance .
num material requirements num num the thin surface course mixture shall comply with bs en num bs en num or bs en num .
it shall be ce marked and the contractor shall submit the declaration of performance for the material to the overseeing organisation .
the declaration of performance shall demonstrate that the material meets the requirementsofthespecification .
num num the coarse aggregate shall be crushed rock or steel slag complying with clause num and bs en num .
the contractor shall submit the declaration of performance for the aggregate to the overseeing organisation .
the declaration of performance shall demonstrate that the aggregate meets the requirements of the specification.theresistancetopolishingandabrasionpsvandaavshallbeasspecifiedincontractspecific appendix num .
theaggregateresistancetofragmentationandflakinessindexshallbeasfollows i resistancetofragmentationlosangelescoefficientlanotgreaterthanlanum ii flakiness index fi not greater than finum .
themaximumaggregatesizeshallbeasgivenintablenum table num num maximum aggregate size site definition maximumaggregatesize roundabouts nummm bends numm radius nummm junctionswhereturningradiusmovements numm nummm all other sites nummm num numtheminimumtargetdesignbindercontentsshallbeinaccordancewithtablenumandcontractspecific appendix num .
table num num minimum design binder content minimum target design binder content bmin maximum aggregate size d mixture types ennum parts num and num ac bbtm with pmb to bs en num mixture types en num part num sma paving grade bitumen to bs en num and fibressma num num num num num num num num not used num numtheresistancetopermanentdeformationshallbeasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.the resistance to permanent deformation of mixtures conforming to bs en num parts num and num shall be in accordance with the appropriate class selected from table b.num or d.num respectively of pd num .
num numthewatersensitivityshallbeasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.thewatersensitivityof mixtures conforming with bs en num parts num num and num shall conform to at least category itsrminnum .
num numwhererequiredincontractspecificappendixnumthedesignvoidcontentshallbevminnum to vmaxnum volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num numcontractcompliancetestingofthemixtureshallbecarriedoutasrequiredincontractspecific appendixnumandsamplessuppliedasdetailedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num installation requirements general num num the contractor shall provide an installation method statement to the overseeing organisation .
it shall include the sipt method statement as described in subclause num of this clause all installation instructions relevanttothesystembeinguseddetailsasspecifiedinthisclauseanddetailstomeettherequirementsofclause num .
num numthedesignthicknessofthethinsurfacecoursesystemshallbeasspecifiedinthecontractspecific appendix num within the minimum and maximum design thickness permitted in table num .
the installed layer thickness must not be less than the permitted minimum thickness nor greater than the permitted maximum thickness stated in the installation method statement .
table num num design target layer thickness .
nominal aggregate size mm design target thickness mm minimum maximum num num num num num num num num num num numwhererequiredintheinstallationmethodstatementorincontractspecificappendixnumtoachieve finalpavementlevelsandorthicknessestheexistingsubstratesurfaceshallbestrengthenedorregulatedin accordance with clause num .
num num where the existing substrate surface is regulated in accordance with clause num evidence that the deformationresistanceoftheregulatingmaterialwillmeetthespecificationshallbesubmittedbythecontractorto the overseeing organisation .
where the combined thickness of the regulating material and the thin surface course is more than num mm evidence of the deformation resistance of the combined layers shall be provided .
num num surface preparation including the removal of road markings cleaning and drying resetting of ironwork and road studs shall be in accordance with bs num and the installation method statement .
num num where required in the installation method statement a bond coat or tack coat shall be applied .
it shall be in accordance with the installation method statement .
unless otherwise stated in the installation method statement is shall also comply with clause num and bs num .
a calibrated mechanised method of application shall be used unless otherwise agreed with the overseeing organisation .
num num transportation of the thin surface course material shall be in accordance with the system installation method statement and clause num .
num installation requirements surface macrotexture untrafficked num num the surface macrotexture depth of the thin surface course system shall be measured in accordance withbsennum.unlessotherwisestatedincontractspecificappendixnumthemacrotextureoftheinstalled surfacing shall comply with the relevant section of table num or table num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num table num num requirements for initial texture depth for trunk roads including motorways for thin surface course systems road type surfacing type average per num m section mm average for a set of num measurements mm minimum minimum maximum high speed roads upper daggregatesizeofnummm num num num upper daggregatesizeofnummm num num num upper daggregatesizeofnummm num num num lower speed roads upper daggregatesizeofnummmor less num num num roundabouts on high speed roads upper daggregatesizeofnummm num num num roundabouts on lower speed roads upper daggregatesizeofnummm num num num upper daggregatesizeofnummm num num num highspeedroadsarethosewithapostedspeedlimitnummileshnumkmh lowerspeedroadsarethosewithapostedspeedlimitnummileshnumkmh table num num requirements for initial texture depth for roads other than trunk roads and motorways for thin surface course systems road classification posted traffic speed average per num m section mm average for a set of num measurements mm minimum minimum initial mm maximum initial mm a nummph num num num a all other traffic speeds num num num bcu all traffic speeds num num num num installation requirements macrotexture trafficked num numforaperiodoftwoyearsfromthedateofopeningtotraffictheaveragemacrotexturemeasuredusing the volumetric patch technique in accordance with bs en num will be maintained above the levels given in contractspecificappendixnumandtablenum.themeasurementsshallbeinthemostheavilytraffickedlaneat num m intervals along the centre of the most heavily worn wheeltrack .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num table num num retained surface macrotexture requirements surfacing type average texture depth per numm section mm systems with an upper daggregatesizeofnummmlaidonmotorway trunk and high speed a roads num systems with an upper daggregatesizeofnummmlaidonmotorway trunk and high speed a roads num systems with an upper daggregatesizeofnummmlaidonmotorway trunk and high speed a roads num systemswithallaggregatesizeslaidonnontrunklowspeedaandall b c and u classification roads num or the complete carriageway lane where this is less than num m. verificationofhighspeedfrictionperformancerequired num installation requirements torque bond num numthebondstrengthbetweenathinsurfacingsystemanditssubstrateshallbenumkpameasuredin accordance with clause num .
num installation requirements noise num num the thin surface course system shall have the roadtyre noise characteristics as required in contract specificappendixnum .
num system installation performance trial sipt requirements num num the thin surface course used in the sipt shall meet the performance requirements of the thin surface course to be supplied under the contract .
this shall be demonstrated by the assessments and testing undertaken for the sipt .
num numtheinstalledthinsurfacecoursesystemshallbeassessedtestedandcertifiedbyacertificationbody usingoneormoretrialareasofsurfacing.thecertificationbodyshallbeaccreditedtobsennumbyukasor equivalenteuropeanaccreditationorganisationwhichispartytoamultilateralagreementmlawithukasor any equivalent international accreditation forum mla signatory with a scope that includes relevant standards or schemes .
num num the area of surfacing for the sipt shall be a minimum of num metres in length and num metres in width .
num numasiptmethodstatementshallbeprepared.thesiptshalldemonstrateandenableverificationof the installation procedures given in the sipt method statement .
this will include the correct application rates of the bond or tack coat application method of bond coat paving speed of mixed material joint formation layingtemperaturesmethodsofverificationtobeusedonsitemaintenanceandrepairtechniquesaftercareand frequencyoftestingandacceptablevariationswithinthespecifiedlimits .
num num a sipt inspection protocol shall be prepared .
it shall demonstrate qualitatively and quantitatively the applicability of the sipt for the system in order to satisfy the performance requirements .
num num the sipt method statement sipt inspection protocols all inspection and testing results and the sipt certificationshallbesubmittedtotheoverseeingorganisationalongwiththeinstallationmethodstatement .
num numthesiptshallincludethefollowingtobeundertakenbythecertificationbody i verificationthatthesysteminstallationtrialhasbeenundertakeninaccordancewiththesiptmethod statement and the stated protocols ii assessment of the visual condition of the completed system at the times stated in subclause num iii assessment of the data from the site performance tests detailed in subclause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num the assessments shall be undertaken by an assessment team that includes a lead assessor with experience in pavement inspections and a minimum of two additional suitably experienced persons to comprise an inspection panel for the visual condition of the sipt installation and interim inspections .
num num the installed performance characteristics of the trail area shall meet the criteria stated in table num at the times and intervals stated .
table num num installed performance characteristics characteristic performance requirements times at which the performance characteristic shall be determined or measured visual inspection as defined in subclause num good or excellent at opening to traffic .
good or excellent num months after opening to traffic .
good or excellent num months after opening to traffic surface macrotexture depth bs en num contract specific appendix num or table num or num at opening to traffic .
appendix num and table num num months after opening to traffic .
appendix num and table num num months after opening to traffic torque bond numkpa between num and num days after installation .
roadtyre noise level table num between num and num months after opening to traffic .
void content voluntary assessment and declaration subclause num between num and num months after opening to traffic .
num numdefectsidentifiedduringthevisualinspectionsshallberecorded.thedefectstoberecordedare those described in trl num .
the assessment of defects shall be summarised as a performance band as listed in table num .
table num num site installation performance trial visual inspection requirement performance band description excellent no discernible fault good no significant fault moderate some defects but insufficient for serious problem acceptable several defects but would usually be just acceptable suspect seriously defective but still serviceable in the short term poor requires remedial treatment bad requires immediate remedial treatment num num the torque bond strength between the thin surface course and its substrate shall be established in accordance with clause num .
this shall be established between num and num days after the sipt is installed .
num num the void content of the proposed mixture when evaluated for the sipt shall be vminnum to vmaxnum from the average of num cores .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num noise num numwherenoisecharacteristicsforthethinsurfacecoursesystemsarespecifiedincontractspecific appendix num the sipt shall include the assessment and measurement of noise characteristics as described in sub clauses num to num of this clause .
the declared level shall be num to num or nr as given in table num .
table num num roadtyre noise levels level equivalence to traditional surfacing materials road surface influence rsi num very quiet surfacing material num dba num quieter than hra surfacing materials num dba num equivalent to hra surfacing materials num dba num noisier than hra surfacing materials num dba nr no requirement no requirement num numtheinfluenceoftheroadsurfaceontrafficnoiseusingthestatisticalpassbymethodshallbeestablished atthesiptsitebetweennumandnummonthsafteropeningtotrafficinaccordancewithisonum sections num and num .
num num acoustic measurements shall only be carried out when the road surface is dry and the meteorological conditionspecifiedinisonumsectionnumaremet .
num num the air and surface temperatures shall be monitored in accordance with the procedure described in iso num num clause num .
the road surface temperature t surface must be within numc to numc during acoustic measurements .
the air temperature t air must be within numc to numc .
num numthetestlocationroadspeedcategoryshallbeclassifiedaseithermediumorhighasdefinedin iso num num clause num .
not less than two test locations shall be selected for each road speed category which may be at the same site provided the locations are at least num m apart or on different carriageways .
eachtestlocationshallberepresentativeintermsofroadspeedcategoryandtrafficlevel.eachofthetestsites selected must meet the requirements of iso num num section num and isocd num num .
the road must be essentially straight or bends with a radius of curvature greater than num m for mediumspeed and num m for high speed road categories .
the crossfall of the test lane at the test site must not exceed num .
num num the apparatus described in iso num num section num are used .
the frequency range of between numandnumhzcentrefrequenciesoftheonethirdoctavebandsshouldbecovered .
num num the macrotexture of the road surface used for the noise assessment shall be measured in the nearside wheeltrack along the whole length of test material in accordance bs en num .
the macrotexture depth of the nearside wheeltrack in front of a test location must be within num per cent of the average macrotexture measured along the site .
num num the microphone location at each measurement site shall be recorded accurately and marked with appropriatemethodssuchthatthepositioncanbereadilyidentifiedforaperiodofatleasttwoyears .
num numwhensufficientvehiclepassbyshavebeenmeasuredalinearregressionanalysisshallbeperformed in accordance with iso num num clause num .
in the case of the highspeed road category measurements must not be taken of vehicles travelling at speeds of less than num kmh in accordance with afnor standard snum .
num numforeachcategoryofvehicledefinedintablenumthevehiclesoundlevellveh shall be calculated as the ordinate sound level of the regression line at the reference speed for the category of road .
all levels shall be calculated to two decimal places and rounded to one decimal place .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num table num num reference speeds kmhnum for different road speed categories vehicle category road speed category kmhnum medium high l num num hnum num num hnum num num category l vehicles light vehicles including passenger cars and car derived vans excluding vehicles towing trailers .
category hnum vehicles commercial trucks with num axles and greater than num tonnes .
category hnum vehicles commercial trucks with more than num axles and greater than num tonnes .
num num hot rolled asphalt surface course and binder course performancerelated design mixtures num num hra performance related surface course shall conform to bs en num and follow the example frombsipdnumannexcsectionc.numtherequirementsofthisclauseandthosespecifiedincontract specificappendixnum .
this mixture can be laid at lower layers within special pavement types e.g bridge decks when it is unchipped .
num layer thickness num num the nominal thickness of the hot rolled asphalt surface course layer shall be either num mm or num mm unlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num binder and binder modification num numbitumenprocessedduringrefiningtoprovideabinderwithenhancedpropertieswithouttheadditionof amodifiershallhaveahapascertificateorequivalentproductacceptanceschemecertification .
num num for binders that do not comply with clause num and without hapas or equivalent product acceptance schemecertificationthecontractorshallprovidedatasheetsgivingdetailsofthepropertiesofmodifiedbinders whetherthemodifierispreblendedwithbitumenthebitumenismodifiedduringrefineryprocessingormodified byadditionintotheasphaltmixerincludingthosespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.theseshallinclude rheological data in accordance with bs en num and cohesion in accordance with bs en num .
binders that do not comply with clause num or subclause num of this clause shall not be used without the approval of the overseeing organisation .
num coarse aggregate num num coarse aggregate shall be crushed rock or slag complying with bs en num and clause num .
the resistance to polishing of the coarse aggregate for surface course shall comply with category psvnum in accordance with bs en num clause num .
num deformation resistance num num the resistance to permanent deformation of the mixture shall be in accordance with the appropriate class selectedfromtablec.numofbsipdnumasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num coated chippings for surface course num numwhenrequiredcoatedchippingsshallbenummmornummmsizeasspecifiedincontractspecific appendix num and comply with clause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num surface macrotexture for surface course num num the surface macrotexture shall comply with clause num .
num compaction control procedures num num control testing for compaction and resistance to permanent deformation shall be carried out in accordance with bs num section num .
num numwhenspecifiedinthecontractspecificappendixnumtheresistancetopermanentdeformationof material laid in the permanent works shall be monitored by testing in accordance with clause f.num of bs num annexf.sixcoresshallbetakenfromthefirstkilometrelengthofmaterialfromeachmixingplantandthereafter one further core from each subsequent lane kilometre .
results shall be assessed on successive rolling means of sets ofsixconsecutiveresultsandshallbedeemedtoconformifthemeanisnogreaterthanthespecifiedvalueand individualvaluesnotmorethannumgreaterthanthespecifiedvalue .
num trafficking newly laid surfacing num num the contractor shall ensure the pavement material has adequately cooled and hardened before the road isopenedtotraffic.unlessotherwiseagreedbytheoverseeingorganisationtheroadshallnotbeopenedtotraffic if its surface temperature exceeds numc unless the maximum temperature within the mat has fallen below numc .
num num not used num num weather conditions for laying of hot bituminous mixtures num num the contractor shall take account of the weather conditions when planning his working methods .
the contractors working methods shall comply with all weatherrelated requirements of bs num and any additional requirements of this clause .
when laying is to be undertaken during winter october to april andor nighttimenump.m.tonuma.m.thecontractorshallworktoaqualityplanthatallowsforthespecificissuesraisedby winter andor night time working .
num num hot bituminous materials laid less than num mm thick other than those supplied to clause num shall be laid within the wind speed and temperature constraints of figure num .
num thin surface course systems num numtheweatherconditionsforlayingthinsurfacecoursesystemsshallcomplywiththoseidentifiedas being acceptable in the installation method statement as required in clause num .
num hot rolled asphalt with precoated chippings num num hot rolled asphalt surface course mixtures incorporating num coarse aggregate with precoated chippings shall be laid num mm thick within the following constraints of delivery temperature wind speed and air temperature .
air temperature minimum numc wind speed maximum at any air temperature num kmh at num m height or num kmh at num m height minimum delivery temperature of materials numc .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num wind speed num num when measurements are required for assessment wind speed shall be measured by anemometer positionednearthelayingsitetoaccuratelyreflectconditionsatthelayingsite.theanemometershallbefittedwith a digital accumulative device .
figure num num wind speed and air temperature laying restrictions for layers less than num mm thick num num local repairs num general num numlocalrepairisdefinedasthereinstatementofsurfacecourseandbindercourseandbaseifnecessary over a relatively small area .
num num areas of defectiveness greater than nummnum shall be repaired by inset replacement over a length and width in accordance with subclause numiv and subclause num .
areas of defectiveness up to nummnum in surface area may be repaired using an inset patch .
the repair technique used shall be as given in table num .
table num num repair technique size approx mnum application repair technique up to num individual pothole or road stud hole .
discrete area of local defectiveness inset patch in excess of num or several closely adjacent areas less than num wide area of local defectiveness .
replacement for minimum length of numm or numm in accordance with subclause num iv .
full lane width or less where practicable joints to comply with sub clause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num inset patch repair for areas nummnum preparation num num the edges of the repair shall be sawcut or planed in a neat rectangular shape in sound surfacing at a distance of at least numm beyond the defective area .
the sawcut or planed opening shall have vertical straight edges and extend for the full depth of surface course .
for repairs that extend into the binder course andor base these lower layers may be removed by the use of a mechanical breaker .
an offset stepped detail for the binder and base layers shall be used to ensure that vertical joints do not pass through more than one layer at the same location .
aminimumhorizontalstepofnummmshallbeprovidedatalllayerinterfaces .
num num all existing material within the sawcut perimeter of the repair area shall be removed and the base and sides of the cavity thoroughly cleansed of all loose material and moisture to provide clean and dry surfaces throughout .
num the prepared vertical joints and the base of the cavity shall be treated in accordance with subclause num .
num inset patch repair for areas nummnum repair materials num numrepairmaterialsshallcomplywiththespecificationrequirementsstatedincontractspecific appendixnum.unlessotherwisestatedincontractspecificappendixnumrepairmaterialsshallbeconsistentwith and compatible to the surrounding materials .
num num repair materials for patches in hot rolled asphalt surfacing shall be in accordance with clause num .
num inset patch repair for areas nummnum construction num num construction of the repair should commence at the edges and progress inwards with particular care for full compaction especially in the vicinity of the vertical joint faces .
all construction layers shall be laid and compacted such that on completion each layer shall be at the same level as the adjacent course .
num num the repair material must be compacted using rollers vibrating plates andor tampers as appropriate for thesizeoftherepair.thecornersoftherepairarethemostvulnerabletodistressandparticularcaremustbetaken to achieve full compaction in these areas .
num repair areas nummnum num num large areas shall only be repaired with materials installed using full scale selfpropelled paving machinery .
the extent of the repair area shall be as described in subclause numiv with appropriate longitudinal and transverse joints in accordance with subclause num .
num num repairs to large areas in thin surface course systems shall be undertaken in accordance with the instructionsstatedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num numrepairmaterialsshallcomplywiththespecificationrequirementsstatedincontractspecific appendixnum.unlessotherwisestatedincontractspecificappendixnumrepairmaterialsshallbeconsistentwith and compatible to the surrounding materials .
num num areas exceeding nummnum in existing hot rolled asphalt surfacing shall be repaired using hot rolled asphalt material in accordance with clause num .
num num placing and compaction shall be in accordance with clause num and bsnum with use of bond coat in accordance with clause num .
num proprietary materials and techniques for repairs nummnum num num evidence from laboratory evaluation shall be provided by the contractor to the overseeing organisation to demonstrate that the proprietary repair materials andor techniques comply with the following performance criteria stiffnessnumgpaafternumdayswhentestedinaccordancewithbsennumitsmmethodnumc resistancetopermanentdeformationclassificationno.numasdefinedintabled.numofbsipdnum volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num num data from a representative area of the material andor technique for a local repair nummnuminsizemustbe providedtodemonstratethatthefinishedsurfacetobetraffickedcomplieswiththefollowing the initial surface texture shall be not less than nummm when measured using the volumetric patch method described in bs en num the minimum wet skid resistance value shall not be less than num when determined using the portable skid resistance tester pendulum in accordance with bs en num .
num num in situ cold recycled bitumen bound material num scope num num in situ cold recycled bitumen bound material shall be designed and produced to form the foundation or main structural layer of the road pavement .
the primary aggregate source shall be obtained by cold pulverisation of all or part of the existing road structure .
the primary binder stabilising agent shall be a foamed bitumen with cementorlimeasanadhesionagent.theaggregategradingmaybeadjustedbytheadditionofafiller.limemay also be used to modify any cohesive subgrade soil incorporated in the pulverised layer .
num num prior to commencing the pulverisation and stabilisation works the contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the overseeing organisation using the results of mix design procedures described in subclauses num tonumofthisclausethattheexistingpavementmaterialsinthesectionsoftheworksdefinedincontractspecific appendix num are capable of being recycled by pulverisation to form the primary aggregate component of an in situcoldrecycledbitumenboundmaterialwhichcanmeetthespecifiedendproductperformancerequirements .
num component materials num aggregates and fillers num numthepulverisedpavementmaterialandanysupplementaryaggregateandorfillershallnormallybe granular material with not less than num and not more than num passing the num mm sieve zone a graded material .
approval for use of pulverised granular material containing up to num passing the num mm sieve zonebgradedmaterialshallrequireconfirmationbytheoverseeingorganisationsubjecttotheresultsofthe mixture design procedures described in subclauses num to num of this clause .
num num the pulverised granular material shall contain not more than num of organic matter as determined in accordance with bs num clause num .
num bitumen binder num num the primary binder shall be foamed bitumen .
the base bitumen shall comply with bs en num and shall be num penetration grade .
num numotherthanfoamingagentsbitumenmodifiersshallnotbeusedunlessapprovedbytheoverseeing organisation for special purposes or conditions .
num num the binder shall be transported to the site in tankers capable of maintaining the required temperature and a homogeneous binder consistency and transferred to the stabilising plant in a controlled and uniform manner .
num num the foaming of the bitumen shall be carried out within the spraybar system of the recycling machine and immediately mixed with the pulverised aggregate at which point the foamed bitumen shall have a volume of not less than num times the volume of the base penetration grade bitumen .
num cement filler aggregate and lime num numtheconstituentsandrequiredqualitystandardsofhydrauliccementfilleraggregateandlimedelivered tositeshallbecertifiedbythesupplierwhosemanufacturinganddeliveryprocessesshallbeimplementedusing qualitymanagementsystemsinaccordancewiththebsenisonumandcertifiedbyanaccreditedbody .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num numhydrauliccementasafilleraggregateoradhesionagentshallbecementblastfurnaceslagcementor pfa cement in accordance with subclause num .
num numpfausedasafilleraggregateshallbeinaccordancewithbsennum .
num numlimeforlimestabilisationorasamodifierforplasticfinesshallasrequiredincontractspecific appendix num be either quicklime or hydrated lime complying with subclause num .
num water num num water for moisture content control of the pulverised granular material shall normally be obtained from a water company supply and used without testing .
water from an alternative source shall comply with bs en num and be approved by the overseeing organisation .
num pulverisation and stabilisation num num the contractor shall satisfy the overseeing organisation that the plant used for pulverisation is capableofuniformlypulverisingtheexistingroadstructureinasinglepasstothedepthstatedincontractspecific appendix num .
the plant used for stabilisation shall be capable of uniformly mixing controlled amounts of water and binder agents into the full depth of pulverised layer .
for either operation the plant shall be equipped with a meansofcontrollingthedepthofprocessingtonummmoftherequireddepth .
num num the plant used for stabilisation shall be equipped with a spraybar system within the mixing chamber capable of producing and uniformly distributing foamed bitumen binder at a monitored and controlled rate .
an accessiblesamplingjetshallalsobefittedthatproducesfoamedbitumenhavingthesamecharacteristicsasthat produced by the main spraybar .
flow rate meters for measuring the supply rate of hot bitumen and other liquid additivestothemixtureshallbecapableofrecordingthecorrectrateofflowduringallstatesofpipelineflow i.e.fullyorpartiallycharged.evidenceconfirmingthecapabilitiesoftheplantandthecalibrationofflowmeters shall be submitted to and approved by the overseeing organisation prior to the stabilisation works commencing .
num num the material shall be pulverised and stabilised in a single layer if its compacted thickness is num mm or less .
if the compacted thickness is greater than num mm the material shall be pulverised and stabilised in the minimum number of layers between num mm and num mm thick .
where more than one layer is required the contractor shall satisfy the overseeing organisation that the lower layer has achieved adequate stability in accordance with subclause num of this clause before proceeding with the overlying layer .
num pulverisation process num num pulverisation of the existing road structure shall be carried out in a systematic pattern to the required depthtoensurethatallpartsoftheexistingroaddesignatedincontractspecificappendixnumareincludedinthe works .
an overlap of at least num mm shall be made between adjacent passes of the machine .
any material missed along hard edges or around obstructions shall be excavated and placed in the path of subsequent passes of the machine until a uniform fully pulverised aggregate is obtained .
the pulverised material shall not be contaminated by material drawn in from the verges .
num num all longitudinal and transverse joints shall be clean cut and vertical .
where work continues adjacent to previously recycled material transverse joints shall be reformed a minimum num m into the previously treated construction .
where a layer of material for stabilisation is placed over a layer previously stabilised the depth of pulverisationstabilisation of the upper layer shall be set to cut into the underlying stabilised layer by at least num mm .
num num excess pulverised material shall be removed by the grader andor excavator for use elsewhere on site ortransportedtostockpileatlocationsgivenincontractspecificappendixnum.thesurfaceofthelayershallbe gradednominallytotherequiredprofileandprovisionallycompacted .
num num moisture content of the pulverised aggregate immediately prior to stabilisation shall be measured in accordance with bs en num using the high temperature method .
the moisture content shall be uniform throughoutthelayerwithintherangenumoftheoptimummoisturecontentfortheunstabilisedaggregate includinganydesignedproportionoffillerdeterminedinaccordancewithbsennum .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num numifthemoisturecontentoftheunstabilisedpulverisedaggregatefailstomeetthespecifiedmoisture content range corrective action shall be taken either by aeration to reduce the moisture content or by controlled addition of water to increase the moisture content .
num num aeration of the affected area shall be achieved by full depth passes of the recycling machine to disturb and loosen the material and assist the evaporation of excess moisture .
the material shall be kept in a loose condition until subsequent moisture content tests show that the treated material has reached the required moisture contentrange.thelayershallberegradednominallytotherequiredprofileandprovisionallycompactedin preparation for stabilisation .
num num an increase in moisture content of the affected area shall be achieved by the addition of water through an adjustable spraybar system in conjunction with full depth passes of the recycling machine to achieve a uniform distribution of the water throughout the layer .
increments of water shall be added and mixed in until subsequent moisture content tests show that the material has reached the required moisture content range .
the layer shall be regradednominallytotherequiredprofileandprovisionallycompactedinpreparationforstabilisation .
num stabilisation process num num stabilisation shall not be carried out during or after periods of rainfall where the duration and intensity arelikelytocausethestabilisedmixturetoexceedthespecifiedmoisturecontentcriteriaandcompromisethe stabilityofthelayerundercompactionasdefinedinsubclausenumofthisclause.stabilisationoffrozen materials shall not be permitted .
num num prior to stabilisation pulverised materials within num mm of restricted hard edges such as kerbs and channels or around obstructions such as gullies shall be removed and spread uniformly over the remaining full width of the pulverised material .
num numimmediatelypriortostabilisationanyfillerandoradhesionagentshallbespreaduniformlyoverthe full width of the layer using a mechanical spreader capable of distributing the materials in a uniform controlled manner .
the rate of spread of these materials shall be calculated to achieve the mixture composition determined in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause and monitored as the spreading operation proceeds in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
num num the stabilisation shall be carried out to the required depth in a systematic pattern similar to that used for the pulverisation process with an overlap of at least num mm between adjacent passes of the machine .
the bitumen binder shall be introduced as a foamed bitumen and distributed through the spraybar system directly into the rotor and mixing box of the stabiliser .
the binder shall be supplied to the spraybar of the recycling machine by pumped pipeline from onboard tanks or from a tanker moving in tandem with the recycling machine .
the rate of supply of the bitumen and any foaming agent calculated to achieve the target binder content determined in accordance with subclauses num to num shall be controlled and monitored as described in subclause num of this clause .
num numthelayerofstabilisedmaterialshallbegradedtolevelandcompactedwithintwohoursofthefinalpass of the stabilising plant unless a curing or maturing period of aeration is required .
any furrow formed by prior excavationofedgematerialsshallberefilledbygradingtheadjacentstabilisedmaterialintothespaceusinga minimum amount of reworking .
num num the compaction of each layer shall be carried out using compaction plant approved by the overseeing organisation until such time as the insitu density complies with subclauses num and num of this clause and the stabilised layer provides a stable and dense surface .
any open or segregated surface area shall be blinded using dry crushedrockfines .
num numthestabilityofthelayerundercompactionshallbedeemedadequateifthefinishedsurfacedoesnot shoverutorexhibittransversecrackingundertheloadofsubsequentconstructiontraffic .
num num where required by the overseeing organisation the stability of a layer in any area shall be assessed afteracuringperiodofatleastnumhoursbychannelledtraffickingusingarigidthreeaxletippertruckloadedtoa gross mass of num tonnes assumed equivalent to three standard axles .
the vertical deformation shall be measured in all wheeltracks at monitoring points on each of num transverse sections set num m apart after num num num and num passes ofthetruck.themeanverticaldeformationsattheabovetraffickingincrementsshallbeplottedagainstthe volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num respective number of truck passes and the mean vertical deformation corresponding to num standard axles shall be interpolated .
the layer shall be deemed acceptable if the mean vertical deformation corresponding to num standard axles is less than num mm .
num numoncompletionofcompactionthesurfaceshallbesealedusingasprayedmembraneofclassknum bitumen emulsion complying with clause num .
the bitumen emulsion shall be sprayed at the rate stated in contract specificappendixnum.wherethesurfaceisopenedtotrafficthesealingmembraneshallbeblindedwithfine aggregate or sand applied at a rate of num to num kgmnum .
num process control num num the condition or quality of the pulverised material or stabilised mixture shall be assessed for specificationcomplianceonthebasisofeachnummnum area of the works or part thereof completed in the same working day .
num numthemoisturecontentspecifiedinsubclausenumofthisclauseshallbemonitoredusingtestspecimens extracted from three bulk samples of pulverised aggregate taken from points evenly spaced along a diagonal bisecting the assessment area .
the bulk samples shall comprise material taken from the full depth of the pulverised layer .
the depth of pulverisation relative to the designed road level shall be measured and recorded at each point.thesamplesshallalsobetestedtodeterminetheparticleorlumpsizedistributioninaccordancewith bs en num or by an amended method to obtain an early assessment of grading provided correlation with the standard test method can be demonstrated .
where appropriate the residue of the three samples shall be combined to form one bulk sample and the bitumen content of the pulverised aggregate determined in accordance with bs en num .
if any adjustment of moisture content is carried out prior to stabilisation subsequent samples shall be taken and further moisture content tests completed .
num numtherateofspreadofcementfillerhydratedlimeorquicklimeshallbemeasuredbyweighingthe amountofmaterialretainedoneachoffivetraysormatsofknownarealaidinthepathofthespreadingmachine .
the trays shall be positioned approximately at points equally spaced along a diagonal bisecting the area of coverage .
the mean rate of spread and percentage addition of the material shall be determined and recorded for each assessment area .
num numtherateofsupplyofbitumenbinderandanyotherfluidstothestabilisingplantshallbesetand continuouslymonitoredusingtheappropriateflowratemetersonthestabilisingplant.asacheckatthestartof each work period the rate of supply of bitumen shall be determined from before and after dip measurements of the storagedelivery tanks related to an area of stabilisation of not more than num mnum .
the calculated supply rate of bitumen for each test area shall be recorded .
num num as directed by the overseeing organisation where lime has been used to modify a cohesive soil componentofthepulverisedaggregatetheacceptabilityofthemodifiedmaterialsshallbetestedinaccordance with subclause num .
num numafterstabilisationpriortofinalcompactionofthestabilisedmixturefivesamplesofthestabilised material shall be obtained .
each sample shall be taken from a point equally spaced along a diagonal bisecting the area under consideration .
the location of each sampling point shall be recorded .
each sample shall comprise at least num kg of material taken from the full depth of the layer .
the depth of stabilisation relative to the designed road level shall be measured and recorded at each point .
where appropriate and as directed by the overseeing organisation the depth measurements shall be made using a stringline stretched between points of known level .
num numinthefieldeachsampleofthestabilisedmaterialshallbemixedinatrayandsufficientrepresentative material taken to produce a num mm cube specimen made in accordance with the relevant clauses of series num .
the refusal density for each cube sample shall be determined to the nearest num kgmnum .
the remainder of each sample shall be retained in a sealed condition for subsequent testing on site or in the laboratory as described in sub clauses num num and num of this clause .
num numaftertrimmingandfinalcompactionofthestabilisedlayertheinsitubulkdensityshallbemeasuredat num m intervals per lane including points close to the material sampling points using an indirect density gauge in directtransmissionmodetoadepthwithinnummmofthetotallayerthickness.themeterreadingsshallbeverified periodically in accordance with bs en num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num num the insitu bulk density values obtained shall be compared with the refusal density value obtained from thecubespecimensattherespectivesamplingpoints.theaverageinsitubulkdensityofeachsetoffivevalues shall be at least num of the cube refusal density with no individual insitu density value less than num of the respective refusal density .
num numeitheronsiteorimmediatelyonarrivalatthelaboratoryeachofthefivesamplesshallbetestedfor moisture content in accordance with bs num .
num num either on site or within num hours of arrival at the laboratory one num mm diameter by num mm to num mm highcylindertestspecimenbriquettespecimenshallbemanufacturedfromeachofthefivesamplescompacted inaprdmouldtoatargetdensityoftheaverageinsitubulkdensitymeasuredinthefield.thefinaldensityof each briquette specimen shall be measured and using the respective moisture content values the dry density values shall be determined .
num numthecuringhistoryofthefivebriquettespecimenspriortotestingshallberecordedwhichshallassoon as possible after manufacture include a period of num hours at a nominal temperature of numc .
immediately before testing each briquette specimen shall be conditioned in air for a minimum period of num hours at numc and then tested in accordance with bs en num itsm method to determine the indirect tensile stiffness modulus itsm of the material .
after removal from the test apparatus each briquette shall be immersed in water at numc for a minimum period of num hours then retested to determine the itsm of the material in a saturated state .
num num the air voids content of each briquette shall be determined in accordance with bs num except that the maximum density for the partially coated product used in the air voids content calculation shall be standardised using the maximum density determined for a fully coated laboratory prepared specimen .
a sample of loose pulverised aggregate obtained prior to the addition of foamed bitumen shall be dried to constant mass atnumc.sufficienthotpenetrationgradebitumenshallthenbeaddedinincrementstothedriedaggregateina mechanical mixer until the mixture is visually fully coated using of the order num of added bitumen .
the coated specimenshallbetestedtodeterminemaximumdensityasspecifiedinbsennum .
num numtheresidueofthefivesamplesofstabilisedmaterialshallbecombinedtoformonebulksample.from this bulk sample four subsamples shall be obtained .
three subsamples shall be tested to determine the particle sizedistributionandonesubsampletodeterminebitumencontentinaccordancewithbsennum.theadded bitumen content shall be the measured bitumen content of the stabilised mixture less the bitumen content of the pulverised aggregate prior to stabilisation .
num numthespecificationcompliancecriteriafortheprocesscontroltestsshallbeasdescribedintablenum .
num end product performance of in situ cold recycled bitumen bound material num num the endproduct performance of the in situ cold recycled bitumen bound material shall be assessed on the basis of measurements carried out in areas of num mnum or part thereof completed each working day which match theareasdefinedinsubclausenumofthisclause .
num num within num hours of completion the asinstalled performance of the stabilised layer shall be evaluated using a dynamic plate loading or penetrometer technique to determine values of elastic modulus at points on a nominalgridpatternasdescribedincontractspecificappendixnum.theelasticmodulusateachpointandthe meanelasticmodulusfortheassessmentareashallcomplywiththeminimumstandardsstatedincontractspecific appendix num .
additionally before proceeding with construction of the overlying pavement the valuation process shall be repeated to demonstrate that the elastic modulus value at all points and that of the mean value have increasedovertherespectiveasinstalledvaluesbynotlessthanthepercentagevaluesstatedincontractspecific appendix num .
where these criteria are not met the full extent of the noncompliant material shall be determined and appropriate remedial measures implemented .
remedial action shall comprise either a delay in construction to allow further curing and stiffening of the layer to occur or a repeat of all or part of the recycling process followed by reevaluation until a compliant material is achieved .
num numwithinnumdaysofcompletionofthesurfacingworksafallingweightdeflectometersurveyshallbe carried out and analysed in general accordance with hd num dmrb num .
in particular the measurements shall betakenonthefinishedroadsurfaceinthenearsidewheelpathatauniformandmaximumspacingofnumm.the survey shall be carried out during a period when the pavement temperature at a depth of num mm is within the range volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num to numc .
the fwd results shall be analysed using a linear elastic fwd back analysis computer program with the pavement modelled as a two layer system .
layer num shall represent the combined design thickness of the bound materials i.e .
the combined recycled material and overlying surfacing materials and layer num shall represent the unboundfoundationlayerofinfinitedepth.endproductperformanceshallbedefinedintermsofthecalculated stiffness of layer num uncorrected for temperature .
compliance shall be achieved when the rolling mean of num results isnotlessthanthefigurespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumandnoindividualresultislessthannumof thefigurespecified .
num num in the event that the layer num stiffness requirement of subclause num of this clause are not met the full extent of the noncompliant material shall be determined by further investigation involving coring and laboratory testing .
for each area of noncompliance cores shall be extracted through the full depth of the stabilised layer at locations directed by the overseeing organisation at a minimum rate of one x num mm diameter core per num mnum .
table num num compliance criteria for process control tests on in situ cold recycled bound material material property or characteristic individual results mean from test set relative insitu density num minimum num minimum aggregate grading in accordance with subclause num of this clause added bitumen content targetnum num na moisture content optimumnum optimumnum layer thickness site measurement nummmofspecified nummmofspecified cement content site rate of spread measurement targetnum targetnum indirect tensile stiffness modulus itsm dry specimens num mpa minimum num mpa minimum itsm water saturated specimens num mpa minimum num mpa minimum percentage air voids content num maximum num maximum note subject to the absolute minimum added bitumen content has stated contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall be responsible for extraction of the cores with the minimum of force or disruption .
airflushcoringshallbeallowedformaterialsthataredisturbedbywaterflushcoring.afterextractioneachcore shall be labelled and photographed and prior to testing shall be stored in sealed polythene bags in a uniformly supportedpositionatatemperatureofnumcnumc.thethicknessofrecycledlayershallbemeasuredand recorded .
num numreinstatementofallcoreholesshallbecompletedbeforeopeningtheareatotraffic .
num numifatanyoftheprescribedcorelocationsitisnotpossibletoextractanintactcoreofsuitablesizeor condition for the endproduct performance testing using a maximum of three attempts in an area of num m radius thematerialinthevicinityshallbedeemednottocomplywiththeendproductperformancespecification .
num num in the laboratory each of the cores extracted successfully shall be trimmed to remove surfacing materials and any underlying material prior to cutting into core test specimens between num mm and num mm high .
where possible three test specimens shall be obtained from each core one from the upper part one from the centre and the other from the lower part .
num num all core test specimens thus obtained shall be tested in accordance with the standards described in table num .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num table num num testing standards for core specimens of in situ cold recycled bound material test standard bulk density bs en num and subclause num of this clause air voids content bs en num and subclause num of this clause indirect tensile stiffness modulus bs en num num num the results obtained shall be used for assessing the expected performance of the stabilised material in theworksinrelationtotheknownperformanceofbsspecifiedbasematerials.thestabilisedmaterialinthetrial area shall be deemed acceptable if the compliance criteria described in table num are met .
table num num compliance criteria for in situ cold recycled bound material core specimens from the works material property or characteristic individual cores mean from core set core density relative to refusal density num minimum num minimum air voids content num maximum num maximum layer thickness from core measurement nummmofspecified nummmofspecified indirect tensile stiffness modulus dry num mpa minimum num mpa minimum num mixture design and characterisation num num mixture design and characterisation of in situ cold recycled bitumen bound material for each site or sectionofsiteincludingdetailsoffillerbinderadhesionandorstabilisingagentsandtheirquantitiesshallbe submitted to the overseeing organisation at least one week prior to commencement of the recycling works .
where thesiteinvestigationhasidentifiedsignificantvariationofexistingpavementmaterialsbetweendifferentsections of the site a mix design shall be submitted for each section of the site .
the proposed plan area and depth of the different sections covered by each mixture design shall be approved by the overseeing organisation .
num num the testing standards used for the mixture design of the recycled bitumen bound mixture shall be those listed in table num .
table num num testing standards for the design and characterisation of in situ cold recycled bound material test standard moisture content bs num bulk density bs en num air voids content bs en num and subclause num of this clause grading and binder content bs en num indirect tensile stiffness modulus bs en num num num the aggregate used in the design and characterisation process shall be obtained from the appropriate section of the works and shall be representative in terms of component material proportions of the pavement layers to be pulverised .
the laboratory manufactured aggregate shall be pulverised or crushed such that it closely replicatesthenatureandgradingofthepulverisedaggregateandthattheaggregateparticlesizedistributionshall comply with subclause num of this clause .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num num the laboratory prepared aggregate shall be thoroughly mixed with measured proportions of the bitumen binder and adhesion agents to produce at least three trial mixtures with different added bitumen contents .
the penetration reference of the bitumen and the type of the adhesion agents used in the trial mixtures shall be the sameasthoseusedinthefinishedworks .
num num the different added bitumen contents of the trial mixtures shall be set at increments of between num and num in the range num to num with appropriate allowance made for residual binder in any crushed asphalt component .
from each trial mixture four num mm diameter x num mm to num mm high cylinder test specimens briquette specimens shall be compacted to refusal by vibratory compaction in a cylindrical metal mould using the compaction mould assembly and vibratory hammer described in bs en num .
the bulk density of each cylinder shall be determined .
num num the briquette specimens shall be cured for a period of num hours at a nominal temperature of numc .
following this the briquette specimens shall be conditioned in air for a minimum period of num hours at numc and then immediately tested in accordance with bs en num to determine the itsm .
after further conditioning of the briquettes immersed in water at numc for a minimum period of num hours the itsm tests shall be repeated on each specimen .
num num the characteristics of the mixture to be used in the works including any added water shall be determined using the optimum itsm dry values .
if peak conditions are not clearly displayed then plateau characteristicsshallbeacceptedandthelowestaddedbitumencontentforwhichallthecriteriadefinedintable num are met shall be used in the works subject to a minimum of num for mixtures containing only pulverised unbound or cement bound aggregate and num for mixtures containing only pulverised bitumen bound materials .
num numonthebasisoftheforegoingtestresultsthecontractorshalldeclaredetailsofthejobstandard mixtures for the works setting out target aggregate grading and type added water content adhesion agents and binder content together with tolerances .
the method of compaction shall be described such that the material to be utilised in the works meets the mixture .
table num num acceptable design and characteristic requirements for in situ cold recycled bound material property or characteristic individual specimens mean from test set moisture content na optimumnum indirect tensile stiffness modulus dry num mpa num mpa indirect tensile stiffness modulus wet num mpa num mpa bitumen content na targetnum particlesizedistribution na zone a or zone b air voids content num maximum num maximum num num ex situ cold recycled bound material num general num numexsitucoldrecycledboundmaterialcrbmcomprisesbaseandbindercoursesproducedinafixed or mobile mixing plant from graded aggregate processed from arisings from the excavation of roads and similar sources blended if necessary with other aggregate and bound with cementitious hydraulic or bituminous binders separately or in combination .
this clause covers four generic material families quick hydraulic qh slow hydraulic sh quick viscoelastic qve and slow viscoelastic sve .
the primary binder of these families of materials shall be as follows qh cement as the main component and excluding bituminous binders .
sh hydraulic binders e.g .
pfalime and gbslime excluding bituminous and portland cement volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num qve bituminous binder as the main component but also including portland cement .
sve bituminous binder as main component but excluding portland cement .
num numexsitucrbmshallbedesignedtoachievethespecifiedleveloftheappropriateendperformance property num quality assurance num numexsitucrbmshallbeproducedinplantsthathaveaukasaccreditedbsenisonumquality managementsystem.thebsenisonumcertificatescopeshallincludethisactivity .
num sourcing of aggregate num num the quality plan shall contain details of all aggregates to be used in the crbm .
aggregate may include i asphalt concrete or granular material planed or excavated from a road or other paved area ii primary secondary or recycled aggregate from other sources iii fillersfromprimaryorsecondarysourcese.g.pfa .
num numtheprocessedaggregateincludingaddedfillershallnotcontaindeleteriousmaterialthatadversely affects the performance of the mixture .
num processing of aggregate num num the quality plan shall describe how in particular highway arisings are to be processed crushed screenedandstockedtoenableconsistentproductionofthecrbminlinewiththejobstandardmixture .
num binders and other constituents num num the bitumen and other constituents shall conform to the following standards i bitumen emulsion shall conform to bs en num and be used in accordance with bs num. ii cement shall conform to bs en num. iii bitumen used for foaming shall conform to bs en num and shall be grade num or harder .
iv granulated blast furnace slag gbs shall comply with en num. v ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbs shall comply with bs en num. vi lime shall comply with bs en num. vii flyashpfausedaseitherasfillerorpozzolanshallcomplywithbsennum .
viii unweatherednummmbasicoxygenslagbosslagfinesusedinshmaterialasactivatoraccelerator to the gbs shall comply with bs num part num .
num num subject to approval other constituents including setting and hardening agents may be used to enhance the performance of the mixture .
water shall not contain material that adversely affects the performance of the mixture .
num job standard mixture num num the composition of the job standard mixture shall be declared as follows i source origin and proportion of all aggregate constituents .
ii combined target grading including mineral binders and tolerances .
iii source origin and proportion of all binders .
iv target moisture content .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num num the grading of the job standard mixture i.e .
the aggregate together with the other constituents including hydraulicbindersshallcomplywithoneofthezonesintablenum .
num num use of zone b or c graded material shall be permitted only when the results of a full mix design showing compliance with the required num day performance properties are available or when evidence can be provided of satisfactory achievement of the performance requirements on an earlier contract with a similar composition .
table num num particle size distribution of mixture for cold recycling sieve mm percentage by mass passing zone a zone b zone c num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num the binder addition shall comply with table num .
table num num minimum binder contents for ex situ construction by family and binder type family opc lime pfa gbs ggbs bitumen qh num num num num num num num sh num num num num num num num num num qve num num sve num num foamed or emulsion residual pfa may be added as filler lime may be added for breaking and adhesion purposes and if pfa included as filler will contribute to strength volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num mixture design validation num num when a mix design validation is required it shall be carried out on aggregates and binders representative of those to be used on the works .
the validation may be carried out on crbm mixed either in the laboratory or on a pilot basis on a full scale plant .
num num the target mixture shall comply with subclauses num and num .
num num a preliminary exercise shall be undertaken to establish a target grading and suitable moisture content .
num num representative samples of the mixture shall be taken and from these num mm diameter cylindrical specimens shall be produced in accordance with subclause num .
these specimens shall be num mm high for hydraulic bound mixtures and num mm high for viscoelastic bound mixtures .
the time between mixing and specimen production shall be in accordance with the setting times given in table num .
num num the density of each specimen shall be measured and using the respective moisture content values the dry density values shall be determined .
the cylindrical specimens shall be conditioned and tested .
the conditioning and testing regime shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation and the measured characteristics shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of table num .
num num the performance properties of the conditioned specimens shall be declared .
the results shall be considered as indicative only as the compliance criteria apply only to the specimens prepared during the execution of the works .
table num num mix design and end product requirements property or characteristic all materials mean from test set qve and sve materials num days indirect tensile stiffness modulus class bnum num mpa class bnum num mpa class bnum num mpa class bnum num mpa qh and sh materials num days note num days in situ or cured in accordance with sub clause num .
num trafficking trial num numwhenspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumatraffickingtrialshallbeundertakentodemonstrate that the crbm is not prone to excessive rutting in its early life .
num num a trial area shall be laid using the materials and plant to be used in the main works and on a foundation typical of that in the main works .
the trial area shall be left to cure for num hours and shall then be subjected to controlledtrafficking.thetraffickingshallbeperformedbyaheavygoodsvehiclewithanaxleconfigurationand loading typical of that to be encountered in the construction phase .
the number of passes shall equate to the total expectedamountoftraffictobecarriedduringconstructionwithadefaultvalueequivalenttonumstandardaxles .
num numthemeasuredruttinginthetraffickingtrialshallbelessthannummmorthatspecifiedincontractspecific appendix num .
num process control num num production of the ex situ crbm shall be subject to process control detailed in the quality plan and meeting the following requirements i thereshallbeadescriptionoftheplantandtheproductionprocesspreferablyincludingaflowdiagram detailinghowmaterialistobeproducedinaccordancewiththisspecification .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num ii calibration schedules for all parts of the plant involved in determining mix consistency shall be provided .
these shall be accompanied by calibration records .
iii details of transportation shall be provided .
these shall include the location of the mixing plant and the expected average time between mixing and laying .
the contractor shall record the duration between mixing and the completion of compaction at the site during the execution of the works .
iv measures to avoid problems caused by extreme weather .
in particular production shall not proceed if the feedstockisfrozenorexcessivelywet .
num inspection and test num num there shall be a schedule of inspection and test frequencies to be made during production of crbm .
this shall comply with the minimum frequencies in table num .
table num num minimum frequencies for inspection and test item inspection test aggregate stockpiles daily grading and moisture content before production and weekly binders on receipt supplier data combined grading of mixture continual daily moisture content of mixture continual daily num laying num num a written procedure for the laying of the ex situ crbm shall be provided .
num num the plant used for placing ex situ processed material shall be capable of laying the material without significantsegregationevenlyandtotherequiredthicknessacrossatleastonelanewidth .
num num a method for the making of longitudinal and transverse joints appropriate to the type of crbm being laid shall be provided .
num compaction num numthecompactionofeachlayershallbecarriedouttoadefinedrollingpatterntoachievetherequired in situ density and until the recycled layer provides a stable and dense tight surface .
the stability of the layer after compactionshallbedeemedadequateifthefinishedsurfacedoesnotshoverutorexhibittransversecracking undertheloadofsubsequenttraffic.openedgesshallbeprotectedfromtraffic .
num numaftertrimmingandfinalcompactionoftherecycledlayertheinsitubulkdensityshallbemeasured using an indirect density gauge in direct transmission mode to a depth within num mm of the total layer thickness .
themeterreadingsshallbeverifiedperiodicallyinaccordancewithbsennum .
num numtheinsitubulkdensityvaluesobtainedshallbecomparedwiththerefusaldensityvalueofthejob standard mix or of the refusal density of a specimen representative of the days production .
the average in situ bulkdensityofeachsetoffivevaluesshallbeatleastnumoftherefusaldensitywithnoindividualinsitudensity value being less than num of the respective refusal density .
num sealing num numwhenspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumthesurfaceshallbesealedusingasprayedmembrane of class cnumbnum bitumen emulsion complying with clause num .
the bitumen emulsion shall be sprayed at a rate num to num lmnum to achieve a uniform and continuous seal to the surface of the layer .
where the surface is opened to trafficthesealingmembraneshallbeblindedwithfineaggregateorsandappliedatarateofnumtonumkgmnum .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num end product testing num num the end product testing of the ex situ crbm shall be assessed on the basis of representative specimens madeupinaccordancewiththescheduleincontractspecificappendixnum .
num num representative samples of the ex situ crbm shall be taken either at the mixing plant or from site .
num mm diameter cylindrical test specimens shall be manufactured in sets of six by compacting to refusal in accordance with bs num part num .
the height of the test specimens and the time period after mixing during which compaction must be completed shall be in accordance with table num .
table num num setting times of cold recycled families family setting time under normal temperature conditions sample dimensions prepared to a target density diameter mm height mm qh num hours num num sh num hours num num qve num hours num num sve num hours num num can be longer depending on material composition num conditioning and testing of samples num num prior to testing specimens shall be conditioned in a controlled environment sealed to keep the moisture inasdescribedinthisclause.thepurposeofthisconditioningistosimulatethelikelycuringoverthefirstyearin the road .
num num immediately after compaction the cylindrical specimens in their moulds shall be double wrapped in clingfilmplasticusingtwoseparatesheetseachofwhichshallbesufficienttocovertheentirecircumferenceof thecylinderandthetwoendsofthespecimen.oncewrappedinclingfilmthesampleshallbeplacedinasealed plastic bag .
care shall be taken when handling the specimens not to damage the plastic bag or the underlying clingfilmlayer.thespecimensshouldbestoredinairorwateratatemperaturewithinnumcofthenominal conditioning temperature .
num num the following conditioning regimes shall apply i qh specimens shall be conditioned for a period of num days at a temperature of numc .
ii sh and qve specimens shall be conditioned for a period of num days at a temperature of numc .
num end product criteria num numtheminimumspecificationcompliancecriteriafortheprocesscontroltestsshallbeasdescribedin table num .
table num num end product criteria material property or characteristic individual results mean from test set of six specimens particlesizedistribution zone moisture content num relative in situ density num minimum num minimum layer thickness nummmofspecified nummmofspecified indirect tensile stiffness modulus or indirect tensile test na relevant value from table num less num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num in the event of test specimens failing to achieve the required indirect tensile test results compliance shall be determined by the testing of cores extracted by dry coring after one year .
the results shall be compared with the criteria in table num .
num num not used num num surface preservation systems num num systems that are intended to extend the life of existing asphalt surfacing by the application of a proprietaryliquidcoatingshallhavehapasorequivalentproductacceptanceschemecertificationtodemonstrate theirperformance.preservationsystemswithouthapasorequivalentcertificationshallnotbeusedwithoutprior approval by the overseeing organisation .
num num torque bond test num num the bond strength between a thin surfacing system and its substrate which may be bituminous or cementitious shall be established between num and num days after the sipt is installed by measuring the peak shearing torque at a known temperature .
num numsixevenlyspacednummmdiametercoresshallbecuttoadepthofnummmbelowthethinsurfacing layer to be tested along a diagonal line across the lane width from a num m length of the installation .
the surface to be tested must be clean and dry .
num numametalplateofmildsteelhavingadiameterofnummmandathicknessofnummmincorporating afittingtoenableittobecoupledtoatorquemetershallbesecuredtothesurfaceofthecoreusingasuitable bonding agent taking care to ensure that the plate is parallel to the surface .
num numwhenthebondingagenthasdevelopedsufficientstrengthie.failureshouldnotoccurwithinthe adhesiveatorquemeterfittedwithafiducialreadinggaugecalibratedoverarangeofnumnmwithascale readabletoatleastnumnmshallbefittedtothemetalplateusingadaptersandextensionrodsasappropriate .
num num torque shall be applied to the core at a steady rate so that the torque wrench sweeps an angle of numwithinnumseconds.caremustbetakentoensurethatthetorqueisappliedparalleltothecoresurface withinnum.torqueisappliedtotheplateuntilfailureofthebondoccursoratorqueofnumnmisexceeded .
num num the value of torque at failure shall be recorded in newton metres m. the bond interface temperature shall be measured and recorded immediately after failure using a thermometer readable to a temperature of numc and accurate to numc .
num num the core diameter shall be measured and recorded at two locations approximately num apart using callipers and the mean value d recorded to an accuracy of num mm .
num num the bond strength is calculated for each specimen using the following formula numm x num  dnum where  interlayer bond strength in kilopascals kpa m peak value of applied shearing torque in newton metres nm d diameter of core in millimetres mm volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num num the arithmetic mean of the interlayer bond strength  for the six specimens shall be calculated and shall be greater than or equal to num kpa .
num num the test report shall include the name of organisation carrying out the test description of materials system and substrate date of test peak torque at failure nm interlayer bond strength kpa individual and mean values time to failure seconds diameter of core mm depth of bond interface mm temperature of the bondinterfaceattestcidentificationofsiteorschemecorelocationageoftheinstallationspecimenatthe time of test nature of the bond interface mode of failure .
num num not used num num method for laboratory determination of interface properties using the modified leutner shear test num scope num numthisclausespecifiesalaboratorytestmethodtoassessthebondingbetweenadjacentasphaltpavement layers using cylindrical samples .
it is also appropriate for asphalt applied to concrete .
num terms and definitions num numforthepurposesofthisclausethetermsanddefinitionsgiveninbsnumshallapplytogetherwiththe following i peak shear stress the maximum value of shear stress determined as the maximum force divided by the initial cross sectional area of a specimen when tested as described in this clause .
ii displacement at peak shear stress the displacement at the maximum value of shear stress of a specimen when tested as described in this clause .
iii shear stiffness modulus the peak shear stress divided by the displacement at the peak shear stress of a specimen when tested as described in this clause .
num principle of test num num cylindrical test specimens of nominal num mm diameter shall be subjected to direct shear loading at numcusingthemodifiedleutnersheartest.themaximumshearstressinmpaattheinterfacebetweenlayers shall be determined .
num test apparatus and materials num num the following test apparatus and materials shall be used i sheartestapparatusasshowninfigurenumcomposedofabasebodyaonwhicharefixedthe sample support b and the lower shear ring d. the upper shear ring c is attached to the upper body e which is movable along the guiding bars f. the gap between shear rings c and d is num mm .
ii loadingframecapableofachievingaconstantverticaldisplacementrateofnummmperminuteand a maximum load of at least numkn .
iii data logging system to record load and displacement during the test .
iv metal extension as shown in figure num. v stiffadhesivesuchasepoxyresinwithsufficientstrengthtoavoidfailurewithintheadhesiveoratthe adhesiveasphalt material interface .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num sample preparation num numtestspecimensshallbecoresofnummmdiametertheminimumthicknessofthelayersabove and below the interface to be tested shall be num mm and num mm respectively .
specimens shall be cored from an inservice pavement or from a slab manufactured using a laboratory roller compactor in accordance with bs en num and bs en num .
if the thickness of the layer above the interface is between num and num mm a metal extension shall be glued on top of the layer above the interface .
num procedure num num the diameter and thickness of the specimen shall be determined to the nearest mm .
num num the specimen shall be placed into a suitable temperature controlled conditioning environment at num numc for a minimum of num hours .
num numtheappropriateshearringstoformaloosefitaroundthespecimenforexamplenummmdiameter shear rings for a num mm diameter specimen shall be selected and attached to the leutner test frame .
num num the specimen shall be placed into the test apparatus and the interface aligned figure num g between the upper and lower shear rings figure num c and d. if a metal extension is used the specimen shall be placed into the test apparatus so that the direction of the grooves is perpendicular to the direction of the applied shear load .
num num tighten the sample support using a suitable spanner .
num num the test apparatus shall be placed into the loading frame and adjusted until the upper shear ring figure num c nearly touches the specimen .
num num start the data logging system to record load and displacement and commence shear loading .
the loadingrateshallbenummmperminute .
num numrecordtheloadftothenearestnumknandthedisplacementtothenearestnummm .
num num stop the shear loading when the test frame reaches its limit of num mm displacement .
the length of time between removal of the specimen from the temperature controlled conditioning environment and completion of testing shall not exceed num minutes .
num num after the test has been completed the apparatus shall be dismantled and the specimen removed .
num num both sections of the specimen shall be observed especially the interface for any visual cracks and unusual appearance i.e .
crushed aggregates on edges .
record any comments as necessary .
num calculation and expression of results num num calculate the shear stress as follows where  shearstressinmpa f load in kn r initial radius of specimen in mm num num produce a shear stress versus shear displacement graph an example is shown in figure num using the recorded data .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num num num determine the following parameters from the graph i max peak shear stress mpa expressed to the nearest num ii max displacement at peak shear stress mm expressed to the nearest num iii k shearstiffnessmodulusmaxmax mpamm expressed to the nearest num num test report num num the test report shall contain not less than the following information i a reference to this test method and test conditions .
ii material descriptions for both layers .
iii type and amount of tack bond coat if known .
iv for each specimen tested report specimen diameter expressed to the nearest mm layer thicknesses expressed to the nearest mm maximum load f expressed to the nearest num kn peakshearstressmax expressed to the nearest num mpa displacementatpeakshearstressmax expressed to the nearest num mm shear stiffness modulus k expressed to the nearest num mpamm any cracks or other damage .
v the test temperature expressed to the nearest numc vi the use or otherwise of a metal extension .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num a base body b sample support c upper shear ring d lower shear ring e upper body f guiding bar g specimen interface figure num num schematic diagram of the modified leutner shear test apparatus volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num figure num num schematic drawing of the metal extension figure num num example of shear stress vs displacement data plot volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num num ageing profile test using a modified rolling thin film oven test mrtfot num scope num numthisclausespecifiestheprocedureforobtainingsamplesofagedbinderaftervariousstagesof conditioning.inthiswayaplotofbinderpropertiesprovidinganageingprofilemaybeaccomplishedinashort timeusingthemodifiedrollingthinfilmoventestmrtfottosimulateageinginroadmaterialsovermany years in service .
themrtfotutilisestherollingthinfilmovenastmnumspecifiedinbsennum .
the method is suitable for generating small quantities of binder for rheological testing theageingprofileisgeneratedbydeterminingtherheologicalpropertiesofcomplexshearstiffnessmodulus gandphaseangleofsamplestakenfromtheovenatintervalsthroughoutthetestperiodtypicallyoneday .
other properties such as durability of cohesion may also be assessed .
three protocols are used depending on the type of binder and its use i amethodtosimulateageingofpolymermodifiedbinderorpavinggradebitumenusedinthe manufacture of asphalt ii amethodtoremovethewaterphaseandvolatilefluxfrompolymermodifiedbituminousemulsionsand simulate ageing and iii a method to test the potential for preservatives to reduce the ageing rate of bitumen .
theageingprofileintermsofrheologicalcharacteristicsprovidesproductidentificationandthisisessentialto ensureconsistencyandtoenableproprietarybinderstobeidentified .
num warning num numtheuseofthistestmethodcaninvolvehazardousmaterialsoperationsandequipment.thisclause does not purport to address all of the safety problems associated with the use of the test method .
it is the responsibility of the user of these test methods to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to use .
num asphalt binders num numbindersusedtomanufacturehotmixedasphaltasphaltbindersarefirstsubjectedtoashortterm ageing test to simulate the effects of manufacture transport and laying .
in this respect the test described in this clause has been shown to be equivalent to bs en num .
the binder is continually stirred by rotating stainless steelscrewsinsamplecanstoobtainahomogeneoussampletheprocedurealsobenefitsfromafasteroxidation rate rapid ageing because of the increased exposure to the jetted air stream and therefore a shorter test duration .
the binder samples are then aged at a lower temperature and samples removed at intervals and tested to obtain an ageingprofile.thisisparticularlyusefulforasphaltbecausedifferentairvoidcontentsandbindercontentsina road pavement result in different ageing rates .
the longterm aged binder sample where the characteristics are equivalent to those obtained after num hours using the pressure ageing vessel pavnum test is obtained after num hours therefore the test may be carried out in one day .
pavnum is detailed in bs en num .
binders used for manufacturing warm asphalt are mixed at much lower temperatures than for hot mixed asphalt and they do not need the same high temperature protocol for shortterm ageing this part of the procedure is therefore amended for these binders .
all the ageing is done at the lower temperature .
num bituminous emulsion binders num numbitumenandpolymermodifiedbituminousemulsionsarefirstsubjectedtoarapidrecoverytest which removes any water phase and volatile oils to produce a recovered binder .
the recovered binder has similar properties to that produced from other evaporative tests but is achieved over a shorter period and the volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num use of nitrogen replacing air reduces risks associated with volatile oils in the oven .
the recovered binder in rheological terms is equivalent to that recovered using bs en num .
theageingprofileisprovidedbycontinuingtheageingoftherecoveredbinderinthemrtfoatahigher temperaturereplacingthenitrogengaswithairandremovingsamplesafterspecifiedperiodsfortesting.a stabilised binder equivalent in rheological terms to that produced using bs en num may be obtained from theageingprofileplotforaparticularemulsion.fluxedandvegetalfluxedbinderswherevolatileoilsarethought to be present may also be tested using this protocol .
num preservatives num num num penetration grade bitumen used as a control is subjected to shortterm ageing in the mrtfot followed by an extended period at a lower temperature to simulate the ageing of the bitumen in a road pavement .
this aged bitumen control is then cooled to ambient and treated with the preservative .
most of the volatile oils are then removed by conditioning the samples in the mrtfot using a nitrogen blanket .
the aged bitumen treated by preservative is then subjected to further ageing with the mrtfot .
the properties of the aged bitumen after action ofthepreservativeareassessedbyanageingprofileusingrheologyandcomparedwiththeageingprofileof the control bitumen .
num definitions num numforthepurposesoftheproceduresspecifiedinthisclausethefollowingdefinitionsapply i laboratory sample sample of bituminous binder intended for laboratory tests .
it may be a spot sample a composite sample or a part thereof a divided sample as described in bs en num. ii test sample sample of bituminous binder produced by treatment or subdivision of a laboratory sample for individual test bs en num. iii recovered bindermaterialremainingafterremovalofwaterorfluxfromapolymermodified orunmodifiedbituminousemulsionorfluxedbinderinthepresenceofnitrogenequivalenttothe recovered binder using bs en num. iv aged binder material remaining after the ageing protocol .
v shortterm aged binder material obtained during the mrtfot which is equivalent to that provided by bs en numrtfot vi longterm aged binder material obtained during the mrtfot which is equivalent to that provided by bs en num vii ageing profile graphical plot of performancerelated results from samples tested during the ageing protocol of this method .
performancerelated testing is carried out using a dynamic shear rheometer dsr providing g and phase angle data at a determined temperature and frequency .
num test apparatus common to all protocols num num the following test apparatus shall be used i rtfot apparatus to bs en num. ii eightidentifiablesamplecanswiththreadedscrewtoplidsorotherfixingsystemmanufactured fromaluminiumandcoatedonallinternalsurfaceswithpolytetrafluoroethyleneptfewithinternal dimensions and aperture diameter lnum as shown below volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num thetaperinthethroatfromlnumaperturetolidtopisnum figure num num sample can and lid both with threads iii eight screws manufactured from high quality stainless steel surgical quality complying with bs ennumdesignationnumtoafinemachinedfinish.allscrewsshallhavedimensionsdiameter nummmlengthnummmandhavebetweennumandnumturnswithapitchofnummm.the depthofcutshallbenummmwithasemicircularprofileseefigurenum.atoneendthescrewshall haveanunthreadedshanknummmlongandnummmdiameterendinginanumconetruncated togiveaflatendattheapexnumtonummmdiameter.theminimumweightofascrewshallbenumg .
the direction of screw shall be such that the binder sample is drawn to the closed end of the sample can bottle when the can containing the screw is rotated in the carousel .
if the rtfo carousel rotates anticlockwise viewed from the front screws with a righthand thread are required and if the carousel rotates clockwise screws with a left hand thread are required .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num dimension a nummm to nummm figure num num screw with righthanded thread for anticlockwise rotating carousel iv aspatulaforremovingthebinderfromthesamplecansaflatbladewithasquareendhasbeenfound suitable .
v a balance accurate to numg .
vi atimercapableoftimingnumminutesaccuratetonumsecondinfiveminutesandforthemrtfota timer capable of timing num hours to the same accuracy .
vii nitrogen gas supply for rapid recovery test and preservative test .
viii air supply clean dry air for mrtfot .
ix an oven to preheat the sample cans and the binder to the required temperature .
num principle of the ageing profile test for polymer modified and unmodified bituminous binders for asphalts num numathinfilmofbinderisrotatedinaluminiumsamplecanswithscrewtoplidsbothcoatedinternally with ptfe replacing glass bottles using the rolling thin film oven test rtfot apparatus as described in bs en num .
special screws are used to disturb the binder and maintain a homogenous material during ageing.airisjettedoverthefilmofbinderforamuchlongerperiodthanintheconventionaltestandalower temperature used in order to simulate the ageing of the binder in the road after application .
the screws accelerate theprocessandarenecessarytomaintainahomogeneoussampleespeciallywhentestingpolymermodified binders which tend to form a skin and may phase separate in static ageing tests .
the initial conditioning test is to simulate the changes to the properties of the binder caused by the high temperatures during manufacture transport and laying termed shortterm ageing .
further ageing is carried out at a reduced temperature and samples removed after set periods and tested so that an ageingprofilemaybeplotted .
num test procedure for determining the ageing profile of hot mixed polymer modified and unmodified bituminous binders for asphalts num num obtain a sample in accordance with bs en num .
stir the sample thoroughly to ensure it is completely homogenized.ifsubsamplesaretakentheseshallhaveaminimumvolumeofnumml.ensurethatthertfois levelsothatthehorizontalaxesofthesamplecanswheninpositioninthecarouselarelevel.preheattheovento volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num numcnumhisgenerallysufficient.forbindersusedtomanufacturewarmmixedasphaltssubstitutenumcfor numc throughout the test procedure .
insert a stainless steel screw into each of the sample cans with the tapered end of the screw towards the aperture of the container and record the mass of each assembly to numg .
heat the sample cans and the stainless steel screws to numcfornummin .
heatthesampletonumc.thoroughlystirthesampletoensurehomogeneityimmediatelypriortodecanting into the sample cans .
pournumgofthesampleintoapreheatedsamplecanandrecordthemasswithlid.immediatelyafter weighing roll the sample cans to ensure distribution of the binder on the walls of the can .
mount the sample can in the carousel of the rtfo .
repeat for the remaining sample cans .
close the door of the rtfobetweenmountingeachsamplecaninthecarousel.theperiodbetweenweighingthefirstsamplecanwith binder and mounting of all the sample cans and the start of the rotation of the carousel shall not exceed num minutes .
whenthecarouselisfullyloadedrotatethecarriageassemblyataspeedofnumminnum.starttheflowofairat asetrateofnummlmin.startthetimer.maintainthesamplesintheovenandtheairflowingfornummin fromthetimethetesttemperaturereachesnumc .
ifthetesttemperatureofnumcisnotreachedwithinthefirstnumminutesdiscontinuethetest .
afternumminsamplecansminimumnummayberemovedfortestingandtodeterminemasslossifrequired .
this is the shortterm aged binder equivalent to rtfot bs en num .
tocontinuetheageingprofiletestmaintainthetemperatureatnumcforafurthernumminuteswiththecarousel rotatingintheairflowthenreducethetemperatureoftheoventonumc.notethetimethertfotakesto reach numc .
once the temperature has been achieved continue to rotate the samples in the air supply and remove sample cans to obtain samples of aged binder as required for testing after three periods numhnummintermedagednum binder numhnummintermedagednum binder numhnummintermedagednum binder this is the longterm aged binder equivalent to pavnum .
other periods may be used either for convenience or to allow other degrees of ageing to be investigated .
table num num summary of sampling times stage gas rtfo temperature time sampling cumulative time ageing air numc nummin rtfot equivalent nummins air numc nummin none numh nummin air numc numh agednum test samples numh nummin air numc numh agednum test samples numh nummin air numc numh agednum test samples equivalent to pavnum numh nummin for binders used to manufacture warm asphalt short term ageing at numc is not required therefore replace numc by numc in table num and report in addition agednum result ageing at numc after a cumulative time of numhnummin .
num handling of the aged binder num num if the binder is to be tested immediately remove a sample can from the carousel extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
place the sample cans in an oven preheated to the softening pointofthebinderplusnumcifknownornumcifthepropertiesofthebinderareunknownfornummin .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num place the containers on their sides in an oven .
this allows the binder to drain to one side of the container which is more easily removed with the spatula .
attheendofnumminremovethesamplecanfromtheovenunscrewthelidandusingthespatulascrapethe aged binder from the sample can and prepare the test samples in accordance with the relevant test method .
warming the spatula to the same temperature as the binder facilitates removal of the binder .
if the aged binder from more than one sample can is needed to produce a test sample combine the aged binder from the sample cans and reheat .
reheating for testing shall be in accordance with bs en num ensuring that agedbinderisheatedfornolongerthanisabsolutelynecessary.thebindershallbethoroughlyhomogenizedby stirring after heating and before being used for testing while taking care not to entrain any air .
if the binder is not to be tested immediately remove a sample can from the rtfo extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
unscrew the lid and using the spatula scrape the aged binder from the sample can and place on a silicon sheet .
the binder shall be sealed and stored at between numc to numc .
the sample shall be reheated in accordance with bs en num and homogenised immediately before testing .
if the aged samples are to be transferred to another laboratory for testing they shall not be subjected to temperatures greater than ambient after ageing and before testing and the delay before testing shall not exceed num hours .
the thermal history of the sample shall be recorded .
num principle of the ageing profile test for polymer modified or unmodified bituminous emulsions or fluxed binders num numathinfilmofbinderisrotatedinaluminiumsamplecanswithscrewtoplidsbothcoatedinternallywith ptfe replacing glass bottles using the rtfot apparatus as described in bs en num to evaporate water frombituminousemulsionsandorthelightsolventorhighlyvolatilefractionfromfluxedorotherbinders.special screws are used to disturb the binder and maintain a homogenous material during breaking andor curing .
nitrogen gasinsteadofairisjettedoverthefilmofbituminousbinderatalowertemperatureinordertominimizeageing effectsandsimulatetheconditionofthebindersoonafterapplication.thefirstpartoftheprocessiscarriedout with the rtfo set at numc to prevent frothing of the binder .
the temperature is then increased to numc to drive off any remaining water andor solvent to provide the recovered binder which is equivalent to the recovered binder obtainedfrombsennum.theageingprofileisprovidedbycontinuingtheageingofthebinderinthe rtfoatnumcreplacingthenitrogengaswithairandremovingsamplesafterspecifiedperiodsfortesting .
num test procedure for recovery and ageing of bituminous emulsion and fluxed binders num num obtain a sample in accordance with bs en num .
stir the sample thoroughly to ensure it is completely homogenized.thetemperatureofthebindersampleshallnotbelessthannumofthenormalapplication temperature in degrees celsius and shall be recorded for example high binder content surface dressing emulsion mayrequireaminimumofnumcorapolymermodifiedfluxedbindernumc.thesamplehistoryifknownshall be recorded this is important as some ageing may have occurred .
if subsamples are taken these shall have a minimumvolumeofnumml.ensurethattheovenislevelsothatthehorizontalaxesofthesamplecanswhenin positioninthecarriagearelevel.preheattheoventonumcnumhisgenerallysufficient .
insert a stainless steel screw into each of the sample cans with the tapered end of the screw towards the aperture of the container and record the mass of each assembly to numg .
heat the sample cans lids and the stainless steel screws tonumcfornummin .
heatthesampletotheapplicationtemperatureofthebinderorifthisisnotknowntonumc.thoroughlystir the sample to ensure homogeneity immediately prior to decanting into the sample cans taking care to minimise loss of water content andor any volatile oil .
some cutback binders and other binders such as primers having low flashpointsarenotsuitableforthistest.ifthereisanydoubtconcerningthevolatilenatureofthesamplefortesta suitableflashpointtestmustbecarriedoutbeforeproceedingwiththeageingprofiletestorheatingtonumc .
pournumgofthesampleintoapreheatedsamplecanandrecordthemass.immediatelyafterweighingroll the containers to ensure distribution of the binder round the bottle .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num mount the sample can in the carousel of the rtfo .
repeat for the remaining sample cans .
close the door of the rtfobetweenmountingeachsamplecaninthecarousel.theperiodbetweenweighingthefirstsamplecanwith binder and mounting of all the sample cans and the start of the rotation of the carousel shall not exceed num minutes .
whenthecarouselisfullyloadedrotatethecarriageassemblyataspeedofnumminnum.starttheflowof nitrogenatasetrateofnummlmin.startthetimer.maintainthesamplesintheovenandthenitrogen flowingfornumminfromthetimethetesttemperaturereachesnumc.atthisstagetheremaystillberesidual water in emulsion binders especially those with high polymer contents .
ifthetesttemperatureofnumcisnotreachedwithinthefirstnumminutesdiscontinuethetest .
increasethetemperatureoftheoventonumc.notethetimethertfotakestoreachnumc.oncethe temperaturehasbeenachievedcontinuetorotatethecarouselforafurthernumminatnumc.attheendof the num minutes turn off the nitrogen .
if required sample cans may be removed and the samples may be used for testing or determination of mass loss .
this is the recovered binder and is equivalent to that obtained using bs en num .
theageingprofilecanbedeterminedbymaintainingthertfoatnumcandswitchingtoanairsupplysetat nummlmin .
rotate the samples in the air supply and remove sample cans to obtain samples of aged binder as required for testing after three periods numhnummintermedagednum binder numhnummintermedagednum binder and numhnummintermedagednum binder other periods may be used either for convenience or to allow different degrees of ageing to be investigated .
long term ageing equivalent to pavnum has been found to occur at num hours .
it takes longer to achieve than with asphalt binder because there is no shortterm ageing at numc .
the pavnum ageing period is not thought to be relevant for emulsion binders used in most road applications .
if samples at num hours are not required to simulate pavnum a combined sample from three sample cans may be useful at num and num hours or another aged sample from two cans sayatnumhoursmaybeobtainedfortesttoenhancetheageingprofile table num num summary of sampling times stage gas rtfo temperature time sampling cumulative time recovery nitrogen numc nummin none numh nummin nitrogen ramp to numc nummin approx none numh nummin nitrogen numc nummin recovered binder test samples numh nummin ageing air numc numh agednum test samples numh nummin air numc numh agednum test samples numh nummin air numc numh optional agednum test samples numh nummin num handling of the recovered binder num num if the binder is to be tested immediately remove a sample can from the carousel extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
immediately transfer the sample can s to an oven and heat until at the required test temperature .
place the containers on their sides in an oven .
this allows the binder to drain to one side of the container which is more easily removed with the spatula .
unscrew the lid of the sample can and using the spatula scrape the recovered binder from the sample can and place in the test apparatus .
warming the spatula to numc facilitates removal of the binder .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num if the recovered binder from more than one sample can is needed to produce a test sample combine the recovered binder from the sample cans and reheat .
reheating for testing shall be in accordance with bs en num ensuring that recovered binder is heated for no longer than is absolutely necessary .
the recovered binder shall be thoroughly homogenizedbystirringafterheatingandbeforebeingusedfortestingwhiletakingcarenottoentrainanyair .
if the recovered binder is not to be tested immediately remove a sample can from the rtfo extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
unscrew the lid and using the spatula scrape the recovered binder from the sample can and place on a silicon sheet .
the binder shall be sealed and stored at between numc to numc .
the sample shall be reheated in accordance with bs en num and homogenised immediately before testing .
if the recovered samples are to be transferred to another laboratory for testing they shall not be subjected to temperatures greater than ambient after recovery and before testing and the delay before testing shall not exceed num hours .
the thermal history of the sample shall be recorded .
num handling of the aged binder num num if the binder is to be tested immediately remove a sample can from the carousel extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
place the sample can s in an oven preheated to the softening pointofthebinderplusnumcifknownornumcifthepropertiesofthebinderareunknownfornummin .
place the sample cans on their sides in an oven .
this allows the binder to drain to one side of the sample can which is more easily removed with the spatula .
attheendofnumminremovethesamplecanfromtheovenunscrewthelidandusingthespatulascrapethe aged binder from the sample can and prepare the test samples in accordance with the relevant test method .
warming the spatula to the same temperature as the binder facilitates removal of the binder .
if the aged binder from more than one sample can is needed to produce a test sample combine the aged binder from the containers and reheat .
reheating for testing shall be in accordance with bs en num ensuring that agedbinderisheatedfornolongerthanisabsolutelynecessary.thebindershallbethoroughlyhomogenizedby stirring after heating and before being used for testing while taking care not to entrain any air .
if the binder is not to be tested immediately remove a sample can from the rtfo extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
unscrew the lid and using the spatula scrape the aged binder from the sample can and place on a silicon sheet .
the binder shall be sealed and stored at between numc to numc .
the sample shall be reheated in accordance with bs en num and homogenised immediately before testing .
if the aged samples are to be transferred to another laboratory for testing they shall not be subjected to temperatures greater than ambient after ageing and before testing and the delay before testing shall not exceed num hours .
the thermal history of the sample shall be recorded .
num principle of assessing the action of preservatives using the mrtfot num numathinfilmofnumpenetrationgradebinderisrotatedinaluminiumsamplecanscoatedinternally with ptfe replacing glass bottles using the rolling thin film oven test rtfot apparatus as described in bs en num .
special screws are used to disturb the binder and maintain a homogenous material during conditioning .
the bitumen is subjected to shortterm ageing followed by an extended period in the rtfo to simulate the ageing of the bitumen in a road pavement .
the properties of the longterm aged bitumen may be determined at this stage .
the aged bitumen control in the remaining samples is then cooled to ambient treated with the preservative and left for num hours .
most of the remaining highly volatile oils are subsequently removed by conditioning the samples in the rtfo using a nitrogen blanket .
the aged bitumen treated by preservative is thensubjectedtofurtherageingwiththemodifiedrtfo.thepropertiesoftheagedbitumenafteractionofthe preservativeareassessedbyanageingprofiletestusingrheologyvaluesofcomplexshearstiffnessmodulus gandphaseangleinaccordancewithbsennum.cohesiondurabilitymayalsobedetermined .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num test procedure for determining the ageing profile of aged paving grade bitumen as a control treated with a preservative num num obtain a sample of num paving grade binder in accordance with bs en num .
stir the sample thoroughly toensureitiscompletelyhomogenized.ifsubsamplesaretakentheseshallhaveaminimumvolumeofnumml .
ensurethatthertfoislevelsothatthehorizontalaxesofthesamplecanswheninpositioninthecarouselare level.preheattheoventonumcnumhisgenerallysufficient .
insert a weighed stainless steel screw into each of the sample cans with the tapered end of the screw towards the aperture of the can lid record the mass of each assembly to numg .
heat the sample cans lids and the stainless steel screwstonumcfornummin .
heat the sample to the maximum storage temperature of the binder .
thoroughly stir the sample to ensure homogeneity immediately prior to decanting into the sample cans .
pournumgofthesampleintoapreheatedsamplecanandrecordthemass.immediatelyafterweighingroll the sample can on the bench to ensure distribution of the binder round the walls of the can .
mount the sample can in the carousel of the rtfo .
repeat for the remaining sample cans .
close the door of the rtfobetweenmountingeachsamplecaninthecarousel.theperiodbetweenweighingthefirstsamplecanwith binder and mounting of all the sample cans and the start of the rotation of the carousel shall not exceed num minutes .
whenthecarouselisfullyloadedrotatethecarriageassemblyataspeedofnumminnum.starttheflowofairat asetrateofnummlmin.startthetimer.maintainthesamplesintheovenandtheairflowingfornummin from the time the test temperature reaches numc .
ifthetesttemperatureofnumcisnotreachedwithinthefirstnumminutesdiscontinuethetest .
afternumminatnumcsamplecansminimumnumshallberemovedfortestingandtodeterminemassloss .
this is the shortterm aged binder .
reducethetemperatureoftheoventonumc.notethetimethertfotakestoreachnumc.oncethis temperaturehasbeenachievedcontinuetorotatethesamplesintheairsupplyfornummin.attheendofthis period remove the sample cans from the rtfo and determine their mass loss .
removethescrewsandweightodeterminethemassofbinderretainedoneachidentifiedscrew .
a quantity of binder shall be removed from each sample can which shall be numglessthemassofbinderretainedontheparticularscrewremoved .
it may be necessary to warm the sample cans to facilitate the removal of the screws and binder .
after removing the binder lay the sample cans on their sides and allow them to cool to ambient temperature .
addnumgofpreservativetoeachsamplecontainerandswillthepreservativearoundthesamplecontainerfor approximately num seconds .
determine the mass of each sample can .
the sample cans with the binder and preservative are stored on their sides with the pooled binder at the bottom inaventilatedfumecupboardatambienttemperaturefornumhours.thisprocessallowsanyverylowflashpoint volatile oil to safely evaporate and consequently reduce the amount of hydrocarbon solvent within the sample can .
preheattheoventonumcandtransferthesamplecansfromthefumecupboardtothertfocarousel.startthe carouselandjetnitrogenatnummlminoverthesamplecansfornummin .
identify and weigh eight clean screws and heat the screws to numc .
afternumhoursthertfotemperatureisraisedfromnumctonumcandairjettedatnummlminsubstituted for the nitrogen supply .
note the time when the oven achieves numc .
when the rtfo has reached numc stop the carousel and add a preheated screw to each sample can with the tapered end of the screw towards the aperturelid of the sample can and noting which screw is added to which sample can .
restart the carousel and continue the conditioning of the samples at numc in air jetted at nummlminfornummin .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num remove the sample cans from the rtfo to obtain samples of aged binder as required for testing and determine the mass of each sample can .
the control bitumen may be substituted with a binder recovered from a road or from a laboratory aged sample in which case the shortterm ageing and subsequent ageing protocol are not carried out because the binder will already have been aged and heated .
in this case the recovered binder sample is heated in accordance with bsennumandnumgaddedtoheatedcansnumcwhicharethenrolledtoachieveafilmaroundthewalls .
afterthistheyarecoolednumgpreservativeaddedandthepreservativetreatedsamplessubjectedtothesame ageingprofileprotocolasdescribedabove .
num handling of the preservative treated aged bitumen num num if the binder is to be tested immediately remove a container from the carousel extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
place the sample can s in an oven preheated to numc for nummin.placethecontainersontheirsidesintheoven.thisallowsthebindertodraintoonesideofthe container which is more easily removed with the spatula .
attheendofnumminremovethecontainerfromtheovenunscrewthelidandusingthespatulascrapethe aged binder from the container and prepare the test samples in accordance with the relevant test method .
warming the spatula to the same temperature as the binder facilitates removal of the binder .
if the aged binder from more than one container is needed to produce a test sample combine the aged binder from the containers and reheat .
reheating for testing shall be in accordance with bs en num ensuring that aged binderisheatedfornolongerthanisabsolutelynecessary.thebindershallbethoroughlyhomogenizedbystirring after heating and before being used for testing while taking care not to entrain any air .
if the binder is not to be tested immediately remove a container from the rtfo extract the screw using a small spatula and set the screw aside for cleaning .
unscrew the lid and using the spatula scrape the aged binder from the container and place on a silicone sheet .
the binder shall be sealed and stored at between numc to numc .
the sample shall be reheated in accordance with bs en num and homogenised immediately before testing .
if the aged samples are to be transferred to another laboratory for testing they shall not be subjected to temperatures greater than ambient after ageing and before testing and the delay before testing shall not exceed num hours .
the thermal history of the sample shall be recorded .
num report num num sample description e.g .
type agecondition and source .
theageingprofiletestprocedureadoptedforthework .
the change in mass of the sample from each stage of the recovery and or ageing protocol shall be plotted to developanageingprofileformasschange .
similarly results of tests for example g using bs en num carried out after each stage of recovery and or ageingprotocolshallbeplottedtodevelopanageingprofileforthatproperty.theseresultsshallinclude aplotofgnumhzoverarangeoftemperaturesbetweennumcandnumc aplotofphaseanglenumhzoverarangeoftemperaturesbetweennumcandnumc gandphaseangleatnumhzandnumc temperaturenumhzwherethephaseangleisnumdegreesviscouselastictransitionvet temperature gnumhzatthevettemperaturewherephaseangleisnumdegrees for clause num hard grade binder samples and other samples where they are considered to have a softening point above numc the temperature range shall be increased to numc .
the thermal history of the samples if they are not tested immediately shall be reported .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num num num num num not used num num modified binder storage stability test num scope num numthistestdeterminesthesusceptibilityofapreblendedmodifiedbindertoseparationorinstabilityduring prolonged storage at high temperature .
num summary of method num numasampleofmodifiedbindershallbecontainedinaclosedvesselofspecificdimensionsandshallbe maintainedatnumcfornumdaysnumhours.abindersampleshallthenbetakenfromthetopandbottomthirdsof thevesselandbothsamplesshallbetestedforcompliancewiththebinderspecification .
num apparatus num num the apparatus shall consist of i cylindermadeofheatresistantglassnummmlongandnummminternaldiameterhavinga removablelidflushfittingtoexcludeairwhenthecylinderisfilledwithbinderandprovidedwith three drain valves one at the base the other two spaced equally down the side of the cylinder to allow the sample to be divided into three equal portions as in subclause num vii of the procedure .
alternatively a thinwall sheet metal tube or similar vessel such as a num ml beverage can of similar dimensionstotheglasscylinderandhavingasimilarlyremovablelidfittedeitherwithorwithout drainvalves .
ii ovenelectricallyheatedfanassistedandcapableofmaintainingatemperatureofnumchaving interior dimensions not less than num mm from the top of the heating element to the top of the chamber and not less than num mm in width and depth .
iii tube holder made of metal that will hold either the glass cylinder or sheet metal can in a vertical positionsuchthatthebaseofthecylinderorcanisnotindirectcontactwiththeovenfloor .
iv apparatus for determining the penetration and softening point of bitumen in accordance with bs en num and bs en num. v transferdishesnummadeofmetaleachofacapacitysufficienttoholdatleastonethirdofthetest sample .
num test procedure num num the procedure shall be as follows i thebulksampleofmodifiedbindershallbeobtainedbysamplinginaccordancewithbsennum .
ii placethebulksampleofmodifiedbinderandtheglasscylinderormetaltubeorequivalentvesselin thepreheatedovenatnumcforaperiodnotexceedingnumhours .
iii remove the bulk sample from the oven and thoroughly mix by stirring to ensure obtaining a representative test sample .
iv removetheglasscylinderormetaltubeorequivalentvesselfromtheovenandcompletelyfillwith themodifiedbindertestsampletoallownoairspacewhenthelidisfitted .
v supportthefilledcylinderinaverticalpositionintheholderandtransfertotheovenwhichshallbe controlledatatemperatureofnumcandallowtostandundisturbedforaperiodofnumhours .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials num amendment may num vi if a vessel having drainvalves has been used for the test proceed using method a below otherwise proceed using method b. vii method a a remove the glass cylinder or alternative approved vessel from the oven keeping the cylinder vertical .
b open the uppermost drainvalve and run off the top third portion of the test sample into a transfer dish for testing .
c open the middle drainvalve and run off the middle third portion of the test sample into a suitable container and discard .
d open the lower drainvalve and run off the bottom third portion of the test sample into a transfer dish for testing .
viii method b a remove the tube or vessel containing the test sample from the oven and allow it to cool at room temperaturefornumhourswhilstmaintainingthevesselverticalintheholder .
b whenthevesselofmodifiedbinderhascooledtoambienttemperatureremoveitfromthe tube holder and make two cuts through the vessel and the sample at positions onethird and two thirds of the length from and parallel to the base .
c retain the top and bottom thirds of the test sample for further testing and discard the middle third .
ix determine the penetrations and softening points of the top and bottom thirds of the test sample in accordance with bs en num and bs en num .
num reporting num num for both the top and bottom thirds of the test sample the following shall be reported i the penetration to bs en num. ii the softening point to bs en num. iii whether method a or method b was used .
iv the location and date of obtaining the bulk sample and the dates of test .
volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements bituminous bound materials amendment may num numf national alterations of the overseeing organisations numtswg num hot rolled asphalt surface course design mixtures num num hot rolled asphalt surface course design mixes shall conform to bs en num the example in bsi pdnumannexcandrequirementsspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.themixturedesignationshall be one of the following i hra num f surf xxyy des ii hra num f surf xxyy des iii hra num f surf xxyy des iv hra num f surf xxyy des v hra num f surf xxyy des vi hra num c surf xxyy des vii hra num c surf xxyy des viii hra num c surf xxyy des ix hra num c surf xxyy des x hra num c surf xxyy des unlessotherwisespecifiedincontractspecificappendixnumthegradeofbitumenrequiredxxyyshallbenum .
num coarse aggregate num num the resistance to polishing of the coarse aggregate for chipped mixtures shall be category psvnum as definedinbsennumclausenum.forunchippedmixturesthecoarseaggregateshallhaveaminimum declaredpsvandamaximumdeclaredaavasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum .
num coated chippings num numwhenrequiredcoatedchippingsshallbeeithernummmornummmsizeinaccordancewith bsi pd numasspecifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.coatedchippingsshallalsocomplywith clause num .
num marshall stability and flow num numwhenrequiredthemarshallstabilityandflowofthemixtureatthetargetbindercontentshallbeas specifiedincontractspecificappendixnum.stabilityandflowvaluesshallbedeterminedinaccordancewiththe procedures in bs num annex h. numts num stone mastic asphalt surface course tsnum num numsmatsnumspecificationshallbeasperchapternumoftsnumsurfacecoursespecification guidance issue num october num or subsequent issue available via the following link httpwww.transport.gov.scotsystemfilesuploaded_contentdocumentstsc_basic_pagestransporttsianum numbnumtsnumvernumoctnum.pdf amendment february num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works num series num road pavements concrete materials contents clause title page num general num num num strength classes of concrete and constituent materials for pavement layers num num num air content num num num density num num num pavement concrete strength num num num consistence workability num num num not used num num num separation and waterproof membranes num num num steel reinforcement num num num transverse joints num num num longitudinal joints num num num dowel bars num num num tie bars num num num joint grooves num num num groove formers and bottom crack inducers num num num joint filler board num num num preparation and sealing of joint grooves num num num joint seals num num num joints at manhole and gully slabs num num num inspection of dowel bars num num num side forms rails and guide wires num num to num num not used num num num transport and delivery num num num construction by machine num num num construction by small paving machines or hand guided methods num num num finished surface requirements num num num curing num clause title page num num trial length num num num texturing of hardened concrete num num num wet lean concrete num num num measurement of macrotexture depth volumetric patch technique num num num thin bonded repairs num num num full depth repairs and reinstatements num num num bay replacement num num num slab lifting using space frames num num num pressure grouting num num num vacuum grouting num num num continuously reinforced slabs and roadbases full depth repair num num num summary of rates for sampling and testing concrete for pavement layers num num to num num not used num num num foamed concrete num num num pavements with an exposed aggregate concrete surface num num num weather conditions for laying of cementitious materials numf num to num num not used numf num num use of surfaces by traffic and construction plant numf num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials road pavements concrete materials num num general num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num num strength classes of concrete and constituent materials for pavement layers num num concrete in rigid or rigid composite pavements shall be one of the classes given in table num in accordance with the pavement design alternatives permitted in contract specific appendix num .
num num unless otherwise specified in contract specific appendix num concrete shall conform with the requirements of bs en num and the requirements of this series .
the constituents of the concrete shall conform with bs en num and bs num and bs num and bs en num and the requirements of this series .
table num num pavement layers concrete strength classes pavement layer bs en num bs num bs en num bs num bs en num clause designed concrete standardised prescribed concrete designated concrete i surface slabs unreinforced concrete urc jointed reinforced concrete jrc continuously reinforced concrete pavement crcp ccnum cnum num to num and num ii continuously reinforced concrete base crcb ccnum cnum iii crcp and crcb ground beam anchorages cnum iv v vi vii wet lean concrete num wet lean concrete num wet lean concrete num wet lean concrete num for bases or subbases as required in contract specific appendix num ccnum ccnum ccnum ccnum stnum stnum stnum stnum gen num gen num gen num gen num cnum cnum cnum cnum num note cores shall not be taken from ground beam anchorages num cement num num the general term cement in this series means any of the materials in i or the combinations in ii below i cements complying with a portland cement cem i bs en num b portlandslag cement cem iias and cem iibs bs en num c blastfurnace cement cem iiia and cem iiib bs en num d portlandfly ash cement cem iiav and cem iibv bs en num e pozzolanic cement cem iva bs en num amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials ii combinations a portland cement cem i with ground granulated blastfurnace slag ggbs for use with portland cement cem i bs en num bs en num and bs en num b portland cement cem i with pulverisedfuel ash pfa for use as a cementitious component in structural concrete bs en num bs en num and bs en num c portland cement cem i with pozzolanic additive having a current bba certificate bs en num iii in each cubic metre of fully compacted concrete the cement content shall be in accordance with table num .
for num mm maximum size aggregate add num kgmnum and for nummm maximum size add num kgmnum .
iv when used the proportion of silica fume to cem i shall be num num .
table num num minimum cement or combination contents with num mm maximum aggregate class bs num cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum class bs en num ccnum ccnum ccnum ccnum ccnum ccnum ccnum cement in surface slabs overlaid by num mm minimum thin surface course system complying with clause num in at least the top num mm of surface slabs min .
portland cement cem i bs en num kgmnum num num num a or num a or num b or num b or num min .
other cements or combinations permitted in sub clauses numi and numii kgmnum num num num a or num a or num b or num b or num for mixtures preblended or mixed on site maximum proportion of ggbs num num num num num num num maxmin .
proportion of pfa num num num num num num num min .
cem i content kgmnum num num num num notes a denotes maximum aggregatecement ratio of num by mass .
b denotes maximum aggregatecement ratio of num by mass .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num water num num water from a water company supply may be used without testing .
water from other sources may be used if it conforms to bs en num .
the water content shall be the minimum required to provide the specified consistence for full compaction of the concrete to the required density as determined by trial concrete mixes or other means and the maximum free watercement ratio shall be num for strength classes ccnum ccnum cnum and cnum and num for strength classes ccnum ccnum cnum and cnum .
the requirements for standardised prescribed concrete shall be in accordance with bs en num and bs num .
num admixtures num num concrete in at least the top num mm of surface slabs shall incorporate an airentraining admixture complying with bs en num except i for pavements with an exposed aggregate concrete surface constructed to clause num where at least the top num mm of the surface slab shall be air entrained or ii for surface slabs of pavements with at least a class cnum concrete iii for surface slabs of pavements with a class cnum concrete which are to be overlaid by a num mm minimum thickness thin surface course system complying with clause num and iv for surface slabs of pavements with a class cnum concrete which are to be overlaid by a num mm minimum thickness thin surface course system complying with clause num .
plasticisers or water reducing admixtures shall comply with bs en num .
admixtures containing calcium chloride shall not be used .
num aggregate num num aggregates for all pavement concrete including wet lean shall comply with bs en num .
crushed concrete which complies with the quality and grading requirements of bs en num and table num of bs num num may also be used in all pavement concretes except aggregate concrete surface complying with clause num .
alternatively coarse aggregate may be crushed aircooled blastfurnace slag complying with bs en num and shall be category finum or finum for concrete of classes ccnum to ccnum and over class ccnum respectively .
pfa when used as part of the aggregate shall comply with bs en num .
once the appropriate gradings have been determined they shall not be varied without the approval of the overseeing organisation .
irrespective of source the aggregate will be considered suitable if i the resistance to freezing and thawing complies with bs en num clause num for pavement and wet lean concrete and ii the resistance to fragmentation complies with category lanum of bs en num clause num for concrete surface slabs and lanum of bs en num clause num for concrete bases and wet lean concrete or iii evidence can be provided to the overseeing organisation of satisfactory use of aggregate from the source .
the water absorption wa of the coarse aggregate from the source determined in accordance with bs en num shall also be declared .
where recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate is used in this series they shall comply with the limits specified in table num of bs num and it shall have been tested in accordance with clause num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num the maximum size of coarse aggregate d shall not exceed num mm .
when the spacing between longitudinal reinforcement is less than num mm the maximum size of coarse aggregate d shall not exceed num mm .
num num sand i.e .
fine aggregate containing more than num by mass of acidsoluble material as determined in accordance with bs en num in either the fraction retained on or the fraction passing the num mm sieve shall not be used in the top num mm of surface slabs .
this requirement will not apply for pavements with an exposed aggregate concrete surface constructed to clause num or if it can be shown that the sand ie fine aggregate retained on or the fraction passing the num mm sieve contains less than num per cent by weight of calcium carbonate .
num num the water absorption of flint coarse aggregate containing white flints for use in concrete surface slabs when determined in accordance with bs en num shall not exceed num for any separate nominal size fraction num for the total combination of coarse aggregates in the proportions to be used in the concrete .
tests shall be carried out on three samples taken at random from the source prior to use .
tests shall also be carried out during stockpiling or paving once a week or at a lesser rate when authorised by the overseeing organisation .
num source of recycled aggregates num num where recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate is used only crushed concrete resulting from reclamation or processing of concrete previously used in construction which originates from appropriate identified structures with a known history of use shall be used .
num num in order to detect substances and chemicals harmful to the durability of concrete appropriate tests based on current relevant advice shall be carried out on recycled coarse aggregate and recycled concrete aggregate and the results reported to the overseeing organisation .
num chloride content num num the chloride ion content of the aggregate to be used in concrete shall be as stated in bs en num .
the chloride class of reinforced concrete or concrete containing embedded metal shall be cl num and unreinforced concrete shall be cl num .
the chloride ion content of the aggregate to be used in concrete with embedded metal shall be determined in accordance with the volhard reference method in bs en num or in the case of recycled coarse aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate in accordance with bs num part num .
num chemical requirement num num acidsoluble sulfate acidsoluble sulfate content of the aggregates and filler aggregates for concrete pavements including wet lean shall comply with bs en num clause num and shall be category asnum for aircooled blast furnace slag and for other aggregates category asnum .
num num total sulfur total sulfur content of recycled coarse aggregates recycled concrete aggregates aggregates and filler aggregates shall comply with bs en num clause num .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num air content num num the concrete shall meet the requirement for exposure class xfnum in bs en num .
this shall be achieved by the use of an airentraining agent .
the minimum quantity of air in airentrained concrete as a percentage of the volume of the concrete shall be as in table num table num num minimum air contents maximum aggregate size mm minimum air content num num num num num num the air content shall be determined at the point of delivery to the paving plant by the pressure gauge method in accordance with bs en num at the rate of one determination per num m of slab or at least num times per day whichever is the greater in conjunction with tests for consistence and strength .
for areas less than num m the rate shall be at least one determination to each num m length of slab or less constructed at any one time or at least num times per day .
if the air content is outside the specified limits in bs en num the contractor shall remove the concrete from the works .
num num the airentraining agent shall be added at the mixer by an apparatus capable of dispensing the correct dose within the tolerance for admixtures given in bs en num to ensure uniform distribution of the agent throughout the batch during mixing .
num num density num num the density of a saturated core cut from the full depth of the concrete pavement shall not be less than num of the average density of at least six fully compacted saturated moulded specimens made from the same concrete and tested at the same age .
num num the density of the concrete pavement shall be determined in accordance with bs en num .
the density of a saturated core cut from the full depth of the concrete pavement shall be determined in accordance with bs en num .
the determination of the saturated density of the fully compacted moulded specimens shall be in accordance with bs en num bs en num and bs en num .
num num the core shall have an average diameter of at least four times the nominal maximum aggregate size and in any case at least num mm diameter .
where different concrete mixes are used in separate layers the density of each layer shall be separately determined by splitting or cutting the cores between the layers .
num num cores shall be taken at the rate given in clause num for trial bays and according to category num in table num of bs en num for the main slab .
if the density of any core is below the minimum required the concrete across the whole width of the slab constructed at the time relating to that core shall be removed .
in unreinforced concrete the whole slab length between joints shall be removed .
for reinforced slabs in order to determine the limit of the defective area of concrete which shall be removed additional cores shall be taken at num m intervals on each side of any defective core until concrete of satisfactory density is found .
defective areas shall be made good with new material in accordance with the specification .
num num in calculating the density allowance shall be made for any steel in the cores .
num num core holes shall be reinstated with compacted concrete with mix proportions of num part of portland cement cem i num parts of sand num parts of num mm single sized coarse aggregate by mass .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num pavement concrete strength num num sampling and testing for and compliance with the specified characteristic core strength of designed concretes shall be undertaken by compressive strength testing in accordance with bs en num on cores cut from the full depth of the slab .
no correction for maturity shall be applied to the num day or num day strength .
num num concrete cores of the appropriate size shall be taken cured and tested in accordance with bs en num with the exception that the core shall be cured under water at numc numc from as soon as practically possible .
the sampling rate shall be as designated in bs en num for category num three cores shall be taken from areas of concrete of up to num mnum and one additional core for every further num mnum of concrete laid .
num num an exception to the above sampling rate is that in the trial slab at least six cores shall be taken three to be tested at num days and three at num days .
num num the end preparation of the core shall be by grinding and the heightdiameter hd ratio of the tested specimen shall be between num and num .
num num if during the construction of the trial length the average corrected core compressive strength from the three cores falls below the num day corrected core compressive strength given in table num then either the cement content of the concrete shall be increased by num by mass or a further trial slab shall be constructed using an improved compaction technique andor an increased cement content .
the increased cement content shall be maintained at least until the three corresponding numday core strength tests have been assessed .
if the cement content is increased the concrete shall be adjusted to maintain the required consistence .
table num num num day corrected core compressive strengths class of concrete cem i concretes nmmnum cem i with pfa or ggbs concretes nmmnum ccnum num num ccnum num num ccnum num num ccnum num num ccnum num num ccnum num num num num overlapping groups of four consecutive num day corrected core strengths shall be used for assessing the pavement for compliance with the criteria in table a.num of bs en num .
the pavement shall be accepted if both the criteria in table a.num are satisfied for four results derived from strength tests on cores taken from the constructed pavement .
conformity control of the concrete is the responsibility of contractor .
num num for small jobs constructed to bs en num cubes shall be used for compliance .
num num to assess the time for use of a concrete slab by traffic the strength development rate may be predetermined by cubes stored at numc made from trial concrete mixes and maturity meters placed in the pavement .
alternatively pairs of cubes may be made for each num m or less and stored alongside the pavement in containers or in such a way that their sides are well insulated .
if thermal insulation is used for accelerated curing the cubes shall be similarly insulated .
pairs of cubes shall be tested at the intervals specified in contract specific appendix num .
tests for compliance with the specified strength shall be made in the normal way .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num consistence workability num num the consistence shall be determined by the degree of compactibility compaction index test in accordance with bs en num or the vebe test in accordance with bs en num .
alternatively for concrete class cnum or below consistence may be determined by the slump test in accordance with bs en num the sampling for all concrete classes shall be undertaken in accordance with bs en num and the rate of testing in accordance with table num of bs en num .
consistence shall be carried out at the point of placing in conjunction with tests for strength and any tests for air content .
the consistence shall be maintained at the optimum within the limits specified in bs en num .
num num if any determination of consistence gives a result outside the tolerance a further test shall be made immediately on the next available load of concrete .
the average of the two consecutive results and the difference between them shall be calculated .
if the average is not within the tolerance or the difference is greater than num for ci or num mm for slump or num seconds for vebe subsequent samples shall be taken from the delivery vehicles which shall not be allowed to discharge into the works until compliance with the specification has been established .
num num not used num num separation and waterproof membranes num num a separation membrane shall be used between jointed reinforced concrete surface slabs or unreinforced concrete surface slabs and the subbase .
num num separation membranes shall be impermeable plastic sheeting num microns thick laid flat without creases .
where an overlap of plastic sheets is necessary this shall be at least num mm .
there shall be no standing water on or under the membrane when the concrete is placed upon it .
num num under crcp and crcb a waterproof membrane shall be provided which shall be a bituminous spray in accordance with clause num before concreting .
where a bituminous spray has been used to cure cementbound material or wet lean concrete then only those areas which have been damaged shall be resprayed after making good .
num num steel reinforcement num general num num reinforcement shall comply with any of the following standards and shall be cut and bent in accordance with bs num .
the reinforcement materials shall be obtained from a firm holding a valid cares or fully equivalent scheme certificate of approval .
rebending of carbon steel bars and fabric reinforcement on site shall not be permitted hot rolled and cold worked carbon steel bars i bs en num and bs num grade bnumb or bnumc .
steel wires ii bs en num and bs num ribbed grade bnum .
steel fabric iii bs en num and bs num grade bnuma bnumb or bnumc .
steel fabric reinforcement shall have a minimum nominal bar size of num mm num mm for grade bnuma .
steel fabric reinforcement shall be delivered to site in flat mats or prebent .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num for hot rolled and cold worked carbon steel bars and for steel fabric reinforcement the bond property requirements for bs num shall be complied with based on the surface geometry requirements of that standard .
for steel wire the bond property requirements of bs num shall be complied with based on the surface geometry requirements of that standard .
num num spacing of bars shall not be less than twice the maximum size of aggregate used .
laps in longitudinal bars shall be not less than num bar diameters or num mm whichever is greater .
in continuously reinforced concrete slabs crcp or crcb only one third of the laps may be in any one transverse section except in single bay width construction where half the laps may be in any one transverse section .
there shall be a minimum of num m longitudinally between groups of transverse laps or laps in prefabricated reinforcement sheets .
alternatively the reinforcement may be butt welded in accordance with clause num .
num num laps in any transverse reinforcement shall be a minimum of num mm .
where prefabricated reinforcement sheets are used and longitudinal and transverse laps would coincide no lap is required in the transverse bars within the lap of the longitudinal reinforcement .
these transverse bars may be cropped or fabricated shorter so that the requirements for cover are met .
alternatively prefabricated sheets incorporating splices ie flying ends may be used to provide nesting of reinforcement in both directions at lap positions .
the lengths of the laps shall be the minimum values previously stated .
num num if the reinforcement is positioned prior to concreting it shall be fixed on supports and retained in position at the required depth below the finished surface and distance from the edge of the slab so as to ensure that the required cover is achieved .
reinforcement assembled on site shall be tied or firmly fixed at sufficient intersections to provide sufficient rigidity to ensure that the reinforcement remains in the correct position during construction of the slab .
num num alternatively when a reinforced concrete slab jrc crcp or crcb is constructed in two layers the reinforcement in the form of prefabricated sheets may be placed on or into the bottom layer which shall be spread and compacted to such a level that it will support the reinforcement without distortion at the required position in the slab .
the sheets shall be tied together at overlaps and after the second layer has been spread and compacted the reinforcement shall have the required cover .
num num when a reinforced concrete slab is constructed at maximum width as in clause num the transverse reinforcement in the centre of each slab width shall be a minimum of num mm nominal diameter bars at num mm centres .
this reinforcement shall be at least num mm longer than one third of the width of the slab and be lapped to other transverse reinforcement bars or sheets or be continuous across the whole width of each slab .
num jointed reinforced concrete slabs num num the reinforcement shall be so placed that after compaction of the concrete the cover below the finished surface of the slab is num num mm for slabs less than num mm thick num num mm for slabs num mm or more but less than num mm thick num num mm for slabs num mm thick or more .
the negative vertical tolerance shall not be permitted beneath road stud recesses .
where traffic signal detector loops are to be installed the minimum cover to the reinforcement from the surface shall be num mm .
the vertical cover between any longitudinal joint groove forming strip and any reinforcement or tie bars shall be a minimum of num mm .
any transverse bars shall be at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the carriageway .
any transverse reinforcement shall terminate at num num mm from the edges of the slab and longitudinal joints where tie bars as in clause num are used .
no longitudinal bars shall lie within num mm of a longitudinal joint .
the reinforcement shall terminate num mm num mm from any transverse joint excluding emergency construction joints .
num continuously reinforced concrete slabs crcp or crcb num num the reinforcement shall be grade num deformed steel bars with the diameters and spacings as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num the reinforcement shall consist of bars assembled on site or of prefabricated sheets .
except where otherwise shown on the drawings the longitudinal bars shall be parallel to the centreline of the road .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num the reinforcement shall be positioned so that after compaction of the concrete it shall be at the mid depth of the specified thickness of the slab num mm .
no longitudinal bar shall lie within num mm of a longitudinal joint .
in reinforcement assembled on site longitudinal bars shall be placed immediately above any transverse bars which shall be at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the carriageway .
any transverse reinforcement shall terminate num num mm from the edges of the slab and longitudinal joints where tie bars as in clause num are used .
num num transverse joints num general num num transverse joints shall be provided in unreinforced and jointed reinforced concrete slabs and shall be contraction expansion or warping joints at the spacings described in contract specific appendix num such that for unreinforced concrete slabs the lengthwidth ratio shall be not greater than num .
the spacings may be increased by num if limestone coarse aggregate is used throughout the depth of the slab .
num num joints in the surface slab and subbase shall be staggered so that they are not coincident vertically and are at least num m apart .
num num transverse joints shall be straight within the following tolerances along the intended line of the joint which is the straight line transverse to the longitudinal axis of the carriageway except at road junctions or roundabouts where the positions shall be as shown on the drawings .
i deviations of the filler board or bottom crack inducer from the intended line of the joint shall be not greater than num mm ii the best fit straight line through the joint groove as constructed shall be not more than num mm from the intended line of the joint iii deviations of the joint groove from the best fit straight line of the joint shall be not greater than num mm .
num num transverse joints on each side of a longitudinal joint shall be in line with each other and of the same type and width .
the position of the joints relative to manholes and gullies shall be in accordance with clause num .
num num concrete pavement layers shall be isolated from fixed structures by expansion joints or earthworks or a granular layer over the structure or by bridgetype expansion joints or by lengths of fully flexible pavement construction .
end of pavement surface slabs shall have a transition bay as shown on the drawings leading into the fully flexible construction .
num num transverse joints shall have a sealing groove which shall be sealed in compliance with clause num .
num contraction joints num num contraction joints shall consist of i a sawn joint groove complying with clause num ii dowel bars complying with clause num iii a sealing groove complying with clause num .
num expansion joints num num expansion joints shall consist of i a joint filler board complying with clause num ii dowel bars complying with clause num iii a sealing groove complying with clause num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num the filler board shall be positioned vertically within the prefabricated joint assemblies along the line of the joint within the tolerances given in subclause num of this clause and at such depth below the surface as will not impede the passage of the finishing beams on the paving machines .
the joint filler board together with the sealing groove shall provide a complete separation of adjacent slabs and any spaces around dowel bars and between the subbase and the filler board shall be packed with a suitable compressible material after fixing the joint assembly .
num warping joints num num warping joints shall consist of i a sawn joint groove complying with clause num ii tie bars complying with clause num iii a sealing groove complying with clause num .
num construction joints num num construction joints made at the end of a working day in unreinforced concrete slabs and jointed reinforced concrete slabs shall be contraction joints .
in the event of mechanical breakdown of the concreting machinery or at the onset of adverse weather emergency joints may be formed .
num num emergency joints in unreinforced concrete slabs shall be contraction joints not less than num m from the preceding or succeeding joint position .
num num emergency joints in jointed reinforced concrete slabs shall be not less than num m from the preceding or succeeding joint position .
the stop end formwork shall be sufficiently rigid to ensure that dowel bars tie bars or reinforcement will be held in position in compliance with the specification and placed in such a position that it permits the longitudinal reinforcement to project through the joint for a distance of at least num mm .
num num construction joints in continuously reinforced concrete slabs crcp and crcb at end of day or in an emergency shall not be constructed within num m of any lap in the longitudinal reinforcement .
the stop end formwork shall be sufficiently rigid to ensure that the longitudinal reinforcement and the tie bars as required in subclause num which project through the joint are held in the correct position .
num num longitudinal joints num general num num sawn or wetformed longitudinal joints shall be provided in surface slabs between or at the centre of traffic lanes within the allowable positions as shown on the drawings so that bay widths are not greater than num m or num m with limestone aggregate for unreinforced slabs or num m or num m with limestone aggregate for reinforced concrete surface slabs with transverse reinforcement as in subclause num .
longitudinal joints shall be provided in crcb between lanes or at the centre of lanes within a tolerance of num mm so that bay widths are not greater than num m or num m with limestone aggregate .
joints in the surface slab base or subbase shall be staggered so that they are not coincident vertically and are at least num mm apart .
num num wetformed longitudinal joints shall consist of wetformed joint grooves complying with clause num a bottom crack inducer complying with clause num and tie bars complying with clause num except where transverse reinforcement is permitted in lieu .
num num longitudinal joints shall be constructed within the following tolerances i deviations of the bottom crack inducer from the intended line of the joint parallel to the axis of the road shall be not greater than num mm ii the joint groove shall be located vertically above the bottom crack inducers within a horizontal tolerance of num mm num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials iii the best fit line along the constructed joint groove shall be not more than num mm from the intended line of the joint iv deviations of the joint groove from the best fit line of the joint shall be not greater than num mm .
num num sawn longitudinal joints shall consist of joint grooves complying with clause num .
num num tie bars may be replaced by continuous transverse reinforcement across the joints in continuously reinforced concrete slabs which are constructed in more than one lane width in one operation provided that the transverse reinforcement is a minimum of num mm diameter bars at num mm centres .
the transverse reinforcement in these circumstances shall be protected by suitable bituminous paint or equivalent coating for a distance of at least num mm either side of the joint .
num longitudinal construction joints num num longitudinal construction joints between separate slabs shall have tie bars as in clause num with a joint groove as in clause num .
alternatively if split forms are used the transverse reinforcement if num mm diameter or more may be continued across the joint for a minimum of num mm or num times the diameter of the transverse reinforcement bars whichever is the greater .
the transverse reinforcement in these circumstances shall be protected by suitable bituminous paint or equivalent coating for a distance of at least num mm either side of the joint .
a joint sealing groove is not required in construction joints in continuously reinforced concrete bases .
where the edge of the concrete slab is damaged it shall be made good before the adjacent slab is constructed .
num num dowel bars num num dowel bars shall meet the requirements of bs en num with a minimum tensile strength of nummpa and shall be free from oil dirt loose rust and scale .
they shall be straight free of burrs and other irregularities and the sliding ends sawn or cropped cleanly with no protrusions outside the normal diameter of the bar .
for expansion joints dowel bars shall be num mm diameter at num mm spacing and num mm long for slabs up to num mm thick and num mm diameter for thicker slabs .
for contraction joints dowels shall be num mm diameter at num mm spacing and num mm long for slabs up to num mm thick and num mm diameter at num mm spacing and num mm long for thicker slabs .
num num dowel bars shall be supported on cradles in prefabricated joint assemblies positioned prior to construction of the slab .
for contraction joints as an alternative to prefabricated assemblies dowel bars may be mechanically inserted with vibration into the concrete by a method which ensures full recompaction of the concrete around the dowel bars and the surface finished by a diagonal finishing beam or a longitudinal oscillating float travelling across the slab .
num num dowel bars shall be positioned at middepth from the surface level of the slab num mm .
they shall be aligned parallel to the finished surface of the slab to the centre line of the carriageway and to each other within the following tolerances i for bars supported on cradles prior to construction of the slab and for inserted bars in two layer construction prior to placing the top layer a all bars in a joint shall be within num mm per num mm length of bar b two thirds of the bars shall be within num mm per num mm length of bar c no bar shall differ in alignment from an adjoining bar by more than num mm per num mm length of bar in either the horizontal or vertical plane ii for all bars after construction of the slab a twice the tolerances for alignment as in i above b equally positioned about the intended line of the joint within a tolerance of num mm .
num num cradles supporting dowel bars shall not extend across the line of the joint .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num dowel bars supported on cradles in assemblies when subjected to a load of num n applied at either end and in either the vertical or horizontal direction upwards and downwards and both directions horizontally shall not deflect more than the following limits i two thirds of the number of bars of any assembly tested shall not deflect more than num mm per num mm length of bar ii the remainder of the bars in that assembly shall not deflect more than num mm per num mm length of bar .
num num the assembly of dowel bars and supporting cradles including the joint filler board in the case of expansion joints shall have the following degree of rigidity when fixed in position i for expansion joints the deflection of the top edge of the filler board shall be not greater than num mm when a load of num kn is applied perpendicular to the vertical face of the joint filler board and distributed over a length of num mm by means of a bar or timber packing at mid depth and midway between individual fixings or num mm from either end of any length of filler board if a continuous fixing is used .
the residual deflection after removal of the load shall be not more than num mm .
ii the joint assembly fixings to the subbase shall not fail under the num kn load applied for testing the rigidity of the assembly but shall fail before the load reaches num kn .
iii the fixings for contraction joints shall not fail under a num kn load and shall fail before the load reaches num kn when applied over a length of num mm by means of a bar or timber packing placed as near to the level of the line of fixings as practicable .
iv failure of the fixings shall be deemed to be when there is displacement of the assemblies by more than num mm with any form of fixing under the test load .
the displacement shall be measured at the nearest part of the assembly to the centre of the bar or timber packing .
num num dowel bars shall be covered by a flexible polymeric corrosion resistant coating bonded onto the previously cleaned bar .
the coating shall be smooth and free of indentations .
during coating the bar shall be supported at each end .
minimum thickness shall be num mm .
the coating shall also be able to withstand num hours immersion in a salt fog cabinet complying with bs en iso num without showing any visible crazing or corrosion of the protected bar .
the coated bar shall comply with the following pull out test i four bars shall be taken at random from stock and without any special preparation shall be coated as required in this clause .
the dowel bars which have been coated shall be cast centrally into concrete specimens num x num x num mm made of the same concrete mix proportions to be used in the pavement but with a maximum aggregate size of num mm and cured in accordance with bs en num .
at num days a tensile load shall be applied to achieve a movement of the bar of at least num mm .
the average bond stress to achieve this movement shall be not greater than num nmmnum .
num num for expansion joints a closely fitting cap num mm long consisting of waterproofed cardboard or suitable synthetic material shall be placed over one end of each dowel bar .
an expansion space num mm greater than the thickness of the joint filler board shall be formed between the end of the cap and the end of the dowel bar .
num num tie bars num num tie bars in transverse or longitudinal joints shall conform to clause num in accordance with the requirements given below and table num .
num num tie bars for use across joints shall have corrosion protection in the form of a flexible polymeric corrosion resistant coating bonded centrally onto num mm of the previously cleaned centre section of the bars .
where tie bars are to be cranked for construction joints and later straightened the coating shall be shown to be capable of being straightened through num degrees without cracking .
the coating for both straight and cranked bars after straightening shall be able to withstand num hours immersion in a salt fog cabinet complying with bs en iso num without showing any visible crazing or cracking or corrosion of the protected part of the bar .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num tie bars in warping joints and wetformed longitudinal joints shall be made up into rigid assemblies with adequate supports and fixings to remain firmly in position during the construction of the slab .
num num alternatively tie bars at longitudinal joints may be mechanically inserted by vibration from above using a method which ensures recompaction of the concrete around the tie bars .
num num at longitudinal construction joints tie bars may be adequately fixed to side forms or inserted into the side of the slab by a method which ensures recompaction of the concrete around the tie bars and adequate bond .
num num tie bars in warping joints shall be positioned from the top surface of the slab within num num mm of the mid depth of the slab .
tie bars in other joints shall be positioned and remain within the middle third of the slab depth approximately parallel to the surface and approximately perpendicular to the line of the joint with the centre of each bar on the intended line of the joints within a tolerance of num mm and with a minimum cover of num mm below any top crack inducer of joint groove for slabs num mm thick or more or num mm for slabs up to num mm thick .
num num at transverse construction joints in continuously reinforced concrete tie bars shall be num m long and of the same grade and size as the longitudinal reinforcement and shall be fixed at twice the normal spacing midway between the longitudinal reinforcement bars so that num mm num mm extends each side of the joint at the same level as the longitudinal reinforcement and be tied to the transverse reinforcement .
where paving from a construction joint is not resumed within num days an extra longitudinal reinforcement bar num m long shall be lapped and tied to each tie bar .
these extra bars may be combined with the tie bars .
where the spacing between longitudinal reinforcement and the extra num m long bars is less than num mm the nominal size of aggregate shall be num mm for a sufficient number of concrete batches to complete that section of pavement .
table num num tie bar details joints diameter mm grade of steel length mm spacing mm transverse construction joints in continuously reinforced concrete as for main reinforcement grade bnumb or bnumc num twice the spacing of main reinforcement emergency construction joints in jointed reinforced concrete slabs other than at contraction or expansion joints num grade bnumb or bnumc num num num num warping joints num grade bnumb or bnumc num num num num longitudinal all joints except where transverse reinforcement is permitted in lieu num grade bnumb or bnumc num num num num or num grade bnumb or bnumc num num or num grade bnumb or bnumc num num transition from rigid to flexible construction num grade bnumb or bnumc num num note the transverse reinforcement may be continued across the joint in reinforced concrete if the bars are of a minimum nominal diameter of num mm and the bars are protected from corrosion and the cover is as required in this clause .
num num where tie bars are used in longitudinal joints in continuously reinforced concrete they shall be placed at the same level as the transverse reinforcement and tied to the longitudinal reinforcement .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num joint grooves num general num num transverse contraction or warping joint grooves shall be sawn in the hardened concrete .
num num transverse joint grooves which are initially constructed less than the full width of the slab shall be completed by sawing through to the edge of the slab and across longitudinal joints as soon as any forms have been removed and before an induced crack develops at the joint .
num sawn transverse and longitudinal joint grooves num num sawing shall be undertaken as soon as possible after the concrete has hardened sufficiently to enable a sharp edged groove to be produced without disrupting the concrete and before random cracks develop in the slab .
the grooves shall be between num and num of the specified depth of the slab and of any convenient width not less than num mm .
the sealing groove may be sawn to the required width later .
expansion joint sealing grooves shall be sealed as soon as practical after sawing .
num wetformed longitudinal joint grooves num num when slabs are constructed in more than one lane width in one operation a joint groove shall be formed by inserting a groove former ahead of the finishing beams from dispenser .
the concrete so displaced shall be recompacted by a vibrating compactor or similar device at least num mm wide operating symmetrically along the line of the joint .
after finishing the concrete the groove forming strip shall be in the correct position and alignment within num of the vertical and to sufficient depth below the surface to allow for the passage of the finishing beam within the range num mm below the finished level of the slab .
groove forming strips in wetformed longitudinal joint grooves shall be left in place .
num construction joint grooves in surface slabs num num the grooves shall be formed by fixing a grooveformer or strip or cork seal along the top edge of the slab already constructed before concreting the adjacent slab .
where the edge of the concrete is damaged it shall be ground or made good before fixing the groove forming strip .
alternatively the subsequent slab may be placed adjacent to the first and a sealing groove sawn later in the hardened concrete to the minimum depth required in table num or to the manufacturers instructions if greater and to sufficient width to eliminate minor spalling of the joint arris up to a maximum of num mm for longitudinal joints and num mm for transverse joints .
the joint shall be sealed in compliance with clause num .
num num groove formers and bottom crack inducers num general num num except where joint grooves are sawn a bottom crack inducer shall be provided at each longitudinal joint position .
num num the bottom crack inducer shall be triangular or inverted yshaped fillet with a base width not less than the height made of timber or rigid synthetic material .
it shall be firmly fixed to the subbase so as to remain in position during the whole process of constructing the slab .
num num the combined depth of groove formers and bottom crack inducers shall be between num and num of the depth of the slab and the difference between the depth of the groove former and the height of the bottom crack inducer shall not be greater than num mm .
num longitudinal joints num num groove forming sealing strips for wetformed longitudinal joints shall be of firm compressible strips of ethylene vinyl acetate foam of minimum density num kgmnum or synthetic rubber or equivalent material .
they shall have a minimum thickness of num mm and shall be sufficiently rigid to remain vertical and straight in the concrete without curving or stretching .
they shall be inserted continuously along the joint .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num crcp universal beam anchorage transverse joint num num one side of the beam shall be separated from the crcp slab by an expansion joint filler board against the vertical face and ethylene vinyl acetate foam in accordance with hcd drawing cnum .
num num joint filler board num num joint filler board for expansion joints and manhole and gully slab joints shall be num mm thick unless otherwise shown in the drawings within a tolerance of num mm .
it shall be a selfexpanding cork seal or a firm compressible material or a bonded combination of compressible and rigid materials of sufficient rigidity to resist deformation during the passage of the concrete paving plant .
the depth of the joint filler board for manhole and gully slabs shall be the full depth of the slab less the depth of the sealing groove .
in expansion joints the filler board shall have a ridged top as shown on the drawings except where a sealing groove former is indicated on the drawings .
holes for dowel bars shall be accurately bored or punched out to form a sliding fit for the sheathed dowel bar .
num num the joint filler board shall meet the requirements given when tested in accordance with the procedures in the following subclauses i weathering test a three specimens each num mm square num mm shall be placed in a ventilated drying oven maintained at a temperature of numc numc for num days after which they shall immediately be immersed in water at room temperature of between numc and numc for num hours .
they shall then be subjected to five cycles of freezing and thawing in the following manner .
b the specimens shall be placed in a watertight weathering test pan having a ribbed bottom and a fitted slotted lid designed to hold the three specimens vertically on edge .
the pan shall be filled with water to half the depth of the specimens and then frozen to minus numc or below for at least four hours after the initial freezing of the water .
the pan shall then be placed in a water bath maintained at numc to numc without disturbing the specimens and shall remain there for one hour after thawing has completed .
the pan and specimens shall then be returned to the refrigerator and freezing and thawing shall be repeated in precisely the same manner until five cycles of the process have been completed .
the specimens shall be removed from the pan and air dried at room temperature for num hours before examination .
c the material shall be deemed to have passed the weathering test if the specimens show no signs of disintegration or shrinkage .
ii compression and recovery test a two of the specimens which pass the weathering test and two new specimens each trimmed to num mm square num mm maintained at room temperature and humidity for num hours shall be subjected to three applications of load at num hour intervals in a compression test machine complying with bs en iso num with auxiliary platens num mmnum minimum num mm thick .
during each application of load each specimen shall be compressed to num of its original thickness at a rate of strain of num mm per minute .
the load required to achieve this amount of compression shall be not less than num nmmnum nor more than num nmmnum for material to be used in pavements and not less than num nmmnum and not more than num nmmnum for material to be used in bridge joints .
the load shall be released immediately the required degree of compression is reached and after the third application a recovery period of num minutes shall be allowed after which the thickness of the specimen shall be measured .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials b this thickness expressed as a percentage of the original thickness is the recovery value of the specimen .
the thicknesses shall be measured to an accuracy of num micron .
the two new specimens shall be weighed before and after testing .
the difference in mass shall be determined with an accuracy of num and shall be expressed as a percentage of the original mass of the specimen .
c the material shall be deemed to have passed the test if all four specimens have recovery values of at least num and the two new specimens have not suffered a reduction of mass in excess of num. iii extrusion test a the third sample which passes the weathering test shall be trimmed to num mm square num mm and be subjected to the following extrusion test .
b the extrusion mould shall be num mm x num mm num mm num internally of sufficient depth to test the sample as received open on one side only and fixed rigidly to a base plate .
the mould shall be provided with a closely fitting pressure plate which shall fit without binding and with an accurate horizontal measuring dial gauge or measuring device accurate to num microns .
the specimen shall be mounted in the extrusion mould and loaded once as described in the compression and recovery test .
the extrusion at the open side of the mould shall be measured with the gauge when the specimen is compressed to num of its original thickness and before release of the load .
c the material shall be deemed to have passed the test if the extrusion of the free edge does not exceed num mm .
iv immersion test for cork filler board a two specimens each num mm x num mm num mm shall be prepared and the thickness of each specimen shall be determined to the nearest num microns before the specimens are immersed in boiling water for one hour .
after removal from the water the specimens shall be allowed to cool to room temperature and after num minutes at this temperature their thickness shall be remeasured to the nearest num microns .
b the material shall be deemed to have passed the test if both specimens have a thickness of not less than num of their thickness before immersion .
v acid test for cork filler board a two specimens each num mm x num mm num mm shall be immersed in hydrochloric acid of a specific gravity of num at room temperature which is then brought to the boil and maintained thus for one hour when the specimens shall be removed and rinsed in water .
b the material shall be deemed to have passed the test when after examination the specimens show no evidence of serious disintegration friability or lack of resilience .
discolouration or minor swelling shall not be considered as failure .
num num preparation and sealing of joint grooves num general num num all transverse joints in surface slabs except for construction joints in crcp shall be sealed using one of the joint seals described in clause num .
additionally longitudinal joints which are sawn or widened shall be sealed .
num preparation of joint grooves for sealing num num joint grooves shall be prepared in accordance with bs num part num and subclauses num to num of this clause .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num that part of the groove former used to form the sealing groove or any temporary seal shall be removed cleanly without damaging the joint arrises to a minimum depth of num mm where compression seals are used or otherwise to such depth as will provide an applied seal to the dimensions shown in table num after allowing for any necessary caulking material described in subclause num of this clause .
if joint grooves are not initially constructed to provide the minimum dimensions for the joint seals as given in table num they shall be widened by sawing .
joint grooves formed by tapered formers need not be widened .
the sealing grooves shall be cleaned out immediately after sawing using high pressure water jets to remove all slurry from the joint before the slurry hardens .
num num if rough arrises develop when grooves are made they shall be ground to provide a chamfer approximately num mm wide .
if the groove is at an angle up to num from the perpendicular to the surface the overhanging edge of the sealing groove shall be sawn or ground perpendicular .
if spalling occurs or the angle of the former is greater than num the joint sealing groove shall be sawn wider and perpendicular to the surface to encompass the defects up to a maximum width including any chamfer of num mm for transverse joints and num mm for longitudinal joints .
if the spalling can not be so eliminated then the arris shall be repaired by suitable thin bonded arris repair using cementitious materials as specified in clause num .
num num for applied sealants the sides of the joint sealing groove shall be scoured by dry abrasive blasting .
this shall not be carried out before the characteristic compressive strength of the concrete is expected to reach num nmm .
when compression seals are used the sides of the groove may be ground or wire brushed .
num num for hot and cold applied sealants compressible caulking material debonding strip or tape or cord compatible with the sealant of a suitable size to fill the width of the sealing groove shall be firmly packed or stuck in the bottom of the sealing groove to such a depth so as to provide the correct depth of seal as described in table num with the top of the seal at the correct depth below the surface of the concrete .
num num all grooves shall be cleaned of any dirt or loose material by air blasting with filtered oilfree compressed air .
the groove shall be clean and dry at the time of priming and sealing .
num num for applied sealants the joint grooves shall be primed with the relevant primer for the hot or cold applied sealant in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and with bs num part num except that when necessary the joint grooves may be primed and sealed earlier than num days after construction as soon as the grooves have been gritblasted and cleaned .
table num num dimensions of applied joint seals type and spacing of joints m minimum width minimum depth of seal note num impregnated foam compression strips depth of seal below the concrete surface cold applied hot applied mm mm mm mm mm contraction num and under num note num num num num num num over num to num num num num num num num over num to num num num num num num num expansion num num num num num num transverse warping num num num num num num longitudinal joints if sealed num num num num num to num gully and manhole slabs num num num num num to num note num the depth of seal is that part in contact with the vertical face of the joint groove .
the depth of seal below the surface shall be taken at the centre of an applied seal relative to a short straight edge num mm long placed centrally across the joint within num days of sealing .
note num for cork seals other than in construction joints grooves shall be num mm width num mm depth .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num sealing with applied sealants num num sealing shall be carried out continuously along the full length of joint in any one rip except for remedial areas .
when hot or cold applied sealants are used the sealant shall be applied within the minimum and maximum drying times of the primer recommended by the manufacturer .
priming and sealing with applied sealants shall not be carried out when the naturally occurring temperature in the joint groove to be sealed is below numc except between numc and numc it may be carried out when the temperature is rising .
num num hotapplied sealants shall be prepared and applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num num the components of coldapplied sealants shall be thoroughly mixed in the correct proportions in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
as soon as possible after mixing and within the worklife of the sealant the material shall be dispensed into the joint or applied using a caulking gun to the correct level below the concrete surface .
the tackfree time shall be achieved within num hours for machine dispensed material or within num hours for hand applied material .
num testing of applied sealants num num test certificates shall be supplied from an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subclause num for testing sealants stating that the sealant conforms to the relevant standard in clause num .
site testing of coldapplied sealants shall be in accordance with bs num .
site testing of hot applied sealants shall be in accordance with clause num and appendix a of bs num and that the reference to bs num in clause num of bs num shall be replaced by bs en num .
samples of hot applied sealants shall be taken and tested for initial penetration and resilience in accordance with bs en num and bs en num respectively and shall conform to the requirements of bs en num .
num sealing with compression seals num num when compression seals are used the widths of the seal shall be selected in relation to the width of the sealing groove the bay lengths and manufacturers recommendations so that the estimated maximum width of the joint opening shall be not more than num of the original width of the seal the estimated maximum width being calculated on the basis of a movement of num mm per num m run of slab .
the maximum calculated width of sealing groove shall be num mm .
the depth of groove shall be such that the contact face of the seal with the side of the groove shall be not less than num mm and that the top of the seal shall be a minimum of num mm below the surface of the concrete .
num num compression seals shall be inserted into the grooves without prior extension or rotation and where recommended by the manufacturer with a lubricant adhesive which is compatible with the seal and the concrete .
the adhesive shall be applied to both sides of the sealing groove or the seal or to both .
the seal shall be positioned with its axis perpendicular to the concrete surface .
excess adhesive on top of the seal shall be removed to prevent adhesion of the top faces of the seal under compression .
except when compression seals are used in longitudinal joints the transverse joint seal shall be continuous across the slab and the longitudinal joint groove forming strips shall be cut to the required depth after the concrete has hardened for the transverse seal to be inserted .
if compression seals are used in longitudinal joints where the grooves have been sawn after construction of the slab they shall be continuous across transverse joints with the transverse seals butted and fixed to the longitudinal seals with adhesive .
num num joint seals num num joint seals shall consist of hot or cold applied sealants or compression seals complying with this clause .
the colour of the joint seal material shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
num hotapplied sealants num num hotapplied sealants shall be type nnum or type f as stated in contract specific appendix num and conforming to bs en num .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num for joints between concrete surface slabs and bituminous surfacing hot applied type nnum sealants conforming to bs en num shall be used .
alternatively polymer modified bitumen sealing strips may be used and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
hotapplied type nnum sealants may be used in joints in asphalt kerbs laid on concrete pavements .
num coldapplied sealants num num coldapplied sealants shall be type n conforming to bs num except that type f shall be used for laybys and hardstandings .
num num for joints in kerbs and joints other than in pavements seals may be any of the pavement sealants if they have the suitable characteristics for the application or gunning grade cold applied plasticised bituminous rubber sealant or gunning grades of two part polysulphidebased sealants complying with bs num may be used .
alternatively polyurethanebased sealing compounds may be used provided their performance is not inferior to bs num material .
num compression seals num num compression seals shall be precompressed neoprene impregnated expanding foam sealing strip having a current bba certificate or rubber seals made of polychloroprene elastomers complying with bs num and conforming with the requirements of astm standard dnum .
seals of butadieneacrylonitrile or other synthetic rubbers may be used if certificates are produced to show that they conform to the performance requirements of astm standard dnum for oven ageing oil and ozone resistance low temperature stiffening and recovery .
seals made of ethylene vinyl acetate in microcellular form and other synthetic materials may be used in longitudinal joints and in structures if test certificates are produced to show adequate resistance to heat ageing when tested in accordance with bs en iso num and resistance to fuel oils .
the compression set of any seal shall not be greater than num when the specimen is subjected to a num compression in accordance with bs en iso num .
when immersed in standard oils for num hours at numc in accordance with bs iso num the volume change shall not be greater than num .
num num compression seals shall be shaped so that they will remain compressed at all times in accordance with clause num and shall have a minimum of num mm contact face with the sides of the sealing groove .
if lubricant adhesive is used it shall be compatible with the seal and the concrete and shall be resistant to abrasion oxidization fuels and salt .
num num joints at manhole and gully slabs num num manhole covers gullies and their frames shall be isolated from the pavement slabs and be contained in separate small slabs which shall be larger than the exterior of the manhole and gully shafts including any concrete surround less than num mm below the underside of the subbase layer .
the joint around the manhole or gully slab shall be vertical and incorporate joint filler board as in clause num but without dowel bars and tie bars .
num num gully slabs in unreinforced concrete slabs shall be adjacent to or straddle a transverse joint extending the gully slab as necessary to a maximum of num m. where this is impractical an extra tied warping joint shall be provided adjacent to or within the gully slab and at least num m from the next transverse joint .
if the edge of an isolator slab is within num m of any longitudinal joint the isolator slab shall be extended to that joint .
num num manhole slabs in unreinforced concrete slabs shall be adjacent to or straddle transverse or longitudinal joints .
if the manhole is within the middle third of the bay length a warping joint shall be constructed on one side of the manhole slab across the whole width of the bay to the nearest longitudinal joint .
num num reinforcement as shown on the drawings shall be placed in the main concrete slabs in the corners between the manhole and gully slabs and the transverse or longitudinal joints .
extra reinforcement as described in the contract shall be placed in reinforced concrete slabs around the manhole or gully slabs .
num num manhole and gully slabs shall have square corners at all corners which are not adjacent to a transverse or longitudinal joint in the main slab .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num reinforcement as shown on the drawings shall be placed in the gully or manhole slab and concrete class cnumcnum shall be placed by hand in the space between the main slab and the manhole frame .
the concrete shall be fully compacted and finished in compliance with clause num .
num num a sealing groove shall be made directly above the joint filler board and sealed in compliance with clause num .
num num inspection of dowel bars num num compliance with clause num for the position and alignment of dowel bars at contraction and expansion joints shall be checked by measurement relative to the side form or guide wires .
num num when the slab has been constructed the position and alignment of dowel bars and any filler board shall be measured after carefully exposing them across the whole width of the slab .
when the joint is an expansion joint the top of the filler board shall first be exposed sufficiently in the plastic concrete to permit measurement of any lateral or vertical displacement of the board .
during the course of normal working these measurements shall be carried out at a rate of one joint per num m length of slab or one per num days whichever occurs the sooner .
for small areas the rate shall be one joint for up to each num joints .
num num if the position or alignment of the bars in a single joint in the slab is unsatisfactory then the next two joints shall be inspected .
if only the one joint of the three is defective the rate of checking shall be increased to one joint per day until compliance is being achieved .
in the event of noncompliance in two or more successive joints the contractor shall revert to the construction of trial lengths and make any necessary alterations to the concrete mix paving plant or methods until the dowel bar position and alignment is satisfactory .
num num after the dowel bars have been examined the remainder of the concrete shall be removed num mm on each side of the line of the joint and reinstated to the requirements of the specification .
alternatively if the dowels are examined in the penultimate joint of a days work that joint shall be made a construction joint for the next days work and the remainder of the concrete in the last slab may be discarded .
num num side forms rails and guide wires num side forms and rails num num all side forms and rails shall be made of steel and be sufficiently robust and rigid to support the weight and pressure caused by the paving equipment .
side forms for use with wheeled paving machines shall incorporate metal rails firmly fixed at a constant height below the top of the forms .
num num the forms shall be secured by using not less than three pins for each num m length having one pin fixed at each side of every joint .
forms shall be tightly joined together by a locked joint free from play or movement in any direction .
forms shall be cleaned and oiled immediately before each use .
the rails or running surface shall be kept clean in front of the wheels of any paving machines .
the forms shall be straight within a tolerance of num mm in num m. num num the forms shall be bedded on low moisture content cement mortar or concrete class cnum and set to the pavement surface level as shown on the drawings within a tolerance of num mm .
the bedding shall not extend under the slab .
there shall be no vertical step between the ends of adjacent forms greater than num mm .
the horizontal alignment for forms shall be to the required alignment of the pavement edge as shown on the drawings within a tolerance of num mm .
the contractor shall ensure that the forms are set to the correct profile immediately prior to concreting .
the mortar or concrete bedding shall be broken out after use .
num num side forms shall not be removed earlier than num hours after the completion of the construction of the slab .
care shall be taken to prevent damage to the concrete and any projecting tie bars during the removal of the forms .
if the removal of forms results in any damage to the concrete the period of num hours shall be increased to that which is necessary to avoid further damage and the contractor shall make good the damaged areas .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num guide wires num num a guide wire shall be provided along each side of the slab to be constructed by slip form paving plant .
each guide wire shall be at a constant height above and parallel to the required edges of the slab as shown on the drawings within a vertical tolerance of num mm .
additionally one of the wires shall be at a constant horizontal distance from the required edge of the pavement as shown in the drawings within a lateral tolerance of num mm .
num num the guide wires shall be supported from stakes not more than num m apart by connectors capable of fine horizontal and vertical adjustment .
the guide wire shall be tensioned on the stakes so that a num gramme weight shall produce a deflection of not more than num mm when suspended at the midpoint between any pair of stakes .
the ends of the guide wires shall be anchored to fixing points which shall be not closer to the edge of the slab than the row of stakes and in no circumstances shall a guide wire be anchored to a stake .
num num the stakes shall be positioned and the connectors maintained at their correct height and alignment from num hours on the day before concreting takes place until num hours after the concrete has been finished .
the guide wire shall be erected and tensioned on the connectors at any section for at least two hours before concreting that section .
num to num num not used num num transport and delivery num num the number of delivery vehicles provided shall be sufficient to ensure a constant supply of concrete to enable the paving plant to proceed continuously .
num num construction by machine num num the concrete slab shall be constructed in a continuous process by either slipform or by fixed form paving plant in accordance with this clause or by small paving machines or hand guided methods as in clause num .
num num the slab may be constructed in either one or two layers .
in two layer construction the thickness of the top layer shall be not less than num mm or twice the maximum size of the coarse aggregate whichever is the greater and shall be at least num mm thicker than the depth of the groove former if used .
num construction by fixed form paving machines num num a fixed form paving train shall consist of separate powered machines which spread compact and finish the concrete in a continuous operation .
num num concrete shall be discharged without segregation into a hopper spreader which is equipped with the means of controlling its rate of deposition on to the subbase or on to the lower layer .
the concrete shall be spread in each layer without segregation and to a uniform uncompacted density over the whole area of the slab .
the deposited concrete shall be struck off to the necessary level by the underside of the hopper as it is traversed across the spreading machine .
the machine shall be capable of being rapidly adjusted for changes in average and differential surcharge necessitated by changes in slab thickness or crossfall .
when the slab is constructed in two layers the spreading of the concrete in the top layer shall follow the completion of the bottom layer within the times given in table num .
num num prior to being compacted the surface level of each loose spread layer shall be adjusted to the correct surcharge by means of rotating strikeoff blades or a screw device .
num num the concrete shall be compacted by vibration or by a combination of vibration and mechanical tamping so as to comply with clause num throughout the full depth of the slab .
poker vibrators shall be used in each layer adjacent to the side forms and the edge of a previously constructed slab .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num the initial regulation and finish to the surface of the slab shall be effected by means of a beam oscillating transversely or obliquely to the longitudinal axis of the pavement .
this beam shall be readily adjustable for both height and tilt .
num num joint grooves shall be constructed in compliance with clause num .
when grooves are wetformed the concrete shall be recompacted around the former by a hand held vibrating plate compactor drawn along or on each side of the joint prior to the final regulation of the surface by a longitudinal oscillating float .
num num the regulation and finishing of the surface of the slab shall be carried out by a machine which incorporates twin oblique oscillating finishing beams which shall be readily adjustable for both height and tilt .
the beams shall weigh not less than num kgm be of rectangular section and span the full width of the slab .
the leading beam shall be vibrated .
the beams shall be supported on a carriage the level of which shall be controlled by the average level of not less than four points evenly spaced over at least num m of the supporting rail beam or slab on each side of the slab that is being constructed .
except for crcb slabs the final regulation of the surface of the slab shall be provided by a longitudinal oscillating float travelling across the slab .
after the final regulation and before the macrotexture is applied any excess concrete on top of the joint groove former where present shall be removed .
additionally the longitudinal oscillating float shall complete the traverse of the slab in both directions within the length of the float and shall have a total longitudinal stroke of num mm to num mm .
num num the longitudinal oscillating float shall have a minimum length of num m and a minimum constant width of num mm with a maximum weight of num kgm .
the edges of the float shall be curved or chamfered .
num num a minimum length of num mm of longitudinal oscillating float shall be within the length of the machine tracks or wheels .
num num when a concrete slab is constructed in more than one width flanged wheels on the paving machines shall not be run directly on the surface of any completed part of the slab .
the second or subsequent slabs shall be constructed either by supporting machines with flanged wheels on flatbottom section rails weighing not less than num kgm laid on the surface of the completed slab or by replacing the flanged wheels on that side of the machines by smooth flangeless wheels .
before flangeless wheels or rails are used the surface regularity of the slab over which they are to pass shall comply with clause num and its surface shall be thoroughly cleaned and brushed to remove all extraneous matter .
flangeless wheels or rails shall be positioned sufficiently far from the edge of the slab to avoid damage to that edge .
num construction by slipform paving machine num num a slipform paving train shall consist of powered machines which spread compact and finish the concrete in a continuous operation .
num num the slipform paving machine shall compact the concrete by internal vibration and shape it between sliding side forms or over fixed side forms by means of either a conforming plate or by vibrating and oscillating finishing beams .
num num the concrete shall be deposited without segregation in front of the slipform paver across its whole width and to a height which at all times is in excess of the required surcharge .
the deposited concrete shall be struck off to the necessary average and differential surcharge by means of a strikeoff plate or a screw auger device extending across the whole width of the slab .
the equipment for striking off the concrete shall be capable of being rapidly adjusted for changes of the average and differential surcharge necessitated by changes in slab thickness or crossfall .
num num the level of the conforming plate and finishing beams shall be controlled automatically from the guide wires by sensors attached at the four corners of the slip form paving machine .
the alignment of the paver shall be controlled automatically from the guide wire by at least one sensor attached to the paver .
the alignment and level of ancillary machines for finishing texturing and curing of the concrete shall be automatically controlled relative to the guide wire or to the surface and edge of the slab .
num num slipform paving machines shall have vibration of variable output with a maximum energy output of not less than num kw per metre width of slab per num mm depth of slab for a laying speed of up to num m per minute or pro rata for higher speeds .
the machines shall be of sufficient mass to provide adequate reaction on the traction units to maintain forward movements during the placing of concrete in all situations .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num except for crcb slabs the final regulation of the surface slab shall be provided by a longitudinal oscillating float travelling across the slab .
the longitudinal float shall comply with the requirements of subclauses num num and num of this clause .
additionally the longitudinal float shall either be a separate machine closely following a slipform paver or alternatively it shall be attached to a slipform paver in such a manner that it functions effectively and does not adversely affect the performance of the paver or the surface of the slab .
num num joint grooves shall be constructed in compliance with clause num .
where grooves are wetformed the concrete shall be compacted around the former by a separate vibrating plate compactor with twin plates .
the groove former shall be compacted to the correct level by a vibrating pan which may be included with the transverse joint finishing beam .
final finishing shall be carried out in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
any excess concrete on top of the groove former shall be removed before the surface is macrotextured .
num num where a concrete slab is constructed in more than one width or where the edge needs to be matched for one level to another section of surface slab and the surface levels at the edges are not achieved the slab shall be supported by separate side forms placed before or after the paver to ensure that edge levels meet the required tolerances .
num general num num while the concrete is still plastic its surface shall be brushed to comply with the macrotexture requirements specified in clause num .
the surface and edges of surface slabs and crc bases shall be cured in compliance with clause num .
wet lean concrete bases and subbases shall be cured in compliance with clause num .
num num the spreading compacting and finishing of the concrete shall be carried out as rapidly as possible and the paving operation shall be so arranged as to ensure that the time between the mixing of the first batch of concrete in any transverse section of the slab and the application of the sprayed curing membrane to the surface of that section shall not exceed those given in table num .
num num each bay in jointed concrete surface slabs shall be consecutively numbered near the verge next to a transverse joint while the concrete is plastic .
in continuously reinforced concrete pavement the slab shall be marked with the chainage at intervals not greater than num m apart .
num num construction by small paving machines or hand guided methods num as an alternative to fixed form or slipform paving trains the concrete slab may be constructed using parts of trains small paving machines truss type finishing beams or hand guided methods .
hand tamping beams may only be used for short lengths or infill bays or tapers .
reinforcement dowel bars and tie bars shall be supported in position in accordance with clauses num num and num respectively except where two layer construction is used and reinforcement is placed on the bottom layer .
table num num maximum working times temperature of concrete at discharge from the delivery vehicle reinforced concrete slabs constructed in two layers without retarding admixtures all other concrete slabs mixing first layer to finishing concrete between layers mixing first layer to finishing concrete between layers in two layer work not more than numc num hours half hour num hours num hours exceeding numc but not exceeding numc num hours half hour num hours num hour exceeding numc unacceptable for paving unacceptable for paving num num the concrete shall be spread uniformly without segregation or varying degrees of precompaction by conveyor chute blade or auger .
the concrete shall be struck off by a screed or auger so that the average and differential surcharge is sufficient for the surface of the slab to be at the correct levels after compaction of the concrete .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num the concrete shall be compacted by vibrating finishing beams across the slab and with vibrating pokers adjacent to the side forms or the edge of a previously constructed slab .
in addition internal poker vibration shall be used for slabs thicker than num mm and may be used for lesser thicknesses .
when used the pokers shall be at points not more than num mm apart over the whole area of the slab or drawn continuously across the slab in front of the finishing beams .
num num the finishing beams shall be metal with a contact face at least num mm wide .
they shall be rigid or supported by a frame or truss without sag across the width of slab being paved .
the beams shall be supported on rails or forms or an adjacent slab and shall be moved forward at a steady speed of num m to num m per minute whilst vibrating to compact the concrete and to produce a smooth surface finished to the correct crossfalls crowns and levels relative to the top of the forms or adjacent slab .
num num joint grooves shall be constructed in compliance with clause num .
any irregularities at wetformed joint grooves shall be rectified by means of a vibrating float at least num m wide drawn along the line of the joint .
the whole area of the slab shall be regulated by two passes of a scraping straight edge not less than num m wide or by a further application of a twin vibrating finishing beam .
any excess concrete on top of the groove former shall be removed before the surface is macrotextured .
num num the surface shall be brushtextured as described in clause num .
num num the surface shall be cured in compliance with clause num within the time to completion given in table num .
num num finished surface requirements num macrotexture of running surfaces num num the finished surface of the pavement shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
where a pavement area does not comply with the specification in any respect the full extent of the surface which does not comply shall be rectified in accordance with clause num .
num brush finish macrotexture num num subclauses num to num of this clause shall only apply to the reconstruction of existing concrete pavements .
all new concrete pavement constructions shall comply with subclauses num to num .
num num after the final regulation of the surface of the slab and before the application of the curing membrane the surface of concrete slabs to be used as running surfaces shall be brushmacrotextured in a direction at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the carriageway .
the macrotexture shall be applied evenly across the slab in one direction by a brush not less than num mm wide .
the macrotexture shall be uniform both along and across the slab .
num num the macrotexture depth shall be determined by the volumetric patch technique as described in bs en num .
tests shall be taken within num m of commencement of paving and thereafter at least once for each days paving at the times after construction as given below and in the following manner num individual measurements of the macrotexture depth shall be taken at least num m apart anywhere along a diagonal line across a lane width between points num m apart along the pavement .
no measurement shall be taken within num mm of the longitudinal edges of a concrete slab constructed in one pass .
num num macrotexture depths shall be as required in table num .
num num where the required macrotexture depth is found to be deficient the contractor shall make good the texture across the full lane width over lengths necessary to comply with the requirements of table num by retexturing the hardened concrete surface as described in clause num .
failure to achieve a satisfactory minimum macrotexture depth by random grooving shall result in the removal of the full thickness of the slab to the extent required to permit reconstruction of the slab in accordance with the specification .
if the macrotexture depth is excessive the surface shall be planed or ground or otherwise treated over lengths necessary to comply with the requirements of table num .
the treatment shall not affect the requirements of clause num in respect of surface levels or surface regularity .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials table num num macrotexture depths time of test required macrotexture depth mm specified value tolerance i between num hours and num days after the construction of the slab or until the slab is first used by vehicles an average of num measurements num num ii not later than num weeks before the road is opened to public traffic an average of num measurements num num num num performance characteristics of concrete road surfaces num num a system installation method statement for the concrete road surface being assessed shall be provided by the contractor .
the sipt shall be undertaken during daylight hours and shall be a minimum of num metres in length and num metres wide .
the sipt shall demonstrate and enable verification of the performance of the road surface .
num trial installation num stage trial num num the sipt shall be observed by an appropriate technical approval body tab .
num num the technical approval body shall i verify that the system installation trial has been undertaken in accordance with the method statement ii assess the visual condition of the completed system iii assess the data from the site performance tests detailed in subclause num .
num num the installed performance of the system over the twoyear trial period shall be assessed at the intervals specified in table num .
in the case of visual condition this shall be assessed by the tab itself while data relating to the other properties in table num shall be provided to the overseeing organisation .
table num num installed performance characteristics property frequency clause table average locked wheel friction measured at numkm hr .
by pavement friction tester initial num and num month num noise voluntary assessment and declaration between num and num months table num num num the technical approval body shall be ukas accredited for product approval to bs en num .
the technical approval body shall provide a sipt inspection protocol to the satisfaction of the overseeing organisation and the system provider designed to assess qualitatively andor quantitatively the applicability of the sipt for the system in order to satisfy the performance requirements .
num sipt and initial performance requirements num general num num the initial performance requirements shall be as stated in contract specific appendix num .
num friction measurement num num the average locked wheel friction of the road surface macrotexture depth of the surface shall be measured in accordance with astm enumenumm num at a speed of num kmhr rather than num mph in the test method using a tyre that complies with astm enum num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num noise num num for the purposes of voluntary declaration by the system producer as part of the sipt the roadtyre noise level of the concrete shall be assessed to subclauses num to num of this clause and declared as nr num num num or num as described in table num .
if the sipt site conditions are not appropriate for testing an alternative site shall be selected and nominated .
table num num roadtyre noise levels level equivalence to traditional surfacing materials road surface influence rsi num very quiet surfacing material num dba num quieter than hra surfacing materials num dba num equivalent to hra surfacing materials num dba num equivalent to cold applied ultra thin surfacing num dba nr no requirement no requirement the default specification level shall be nr unless a clearly identified and quantified noise sensitive site requirement is deemed absolutely essential in contract specific requirements appendix num .
num num the influence of the road surface on traffic noise using the statistical passby method shall be established at the sipt site between num and num months after opening to traffic in accordance with iso num num sections num and num .
num num acoustic measurements shall only be carried out when the road surface is dry and the meteorological condition specified in iso num num section num are met .
num num the air and surface temperatures are monitored in accordance with the procedure described in iso num num clause num .
the road surface temperature t surface must be within numc to numc during acoustic measurements .
the air temperature t air must be within numc to numc .
num num the test location road speed category shall be classified as either medium or high as defined in iso num num clause num .
not less than two test locations are selected for each road speed category which may be at the same site provided the locations are at least num m apart or on different carriageways .
each test location shall be representative in terms of road speed category and traffic level .
each of the test sites selected must meet the requirements of iso num num section num and isocd num num .
the road must be essentially straight or bends with a radius of curvature greater than num m for mediumspeed and num m for highspeed road categories .
the crossfall of the test lane at the test site must not exceed num .
num num the apparatus described in iso num num section num are used .
the frequency range of between num and num hz centre frequencies of the onethird octave bands shall be covered .
num num the macrotexture of the road surface used for the noise assessment shall be measured in the nearside wheeltrack along the whole length of test material in accordance bs en num num .
the macrotexture depth of the nearside wheeltrack in front of a test location must be within num per cent of the average macrotexture measured along the site .
num num the microphone location at each measurement site shall be recorded accurately and marked with appropriate methods such that the position can be readily identified for a period of at least two years .
num num when sufficient vehicle passbys have been measured a linear regression analysis shall be performed in accordance with iso num num clause num .
in the case of the highspeed road category measurements must not be taken of vehicles travelling at speeds of less than num kmh in accordance with afnor standard snum .
num num for each category of vehicle defined in table num the vehicle sound level lveh shall be calculated as the ordinate sound level of the regression line at the reference speed for the category of road .
all levels shall be calculated to two decimal places and rounded to one decimal place .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials table num num reference speeds kmhnum for different road speed categories vehicle category road speed category kmhnum medium high l num num hnum num num hnum num num category l vehicles light vehicles including passenger cars and car derived vans excluding vehicles towing trailers .
category hnum vehicles commercial trucks with num axles and greater than num tonnes .
category hnum vehicles commercial trucks with more than num axles and greater than num tonnes .
num texture of concrete bases num num the surface of wetlaid concrete bases shall be roughened before the application of any curing compound by brushing with a wire brush or stiff broom .
num num curing num num immediately after the surface treatment described in clause num the surface and exposed edges of surface slabs shall be cured for a minimum period of num days by the application of an approved resin based aluminised curing compound or polythene sheeting or an approved sprayed plastic film which hardens into a peelable plastic sheet and which shall be removed before road marking and opening to traffic .
where the concrete is to receive a thin surfacing overlay the surface and exposed edges shall be cured for a minimum of num days by the application of a curing agent which is compatible with the bond coat specified on the hapas roads and bridges certificate or equivalent for the thin surfacing .
num num resin based aluminised curing compound shall contain sufficient flake aluminium in finely divided dispersion to produce a complete coverage of the sprayed surface with a metallic finish .
the compound shall become stable and impervious to evaporation of water from the concrete surface within num minutes of application and shall have an efficiency index of num when tested as described in bs num .
num num the curing compound shall not react chemically with the concrete to be cured and shall not crack peel or disintegrate within three weeks after application .
num num prior to application the contents of any containers shall be thoroughly agitated .
the curing compound shall be mechanically applied using a fine spray on to the surface at a rate of at least num numm .
for the sides of slipformed slabs or when the side forms are removed within num hours and for small areas where mechanical application can not be used the compound shall be sprayed by hand lance at a rate of at least num numm .
the rate of spread shall be checked during construction of each trial length and for each num m of treated slab .
num num the mechanical sprayer shall incorporate an efficient mechanical device for continuous agitation and mixing of the compound in its container during spraying .
num num continuously reinforced concrete bases shall be cured in accordance with this clause .
immediately prior to laying the bituminous surfacing or upper base a cationic bituminous tack coat shall be applied in accordance with clause num at a rate between num lm to num lm .
num num to achieve high early strength for early use by vehicles insulation blankets as described in clause num shall be used for accelerated curing .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num trial length num general num num except in rapid construction projects and unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num at least three months prior to the construction of the trial length of surface slabs or crcb the contractor shall submit a detailed description of the proposed constituent materials concrete proportions plant equipment and construction methods .
no trials of new constituent materials plant equipment or construction methods nor any development of them shall be permitted either during the construction of the trial length or in any subsequent paving work unless they form part of further satisfactory trials .
num num unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall demonstrate the constituent materials concrete proportions plant equipment and methods of construction that are proposed for concrete paving by first constructing a trial length of slab at least num m but not more than num m long for mechanised construction and at least num m long for hand guided methods .
the concrete proportions decided by trial concrete mixes may be adjusted during the trial but shall not be changed once the trial length has been satisfactorily completed unless the contractor lays a further trial area to assess the suitability of the proposed changes .
num num the trial length shall be constructed in two parts over a period comprising at least part of two separate working days with a minimum of num m constructed each day when mechanised paving plant is used and a minimum of num m on each day for hand guided methods .
the trial length shall be constructed at a similar rate to that which is proposed for the main construction in the permanent works .
num num at least two transverse joints and one longitudinal joint of each type that are proposed for unreinforced concrete slabs and jointed reinforced concrete slabs in the main construction in the permanent works shall be constructed and assessed in the trial length .
if in the trial length expansion joints are not demonstrated the first num expansion joints and at least the first num m of longitudinal construction joint for mechanised paving or num m for hand guided method of construction laid in the main construction in the permanent works shall be considered the trial length for these joints .
one construction joint shall be demonstrated in each trial length of crcp or crcb .
num assessment num num the trial length shall comply for strength and density with the specification in all respects with the following additions and exceptions num surface levels and irregularity i in checking for compliance with table num the levels shall be taken at intervals of not more than num m along any line or lines parallel to the longitudinal centre line of the trial length .
ii the maximum number of permitted irregularities of pavement surfaces shall comply with the requirements of table num for num m lengths .
shorter trial lengths shall be assessed prorata based on values for a num m length .
num joints iii at least num cores of minimum diameter num mm shall be taken from the slab at joints to check the lateral and vertical location of joint grooves and bottom crack inducers .
iv alignment of dowel bars shall be inspected as described in clause num in any two consecutive transverse joints .
if the position or alignment of the dowel bars at one of these joints does not comply with clause num but if that joint remains the only one that does not comply after the next num consecutive joints of the same type have been inspected then the method of placing dowels shall be deemed to be satisfactory .
in order to check sufficient joints for dowel bar alignment without extending the trial length unduly the contractor may construct joints at more frequent joint intervals than the normal spacing required in contract specific appendix num .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials v if there are deficiencies in the first expansion joint that is constructed as a trial the next expansion joint shall be a trial joint .
should this also be deficient further trial expansion joints shall be made as part of a trial length .
deficient expansion joints shall not form part of the permanent works .
num position of reinforcement and tie bars vi compliance with clause num for the position of steel reinforcement and clause num for the position and alignment of tie bars shall be checked by drilling additional cores from the slab unless they can be determined from cores taken for density assessment .
num completion of trial num num the contractor shall not proceed with normal working unless the trial length complies with the specification and any earlier defective trial lengths have been removed unless they can be remedied to comply with the specification .
num num after satisfactory completion of the trial length the constituent materials concrete proportions plant equipment and construction methods shall not thereafter be changed except for normal adjustments and maintenance of plant unless the contractor lays a further trial length as described in this clause to demonstrate that the changes will not adversely affect the permanent works or agrees the changes with the overseeing organisation .
num rejection and further trials num num trial lengths which do not comply with the specification with the exception of areas within the pavement surface which can be remedied in accordance with clause num shall be removed and the contractor shall construct a further trial length .
num num texturing of hardened concrete num num worn rain damaged or inadequately textured surface slabs shall be macrotextured by sawing grooves in the hardened concrete surface at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the pavement with machines using diamond or other abrasive cutting discs .
num num grooves shall be irregularly spaced and shall be not less than num mm and not more than num mm wide .
the sequence of distances between groove centres in mm shall be num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
a tolerance of num mm shall be allowed on each of the spacings .
the minimum width of grooving head shall be num mm and a head not providing a complete sequence of spacings shall use the number of spacings appropriate to its width commencing at the start of the sequence .
num num groove depths shall be measured using a tyre tread depth gauge and measurements shall be taken as follows i at num locations at least num m apart along a diagonal line across a lane width between points num m apart longitudinally .
no measurement shall be taken within num mm of the longitudinal edge of a slab .
ii at each of the num locations the depth of num adjacent grooves shall be measured .
iii where a grooved area is less than num m in length the locations where measurements are taken shall be as i but the number shall be proportional to the requirements for num m. iv the average of each set of num measurements shall be not less than num mm nor greater than num mm .
num num slurry from the sawing process shall be prevented from flowing into joints drains or into lanes being used by traffic and all resultant debris from the grooving shall be removed .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num wet lean concrete num grades and constituents num num the strength for wet lean concrete shall be as described in clause num with the following constituents i cements as described in subclause num and watercement ratio as described in subclause num ii aggregate shall be in accordance with subclause num .
num consistence workability num num consistence shall comply with clause num .
num placing num num wet lean concrete shall be spread uniformly without segregation and without varying degrees of precompaction .
the concrete shall be struck off to a level so that the surcharge is sufficient to ensure that after compaction the surface is at the required level .
num compaction num num the spread wet lean concrete shall be compacted using internal or external vibration or a combination of both to meet the required density .
compaction and finishing to level shall be completed within the times given in table num .
num joints num num at transverse and longitudinal construction joints between two separately constructed slabs the previously laid slab end or edge shall present a vertical face before construction of subsequent slabs .
num num longitudinal joints in wet lean concrete shall be staggered by at least num mm from the position of longitudinal joints in any superimposed concrete slab and by numm for transverse joints .
num curing num num curing of wet lean concrete shall comply with bs en num as appropriate .
num sampling for testing num num sampling shall be as specified in clause num .
num density num num the density shall be determined as required in clause num .
num strength num num the strength shall be determined as in clause num .
num trial concrete mixes num num trial concrete mixes shall conform with bs num for designed concretes for strength class cnum and above or ccnum and above unless recent data relating entirely to the proposed concrete satisfies the requirements of the specification .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num trial length num num at least num days before the start of the main wet lean concrete works a trial length of at least num m for mechanised construction and num m for handguided methods shall be constructed .
the trial length shall be laid to assess the suitability of the proposed material plant equipment and construction methods to meet the requirements of the specification .
the main construction in the permanent works shall not start unless the trial length complies with the specification .
if any trial length does not conform to the specification another trial length shall be constructed .
trial lengths not complying shall be removed unless they can be rectified to comply with the specification .
num num after satisfactory completion of the trial the material plant equipment and construction methods shall not be changed unless the contractor lays a further trial length to assess the suitability of the proposed changes or agrees the changes with the overseeing organisation .
num surface finish num num the surface of the wet lean concrete after compaction and finishing and before overlaying shall be free from ridges loose material pot holes ruts or other defects .
the surface macrotexture shall comply with subclause num .
num num measurement of macrotexture depth volumetric patch technique num num the macrotexture depth of the road surface will be determined using the method described and the equipment specified in bs en num .
num num thin bonded repairs num materials num num cement mortar shall be used for depths less than num mm and fine concrete for greater depths .
resin mortar may only be used for small patch repairs less than num metre long and less than num mm in depth and where insufficient time for adequate curing of a cementitious cement mortar exists .
num num the cements aggregates admixtures and water shall comply with clause num .
the sand ie fine aggregate for mortars or fine concrete shall be within the limits of num cp num mp num mp or num fp of bs en num .
coarse aggregate for fine concrete shall be num single sized aggregate complying with bs en num .
all aggregates shall have the same thermal properties as the aggregate in the original concrete and match other properties as closely as possible .
filler and aggregate for resin mortars shall be prepacked in the correct proportions and mixed with the resin all in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num num the proportions of cement admixtures additives to water and aggregates shall be sufficient to provide high early strength mortar or fine concrete or concrete complying with clauses num num and num .
for cement mortar the sand ie fine aggregate to cement ratio shall not be greater than num .
for resin mortar the sand content shall be in accordance with the manufacturers requirements in the range between num and num to num of resin .
high early strength concrete shall be able to achieve num nmm in less than num hours .
for thin bonded repairs using high early strength concrete less than num mm depth air entrainment is not required .
num procedure num num mark out the area to be rectified parallel and perpendicular to the axis of the road .
cut a groove around the perimeter at least num mm deep without overcutting into the adjacent slab .
carefully cut out the concrete to the required depth with a vertical face without undercutting the adjacent slab .
num num if a joint is included in the area to be rectified fix a groove former or cork seal along the line of the joint by chasing out a groove .
for joints on the perimeter fix the groove former or cork seal by adhesive to the adjacent slab .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num for cementitious repairs wet the area of the patch .
keep it wet until the repair material is ready to be placed .
remove excess water prime the surfaces with cement grout or bonding agent spread the repair material immediately before the primed surface is dry with sufficient surcharge .
thoroughly compact it by vibration ensuring full compaction at the edges and corners .
num num retexture the surface to match the surrounding concrete and cure in accordance with clause num .
num num for resin mortar repairs ensure the area is dry before application of the primer .
place the repair material within the time allowed by the manufacturer for the primer and compact it well into the edges to the patch .
apply a brush texture to match the original .
num num full depth repairs and reinstatements num general num num full depth repairs shall be repairs which will require full depth reinstatement of the concrete slab in accordance with this clause to the extent instructed by the overseeing organisation which repairs may also require reinstatement of subbase .
full width repairs shall be repairs over the full width of a bay or bays .
part width repairs shall be repairs over part of the width of a bay or bays .
a bay shall be that portion of the concrete pavement bounded by adjacent longitudinal and transverse joints .
num num the area of concrete to be removed shall be marked out perpendicular to and parallel to the axis of the road .
for continuously reinforced concrete slabs crcp or crcb the edge of the repair shall be not less than num m from the nearest crack and not less than num m from a transverse construction joint at ground beam anchorages .
where this and the provisions of subclause num of this clause would otherwise require a longitudinal repair joint within num m of the existing longitudinal joint or edge the repair shall be extended to align with that longitudinal joint or edge .
num part width repairs num num providing all the following criteria are met part width repairs may be carried out in accordance with subclause num of this clause i the transverse width of the repair shall not exceed num of the width of the slab under repair and ii the longitudinal joint which would be formed by the repair shall not occur within the wheeltrack and iii the minimum transverse width of the repair shall not be less than num m. if these criteria and those in subclause num of this clause can not be met a fullwidth repair shall be made in accordance with this clause .
num full width repairs num num for full width repairs the following criteria shall apply unless otherwise specified in contract specific appendix num i repair lengths which do not replace an existing transverse joint shall be constructed with two transverse contraction joints and the longitudinal joint shall have tie bars in repair lengths which are greater than num metre .
ii repair lengths which replace a single existing transverse joint shall be constructed with two transverse joints one expansion and one contraction .
the new expansion joint shall be formed at the end which will have the shortest longitudinal distance between this joint and the joint in the adjacent lanes .
the longitudinal joints between the existing joints and the new expansion joint shall be constructed without tie bars and shall have num mm thick compressible foam within the joint for the full depth of the concrete slab .
the longitudinal joint between the new contraction joint and the joint in the adjacent bays shall be constructed with tie bars where the exposed length so permits .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials iii repair lengths which replace more than one existing transverse joint shall be constructed with transverse joints to match expansion and contraction joints in the adjacent bays .
where the repair length does not replace an existing expansion joint one end joint shall be formed as an expansion joint .
except for the end joints all transverse joints shall be formed to coincide with the existing transverse joints .
where one end joint is an expansion joint the longitudinal joints between the existing joints and the new expansion joint shall be constructed without tie bars and shall have num mm thick compressible foam within the joint for the full depth of the concrete slab .
all other longitudinal joints shall be constructed with tie bars .
num repair work num num a groove of num mm nominal depth but less than the depth of any reinforcement shall be sawn around the perimeter .
for jointed slabs the sawcut shall be full depth to provide the face for a new joint .
there shall be no overcutting into the adjacent slab .
additional cuts within the repair area may be made to ease removal of the redundant portion of the slab .
at internal corners full depth holes across the corners at the limits of the saw cuts shall be drilled prior to breaking out .
the line of cut shall not vary by more than num mm throughout its length from the set out line .
all sawn edges shall be perpendicular or parallel to the sides and surfaces of the slab .
when sawing operations have been completed and before any other operations are commenced the surface of the carriageway shall be thoroughly cleaned of the slurry produced by sawing and of any other detritus .
num num the concrete shall be carefully broken out without undercutting the slab or damaging adjoining slabs .
if reinforcement has to be removed sufficient shall be left for a lap length except where a dowelled joint is being made .
reinforcement shall not be bent and subsequently straightened .
slurry from sawing slab breaking repair materials and other debris shall be prevented from entering joints and grooves in adjacent areas .
num num when a new joint is required holes shall be drilled of the appropriate size and depth for dowels or tie bars according to the type of joint .
these holes shall be thoroughly cleaned of debris and dust .
this shall include but not be limited to the use of oilfree compressed air at a pressure of not less than num nmmnum .
dowels and tie bars shall comply with the requirements of clauses num and num respectively .
epoxy mortar shall be to the manufacturers recommendation for this specific application .
the holes shall be filled with epoxy mortar the mortar being injected to the rear of the hole to avoid air entrapment .
the dowel bars shall be inserted into the holes before the initial set of the mortar .
if cartridges of epoxy mortar are used they shall be inserted into each hole the dowel bar inserted through the cartridges and rotated for num minute to ensure that the epoxy mortar is well mixed .
after insertion the dowels and tie bars shall be within the specified tolerances for alignment .
where repairs straddle a movement joint with an adjacent slab tie bars shall be omitted and the joint between the slabs debonded to ensure that movement patterns are not restricted .
where contract specific appendix num or the drawings so require full bay replacement shall be made and this may require an expansion joint or a contraction joint to be provided at the ends of the replaced bay .
num num expansion joint filler shall be fixed to one of the transverse joints .
in the other transverse joint contraction joint groove forming strips or cork seal shall be fixed to the edges of the adjacent concrete .
if the repair is adjacent to another slab bond between the two slabs shall be prevented by providing full depth num mm thick compressible foam strips to clause num along the longitudinal joint between them .
num num the subbase layer and any separation membrane shall be reinstated as necessary to comply with series num and clause num respectively .
defective subbase material shall be removed and the subbase reinstated to the correct level with the material described in contract specific appendix num .
reinstatement of the subbase shall be completed before new dowel and tie bars are fixed at the joints .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num new reinforcement shall be lapped and welded or tied .
the length of tied laps shall be num bar diameters or num mm whichever is the greater for longitudinal bars and num mm for transverse bars .
welded laps shall be num mm minimum length unless a buttweld process has been permitted in contract specific appendix num .
num num the reinstated concrete shall be placed spread compacted and finished as specified in clause num .
particular care shall be taken to ensure full compaction at the edges .
the concrete shall be normal or high early strength pavement concrete complying with clauses num to num and shall achieve the required characteristic strength prior to opening to traffic .
num crack repairs num num stitched crack repairs shall be either type num staple tie bar repair type num diagonal tie bar repair as described in contract specific appendix num and compliant with subclauses num and num of this clause .
the extent of crack repairs shall be determined by inspection after the surface has been cleaned .
num num for type num crack repairs slots num num mm wide by num mm long at num mm centres and at right angles to the line of the crack shall be chased out to a depth such that when bedded the tie bars lie between num and num of the depth of the slab below the surface .
holes of num mm num mm diameter by num mm deep shall be drilled at each end of the slot and the slots cleaned out using oil free compressed air .
when in a dry state the slots shall be primed and the staple tie bars placed into beds of epoxy mortar and covered to a minimum depth of num mm with the same material .
the sides of the slots shall be cleaned of loose material and the slots filled with thoroughly compacted epoxy or cementitious mortar as described in contract specific appendix num .
after curing a groove shall be sawn along the line of the crack and sealed in accordance with clause num .
num num for type num crack repairs drilling points shall be marked out at a distance from the crack equivalent to the depth of the slab at num mm intervals along the crack with alternate points on opposite sides of the crack .
holes of num mm minimum diameter shall be drilled at right angles to the crack and at approximately num to the surface of the slab to a depth which allows num mm cover at the bottom of the slab .
these holes shall be thoroughly cleaned of debris and dust .
num mm diameter grade num deformed steel tie bars shall be notched at a point which will ultimately be num mm below the slab surface when the bars are fully inserted into the hole .
each hole shall be filled with epoxy mortar and its quantity adjusted to ensure that when the tie bar is fully inserted the level of the mortar is up to a point which is num mm below the notch on the tie bar .
such adjustment of the epoxy mortar and the final insertion of the tie bar shall be done rapidly to ensure its completion before the initial set of the mortar .
after the epoxy mortar has set the length of tie bar above the notch shall be broken off .
once all these bars have been broken off the tops of all these holes shall be filled with epoxy mortar .
if cartridges of epoxy mortar are used the bars shall be inserted through the cartridges and rotated for num minute to ensure that the adhesive is well mixed .
num joint grooves and seals num num longitudinal joint grooves shall be recut where directed in contract specific appendix num using the following procedure .
the longitudinal joint shall be saw cut to a nominal width of num mm to encompass the existing joint and to sufficient depth to remove the existing sealant approximately num mm deep .
where existing sealant or traces thereof can not be removed within the num mm saw cuts the groove shall be widened to enable all existing sealant to be removed .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials the groove sides shall be vertical and the horizontal alignment of the groove shall be straight and parallel to the edge of the slab .
the concrete and sealant shall be removed between the saw cuts without damaging the sides of the groove .
the base of the groove shall be formed to a uniform profile suitable for the application of debonding tape or caulking material .
any residual traces of sealant or detritus shall be removed from the groove and the groove prepared for sealing in accordance with clause num .
num num transverse joint grooves shall be recut where directed in contract specific appendix num using the following procedure .
the transverse joint shall be saw cut to form a groove to satisfy the dimension of applied joint seals as specified in table num allowing for debonding tape or any necessary caulking material of at least num mm uncompacted depth and to encompass the existing joint .
the groove sides shall be vertical and the horizontal alignment of the groove shall be straight and parallel to the line of the joint .
the concrete and sealant shall be removed between the saw cuts without damaging the sides of the groove .
the base of the groove shall be formed in accordance with clause num .
any residual traces of sealant or detritus shall be removed from the groove and the groove prepared for sealing in accordance with clause num .
num num unless cork sealants complying with clause num have been used the joints shall be sealed in accordance with clause num .
num num bay replacement num num for the replacement of concrete pavement bays the contractor shall undertake the work listed in this clause .
num num make a vertical saw cut around the perimeter of the repair through the full depth of the slab taking care to ensure that saw cuts do not extend into the adjacent bays .
further saw cuts may be made to enable the concrete to be removed in convenient pieces .
num num carefully break out and remove the existing concrete from within the repair area without damaging the remaining slab and with the minimum amount of damage to the subbase .
num num reinstate or regulate the subbase as necessary .
num num drill for and fix new dowel and tie bars at transverse and longitudinal joints .
num num provide new separation layer .
num num position reinforcement if required .
num num stick groove forming strips along the top edges of the existing slab .
num num place spread compact and finish pavement quality concrete in accordance with the requirements of this series and the contract specific appendices flush with the surface of the adjacent slab and to within a tolerance of nummm and with a difference of not more than nummm between the surface of the repair and a numm straight edge .
num num apply a wire brushed surface texture as specified in clause num and cure immediately by the application of a sprayed resin based aluminized curing compound .
num num seal joints as specified in clause num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num slab lifting using space frames num num for concrete pavement slab lifting using space frames the contractor shall undertake the work listed in this clause .
num num make a full depth saw cut along the longitudinal joint or joints to separate the bays that are to be raised from the adjacent slab .
num num drill nummm diameter lifting holes into the bay at positions to suit the lifting frame and to straddle joints or cracks .
num num drill nummm to nummm diameter holes through the slab and bound subbase on a numm x numm grid for grout injection .
num num position hydraulically operated lifting frames transversely astride the bay with lifting bolts over the lifting holes .
num num fix threaded female sleeves into the lifting holes with resin grout or mortar .
ensure the sockets remain vertical during setting of the mortar .
num num screw the lifting bolts into threaded sleeves at the lifting points .
num num establish a level reference datum across the bay that is to be raised .
num num slowly raise the bay by controlled operation of the hydraulic jack at each corner of the lifting frames in sequence for a few millimetres .
num num start grout injection using a portland cementpfa dry mix in the ratio of num to num using the pressure grouting system for larger voids or the vacuum grouting system for small voids see procedure for pressure or vacuum grouting .
num num lift and grout in stages until the correct level is reached or for a maximum lift of nummm .
if more than a nummm lift is needed raise adjacent areas along the carriageway before returning to complete the process to the required level .
num num repeat the process for adjacent lanes .
num num clean out the injection and lifting holes and plug them with a cementitious mortar .
remove any excess grout or dry material .
num num for long lengths of more than numm where the longitudinal joint tiebars have been cut use either of the crack stitching methods to tie the joint with a minimum of num bars at nummm centres placed in the centre of each unreinforced slab .
the spacing of bars in reinforced slabs shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation for each site .
num num pressure grouting num num for pressure grouting the contractor shall undertake the work listed in this clause .
num num avoiding services drill nummm to nummm diameter grout injection holes through the slab and any bound subbase on a numm x numm grid extending over the whole area of the void under the slab .
num num remove any water from the void by blowing with compressed air at each end of the grout holes in sequence working progressively across and along the bay down crossfalls and longitudinal gradients .
num num inject fluid grout or dry mix mortar under pressure at each of the grout holes in sequence working progressively across and along each bay .
grouting shall continue at each hole until refusal .
temporarily plug adjacent holes when excess grout or plumes of dry mortar emanate from them .
num num upon completion of the pressure grouting process any surplus grout shall be removed from the surface of the slab and the holes cleaned out and made good with resin or cementitious mortar .
any resin grout which can not be removed from the surface of the slab may be blinded with calcined bauxite if this can be done before the grout has gelled .
num num the appropriate minimum curing period shall elapse before the carriageway is trafficked .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num vacuum grouting num num for vacuum grouting the contractor shall undertake the work listed in this clause using the layout shown in figure num .
num num avoiding services drill nummm to nummm diameter grout injection holes through the slab and any bound subbase on a numm x numm grid extending over the whole area of the void under the slab .
num num temporarily plug the holes and sweep the surface clear of all debris .
num num remove the temporary plugs and place vacuum channels in position .
num num place clear flexible plastic sheeting over the area to be grouted and on top of the vacuum channels .
num num effectively seal around the vacuum and injection holes and around manholes to gully openings to prevent ingress of air into the voids or grout into the services .
num num apply a vacuum to holes at edge of treatment area and draw off any water from the void beneath the slab .
num num with the vacuum applied puncture the plastic sheeting at the injection holes pour grout into them in the required sequence and continue the process until the grout ceases to be drawn into the void .
if grout begins to be drawn up through any of the vacuum points that hole should be plugged to avoid grout flowing on to the surface of the slab .
num num upon completion of the vacuum process any surplus grout shall be removed from the surface of the slab and the holes cleaned out and made good with resin or cementitious mortar .
any resin grout which can not be removed from the surface of the slab may be blinded with calcined bauxite if this can be done before the grout has gelled .
num num the appropriate minimum curing period shall elapse before the carriageway is trafficked .
figure num vacuum grouting diagram amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num continuously reinforced slabs and roadbases full depth repair num num for full depth repairs of continuously reinforced slabs and road bases the contractor shall undertake the work listed in this clause .
num num mark out a square or rectangular area encompassing the defect .
the edges of the repair shall be at least numm from the nearest transverse crack and numm from any transverse construction joint .
the minimum length of repair shall be numm .
num num saw a groove around the perimeter of the repair not more than nummm deep and to a depth less than that of the reinforcement .
particular care shall be taken to ensure that the reinforcement is not cut at the edge of the repair .
num num carefully break out the defective concrete in order to form a sound vertical edge to the repair care being taken to limit damage to and bending of the reinforcement to a minimum .
should it become necessary to cut the reinforcement in order to remove the concrete the cut must be made at least one lap away from the edge .
bars made of high yield steel shall not be bent and subsequently straightened .
num num reinstate the subbase as necessary .
num num lap and tie or weld in any new or additional reinforcement that may be required to replace that which has been damaged or removed .
the length of tied laps shall be at least num bar diameters or nummm whichever is the greater for longitudinal bars and nummm for transverse bars .
the minimum length of any welded lap shall be nummm .
num num erect side forms where necessary .
num num stick groove forming strips or cork seals along the top edges of the surrounding slab .
num num clean out the area with compressed air and thoroughly dampen the subbase and edges of the repair .
num num place and evenly spread high early strength pavement quality concrete to the appropriate surcharge compact using internal and surface vibration and finish flush with the surface of the adjacent slab and to within a tolerance nummm and with a difference of not more than nummm between the surface of the repair and a numm straight edge .
particular care shall be taken to ensure thorough compaction around the reinforcement and the edges of the repair .
num num apply a wire brushed surface texture or texture to match surrounding pavement surface and cure immediately by the application of resin based aluminized curing compound .
num num seal joints as specified in clause num .
num num summary of rates for sampling and testing concrete for pavement layers num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num table num summarises the minimum rates of sampling and testing of specimens to the specification .
num num samples for testing shall be taken at the point of placing or from the relevant pavement layer .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials table num num rates for sampling and testing concrete for pavement layers clause test rate the greater number shall be used num air content a main slab num per num m or num per day b slabs less than num m num per num m length or num per day num density a main slab and trial length a minimum of num cores at a rate of num core per num m num strength a main slab num cores for areas up to num m and num additional core per further num m b trial length at least num cores half to be tested num days and half at num days num consistence a main slab initial num mnum subsequently num samples num per num mnum or num per production day b slabs less than num mnum num samples in the first num mnum then num more num hot or cold applied joint sealants penetration test one sample per num m joint or at least one per day num inspection of dowel alignment a main slab num joint per num m length or num joint per num days whichever is the sooner b slabs less than num m in length at a rate of one joint for up to each num joints c trial lengths num consecutive joints if one defective inspect next num consecutive joints num macrotexture depth each lane width one within num m of commencement of paving and thereafter at least one set of num measurements per days work .
num wet lean concrete as in clause num and num in situ density a minimum of num cores at a rate of num core per num mnum strength a main slab num cores for areas up to num mnum and num additional core per further num mnum b trial length at least num cores half to be tested at num days and half at num days num to num num not used num num foamed concrete num num foamed concrete used in reinstatements shall comply with the requirements of the specification for the reinstatement of openings in highways issued by the highway authorities and utilities committee .
num num foamed concrete used for backfilling excavations including trench reinstatement under road pavements shall have the following compressive strengths i a minimum cube compressive strength of num nmmnum at an age of num days .
ii a maximum cube compressive strength of num nmmnum at an age of num days .
num the compressive strength shall be determined by testing foamed concrete cubes which have been made in accordance with bs en num except that the foamed concrete shall be placed in the mould without any tamping or vibration other than gently rocking the mould on a firm base .
the test cubes shall be cured in accordance with bs en num and tested for compressive strength in accordance with bs en num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num num all aggregate used in foamed concrete shall pass a num mm sieve and shall comply with the mp and fp grading limits given in bs en num .
larger size aggregate may be used provided it can be shown to be practicable .
num num after placing foamed concrete shall not be tamped or otherwise compacted .
num num reinstatement of the subbase and base over the foamed concrete shall not be carried out until the foamed concrete has attained sufficient strength to allow compaction of the subbase and base material .
num num pavements with an exposed aggregate concrete surface num general num num pavements with an exposed aggregate concrete surface shall comply with all the requirements of this series except where otherwise specified in this clause .
num num the contractor shall complete contract specific appendix num and submit this with his tender documents .
if after acceptance the contractor wishes to change the proposals contained in contract specific appendix num this change shall only be with the consent of the overseeing organisation .
num num the concrete slab shall be laid in either a single layer or in two layers as stated in contract specific appendix num .
if laid in two layers the surface layer shall be laid monolithically with the lower layer .
num num the contractor shall carry out trials as specified in subclauses num to num of this clause to demonstrate that the materials concrete proportions and methods for exposing the aggregate will meet the requirements of this clause .
num quality of concrete in the slab num num the surface layer concrete shall comply with the following requirements i the surface layer shall be not less than num mm thick .
the coarse aggregate shall comply with the size requirements of contract specific appendix num. ii for num mm coarse aggregate or num mm coarse aggregate as required in contract specific appendix num the amount of aggregate retained on the num mm sieve and num mm sieve respectively shall not exceed num by mass .
the aggregate passing the num mm sieve and num mm sieve respectively shall not exceed num by mass .
iii the fine aggregate grading shall comply with the num fp or num fp grading in bs en num except that not less than num of the mass of the material shall pass the num mm sieve .
iv the coarse aggregate shall comprise at least num by mass of the oven dry constituents of the concrete .
v the polished stone value psv and the aggregate abrasion value aav of the coarse aggregate determined in accordance with bs en num shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
the category of flakiness index of the aggregate is finum .
vi hardness and durability of the coarse aggregate shall be as described in subclause num. vii the type of cement used in the concrete shall be limited to class numnnumr portland cement cem i complying with bs en num .
the minimum cement content of the concrete shall be num kgm and the maximum free watercement ratio shall be num. viii the air content density and strength requirements shall be as required in clauses num num and num respectively .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num general construction requirements num num the concrete paving equipment shall comply with contract specific appendix num as completed by the contractor and submitted at tender stage for approval by the overseeing organisation before the work commences .
the general construction requirements shall be in accordance with the requirements of this series except where otherwise stated in this clause i the concrete carriageway paving operation shall be undertaken as not less than a single lane width of construction using either slipform paving machines or fixed form paving machines .
ii the concrete surface layer shall be fed spread compacted regulated and finished using equipment with elements to obtain the required uniform distribution and bonded embedment of the selected aggregate in the finished road surface .
iii the spread concrete shall be compacted in such a manner that base layer concrete is not drawn into the surfacing and selected aggregate is uniformly present in the finished road surface .
iv the surface layer shall be compacted and shaped to line and level by a combination of either internal vibration and fixed conforming plate or vibrating conforming plate .
v the final regulation of the surface layer shall be provided by a transverse finishing screed in advance of a longitudinal oscillating float in accordance with clause num travelling across the slab before the application of a retarder complying with bs en num .
num finished surface requirements num num the finished surface of the pavement shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
where a pavement area does not comply with the specification for regularity surface tolerance thickness material properties or compaction or contains surface depressions the full extent of the surface which does not comply with the specification shall be rectified by cutting out the full depth of the slab .
it shall be replaced with a new slab complying with the procedures set out in clause num to the extent required to obtain compliance with the specification .
num production of an exposed aggregate surface num num in order to obtain a suitable exposed aggregate surface the main requirement shall be the removal of the surface mortar from the top of the slab to produce an exposed aggregate finish .
this objective may be achieved by the application of a suitable cement set retarder which is sprayed on the surface of the fresh concrete immediately after it has been levelled and finished .
retarded mortar shall be removed by wet or dry brushing as stated in contract specific appendix num generally no sooner than when the surface concrete has reached a maturity of num hours at numc or after a suitable interval determined by trial to achieve the requirements of subclause num of this clause .
num retarder num num the composition and viscosity of the retarder shall be such that it can be spread at an adequate and uniform rate over the surface of the concrete slab in order to ensure adequate aggregate exposure during the subsequent brushing operation .
num num the retarder shall contain a pigment in sufficient quantity to give an even uniform colour after it has been sprayed on to the slab surface .
the pigment shall be fully degraded by exposure to ultraviolet light without leaving any residue that is detrimental to the surface of the concrete .
num num the chemical composition of the retarder and of the curing compound shall be such that they do not react adversely following the application of the curing compound to the exposed aggregate surface .
num num the contractor shall use the retarder which he has nominated in contract specific appendix num .
this shall be of a type and composition to satisfy the requirements of this clause .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num application of the retarder num num the retarder shall be spread evenly on to the surface of the wet concrete slab as soon as practicable after the surface layer has been levelled and finished by a spray bar over the full width of the slab in one pass .
to achieve this uniformity of spread the spraying system shall consist of a spray bar provided with nozzles mounted on a machine spanning the slab .
temporary works materials and equipment shall be chosen in order to permit inspection to ensure adequate coverage of retarder immediately after spraying and before protection of the surface .
num num before commencing work the level of the spray bar the rate of delivery of the retarder from the nozzles of the spray bar and the forward speed of the spraying machine shall be adjusted to achieve the required rate of spread .
means shall be provided and steps shall be taken to avoid excess retarder flowing on the surface of the slab .
num num backup spraying equipment shall be available on the site at all times for use in case of a breakdown of the spraying machine .
num protection of the surface after the application of the retarder num num the finished surface of the pavement concrete after application of retarder shall be protected against precipitation moisture loss contamination and dispersal of the retarder by air movements as stated in contract specific appendix num .
this protection shall be applied immediately after the application of the retarder .
num num where waterproof sheeting is used it shall be laid onto the surface of the concrete immediately after the retarder has been sprayed .
it shall be retained in position until immediately prior to exposing of the aggregate .
num num the protection system shall not adversely affect either the finish the line or the level of the concrete surface or the even distribution of the retarder in any way .
where sheeting is used any air bubbling or blistering shall be prevented .
num exposing the aggregate surface num num brushing equipment shall be used to expose the concrete surface aggregate .
where the brushing equipment runs on the slab the concrete shall have gained sufficient strength to avoid any damage to the concrete .
num num removal of the protection system shall take place as brushing proceeds .
if waterproof sheeting is used as a protection system it shall be maintained in position until immediately in advance of the brushing operation .
num num the contractor shall complete the process of exposing the aggregate before the retarder becomes ineffective .
failure to do so shall entail the remedial measures specified in subclauses num and num of this clause .
num brushing system num num sufficient brushing capability shall always be maintained on site to complete the exposure of the aggregate before the retarder becomes ineffective .
an adequate backup brushing facility shall be available on the site at all times for use in case of a breakdown of the brushing equipment .
num num the brushing equipment nominated by the contractor in contract specific appendix num shall be used to produce an even macrotexture on the surface of the slab .
brushing shall be carried out in the longitudinal direction of the concrete slab .
num num the brushing equipment shall be capable of maintaining an adequate brush rotational speed which in conjunction with the forward working speed is sufficient to remove the surface mortar .
adequate dust suppression and collection measures shall be in operation at all times .
num num when complying with the requirements of subclause num of this clause the wheels of any brushing equipment which may run on the slab shall be fitted with tyres with a shallow tread pattern and a low inflation pressure and be sufficiently wide to avoid damage to the concrete .
num amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials num protection of the surface layer after exposure of the aggregate num num within one hour of completing exposure of the aggregate the surface shall be dampened with water .
a curing compound shall be applied to the entire exposed aggregate surface of the slab in accordance with clause num .
in wet weather the curing compound shall be applied as soon as practicable after the rain stops .
the surface may alternatively be covered by hessian provided it is maintained in a wet condition at all times during the curing period of the concrete .
num surface macrotexture depth and remedial measures num num the texture depth of the surface of the concrete shall be measured using a volumetric patch technique described in bs en num .
the average macrotexture depth of each num m section of carriageway lane or each carriageway lane where less than num m shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
any individual result shall be neither greater than the maximum nor be less than the minimum value of macrotexture depth stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num during brushing initial interim spot check measurements of the surface macrotexture depth shall be made as soon as it is considered that the required texture depth has been reached .
this shall continue until the specified macrotexture depth has been achieved .
num num in the event that it is not possible to achieve the specified minimum macrotexture depth by further exposure the contractor shall treat the surface in accordance with clause num to achieve the specified macrotexture depth .
this treatment shall not be applied until the concrete has reached an age of num days and shall not affect the requirements of subclauses num to num and num to num .
num num failure to achieve a satisfactory minimum macrotexture depth by mechanical means shall result in removal of the full thickness of the slab to the extent required to permit reconstruction of the slab in accordance with the specification .
where the maximum macrotexture depth is exceeded suitable remedial measures shall be employed .
num preliminary trials num num the contractor shall carry out preliminary trials to demonstrate to the overseeing organisation not less than one month prior to the commencement of the trial length referred to in subclauses num to num of this clause the materials concrete proportions and methods for achieving the macrotexture depth requirements defined in contract specific appendix num .
num num preliminary trial panels shall be constructed offline incorporating a top surface of exposed aggregate concrete similar to that specified for the permanent works .
these panels shall be num m long and not less than num mm deep and the maximum intended paving width .
they shall be used to enable the contractor to determine the required application rate of the retarder and the amount of brushing required to achieve the specified macrotexture depth .
num num the trial panels may alternatively be constructed onsite but in this case they may only form part of the permanent works if they meet all the requirements of the specification otherwise they shall be removed after they have served their purpose .
num num the surface macrotexture depth shall be determined by volumetric patch technique at approximately num m spacings along a diagonal line across each trial panel and shall follow the procedure described in bs en num .
num num the average value of each set of num individual measurements shall be taken as the resulting macrotexture depth which shall be assessed against the specification .
num num the materials including all the aggregates plant and equipment used in the preliminary trials shall be equivalent to that which will be used in the trial length .
amendment february num volume num series num specification for highway works road pavements concrete materials numf num trial length num num in addition to the requirements of clause num the macrotexture depth shall be tested for compliance in accordance with subclauses num and num of this clause .
num num macrotexture depth shall be assessed by the volumetric patch technique for each num m length of the trial length and for each lane and shall follow the procedure in bs en num .
num num during the construction of the trial length spot checks shall be made as soon as it is considered that the required macrotexture depth has been reached .
should the texture depth be found to be inadequate further exposure of the aggregate shall be undertaken until the specified macrotexture depth has been achieved .
where the macrotexture depth is not achieved and the trial was intended to form part of the running surface of the permanent works the remedial measures described in subclauses num and num of this clause shall apply .
num num weather conditions for laying of cementitious materials num num road pavement materials in a frozen condition shall not be incorporated in the works but may be used if acceptable when thawed .
num num road pavement materials shall not be laid on any surface which is frozen or covered with ice .
num num the temperature of concrete in any pavement layer shall not be less than numc at the point of delivery .
these materials shall not be laid when the air temperature falls below numc and laying shall not be resumed until the rising air temperature reaches numc unless all surfaces of the concrete slabs are protected by thermal insulation blankets laid immediately after placing and finishing the concrete .
the insulation shall be placed before the temperature of the concrete surface has dropped below numc and shall be retained for a minimum of num days or until the concrete is assessed to have reached num of the specified characteristic compressive strength provided the air temperature is above numc and rising at that time .
thermal insulation blankets shall be closed cell polyethylene foam sheets minimum num mm thick with a u value of num wattsm c or k value of num wattsm kelvin or suitable material with an equivalent or lower thermal conductivity .
they shall be sufficiently robust and capable of being held in place against variations in wind and weather conditions for the necessary curing time .
num to num num not used num num use of surfaces by traffic and construction plant num num construction plant and traffic used on pavements under construction shall be suitable in relation to the material condition and thickness of the courses it traverses so that damage is not caused to the subgrade or the pavement courses already constructed .
the wheels or tracks of plant moving over the various pavement courses shall be kept free from deleterious materials .
num num concrete slabs may be used by traffic when the cube compressive strength is assessed to have reached num nmmnum for pavement surface slabs or num nmmnum for bases with asphalt surfacing .
the method of assessing the time when this strength is reached shall be as described in clause num .
num num in the absence of test data establishing compliance with subclause num of this clause no vehicle with an axle loading greater than num tonnes shall run on concrete slabs within a period of num days after placing the concrete .
vehicles with rubber tyres with an axle loading less than num tonnes or wheels or tracks of concreting plant shall not use any part of a newly constructed pavement within num days .
the above periods before traffic may run on the pavement shall be increased if the num day cube strength is below that required in the specification .
these periods shall be extended by one day for each night on which the temperature of the layer falls to numc or below .
manual of contract documents for highway works volume num the specification for highway works amendment february num num series num kerbs footways and paved areas contents clause title page num num general num num precast concrete kerbs channels edgings and quadrants num num num insitu asphalt kerbs num num num freestanding insitu concrete kerbs channels and edge details num num num footways and paved areas precast concrete flags and natural stone slabs num num num footways and paved areas flexible surfacing num num num footways and paved areas insitu concrete num num footways and paved areas concrete block paving num num footways and paved areas clay pavers num num num grass concrete paving num num num access steps num national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland clause title page numni precast concrete kerbs channels edgings and quadrants nnumf denotes a clause or sample appendix which has a substitute national clause or sample appendix for one or more of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales or northern ireland .
volume num series num specification for highway works kerbs footways and paved areas amendment february num num kerbs footways and paved areas num num general num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num precast concrete kerbs channels edgings and quadrants num num except where otherwise specified in this clause precast concrete kerbs channels edgings and quadrants shall conform to bs en num and their dimensions type designations and performances and classes shall be as described in this clause and appendix num .
they shall be laid and bedded in accordance with bs num on a mortar bed on a concrete pavement slab a base or a cnum or stnum in accordance with bs num concrete foundation .
the mortar bed may be omitted if units are bedded onto a concrete slab or foundation that is still plastic .
all precast units laid on a mortar bed or bedded onto plastic concrete shall be backed with a strength class cnum or stnum concrete in accordance with bs num .
num num precast concrete kerbs which are to be bonded to the pavement surface shall conform to bs en num .
the bonding materials and methods of bonding shall be to the manufacturers recommendations for this specific application .
bonded kerbs shall not be less than num mm in width at the base their height shall not exceed their width and they shall be bonded over their full width .
kerbs shall be precast to the dimensions described in appendix num .
the clear distance between unsupported pavement edge and back of kerb shall be not less than num mm .
the bending strength of units shall be established by testing in accordance with bs en num and shall not be less than class num in table num of bs en num .
units shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
they shall be bonded to the pavement surface with a resilient adhesive compatible with the pavement materials and be capable of withstanding a static pushoff load of num knm applied parallel to the pavement surface at right angles to the kerb .
num joints shall be provided in kerbs channels edgings and backing which are laid on or adjacent to a concrete pavement to coincide with the pavement transverse contraction warping and expansion joints .
the joints shall be the same width as the joint sealing grooves of the pavement and shall be caulked and sealed as described in clauses num and num .
concrete foundations to kerbs channels and edgings laid adjacent to a concrete pavement shall be provided with joint filler board complying with clause num placed vertically through the full extent of the concrete foundation at positions coinciding with the pavement joints .
at expansion joints in bridge decks the kerb joints shall be as described in appendix num .
where the details of bridge expansion joints are proposed by the contractor such details shall include the intended treatment at kerbs and footways .
num num for curves of radius num m or less kerbs of appropriate radius shall be used as per bs en num .
num the surface level of units of kerb channel edging and quadrant shall not deviate from the design level num mm nor shall the longitudinal surface regularity deviate more than num mm in num m when checked with a num m straight edge .
horizontal alignment shall comply with clause num .
num num insitu asphalt kerbs num num the materials for and making and placing of insitu asphalt kerbs shall comply with the recommendations of bs num .
in addition a tack coat shall be used and they shall be laid by a machine capable of producing a dense smoothsurfaced kerb to true line and level .
num kerbs shall be constructed to the dimensions described in appendix num .
num vertical expansion and contraction joints shall be formed in kerbs laid on unreinforced concrete slabs and jointed reinforced concrete slabs to coincide with the pavement transverse expansion and contraction joints .
all joints shall be sealed in compliance with clauses num and num .
num num freestanding insitu concrete kerbs channels and edge details num num freestanding insitu concrete kerbs channels and edge details shall comply with the recommendations of bs num except where otherwise specified in this clause .
they shall be laid by a machine capable of forming dense kerbs or surface water channels or edge details with regular sides arrises and chamfers finished to a fine surface free from blow holes and dragging and constructed to the dimensions described in appendix num .
volume num series num specification for highway works kerbs footways and paved areas amendment august num num for kerbs channels and edge details i constructed before the adjacent road pavement surface the surface level adjacent to the future road surface shall not deviate from the design level by more than num mm .
ii constructed after the adjacent road pavement surface the surface level shall not deviate from the finished level of the adjacent pavement surface by more than num mm .
the longitudinal surface regularity shall not deviate by more than num mm in num m when measured with a num m straight edge .
num num the concrete shall be a strength class cnum to bs num and airentrained in accordance with bs num .
coarse aggregate used in kerbs and channels shall be partially crushed or crushed materials .
num the concrete shall be cured by one of the methods specified in clause num unless otherwise described in appendix num .
num num kerbs channels and edge details shall be firmly secured to the surface on which they are laid .
vertical expansion and contraction joints shall be formed in kerbs channels and edge details laid on integral with or adjacent to unreinforced concrete slabs and jointed reinforced concrete slabs to coincide with the pavement transverse expansion warping and contraction joints .
joints may be omitted from channels cast integral with a crcp concrete pavement .
vertical expansion joints at num m spacings and intermediate contraction joints at num m spacings shall be formed in kerbs channels and edge details laid on or adjacent to other types of concrete and flexible pavement .
expansion joints may be replaced by contraction joints and installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions during the summer period from num april until num october .
all joints in kerbs channels and edge details shall be sealed in compliance with clauses num and num .
num num footways and paved areas precast concrete flags and natural stone slabs num num precast concrete flags shall conform to bs en num .
natural stone slabs shall conform to bs en num .
type designations thicknesses and performances and classes shall be as described in appendix num .
num num precast concrete flags and natural stone slabs shall be laid in accordance with bs num to the required cross falls with a bond as described in appendix num and with joints at right angles to the kerb .
flags and natural stone slabs shall be bedded on a layer of mortar not less than num mm and not more than num mm thick .
where permitted in appendix num flags and natural stone slabs num mm x num mm and smaller may be laid on a layer of sand comforming to bs en num designation num mm num mm num mm thick .
joints to be filled with sand conforming to bs en num designation num .
num num on circular work where the radius is num m or less all flags and natural stone slabs shall be radially cut on both edges to the required line .
num num the laying course shall be laid on subbase composed of one of the materials complying with clause num num num num num num or num laid and compacted to clause num or num as appropriate and to the thickness described in appendix num .
num num footways and paved areas flexible surfacing num num flexible surfacing and subbase for footways and paved areas shall be constructed using the materials and layer thicknesses described in appendix num .
num num bituminous mixtures used in flexible surfacing shall be made in accordance with bs en num the detailed requirements from the example specifications in bs pdnum and clause num .
num num flexible surfacing shall be laid and compacted in accordance with bs num .
subbase shall be composed of an unbound mixture conforming to clause num num num num or num or a cement bound granular mixture conforming to clause num num or num .
subbase shall be laid and compacted to clause num or num as appropriate .
num num footways and paved areas insitu concrete num num insitu concrete for footways and paved areas shall be made laid and cured as described in appendix num .
the grade of concrete and surface finish shall be as described in appendix num .
num num insitu concrete shall be laid to true levels and crossfalls and be of the thickness described in appendix num .
num num insitu concrete shall be laid on a subbase composed of one of the materials conforming to clause num num num num num num or num laid and compacted in compliance with clause num or num as appropriate and to the thickness described in appendix num .
volume num series num specification for highway works kerbs footways and paved areas amendment february num num num footways and paved areas concrete block paving num num precast concrete paving blocks shall be chamfered and shall comform to bs en num and the shapes dimensions colours and performances and classess described in appendix num .
num num precast paving blocks shall be laid in accordance with bs num except that the subbase shall be one of the materials permitted in subclause num .
num the layout of blocks and details at edges chamber covers gullies and other openings shall be as described in appendix num .
num footways and paved areas clay pavers num num clay pavers shall conform to bs en num with chamfers .
the shapes dimensions colours and performances and other required classes of clay pavers shall be as described in appendix num .
num num clay pavers shall be laid in accordance with bs num except that the subbase shall be one of the materials permitted in subclause num .
num the layout of pavers and details at edges chamber covers gullies and other openings shall be as described in appendix num .
num num grass concrete paving num num grass concrete paving shall consist of a reinforced perforated insitu concrete slab or a precast panel system as specified in appendix num and in the locations shown on the drawings .
num num insitu grass concrete paving shall be cast and cured as described in appendix num .
the strength class of concrete and surface finish shall be as described in appendix num .
num num perforations shall be formed in insitu grass concrete paving as described in appendix num .
num concrete panels shall conform to the shape dimensions and colour described in appendix num .
num num concrete used shall have compressive strength class of num and panels when tested in accordance with bs en num the characteristic bending strength shall be class num to table num of bs en num .
the water absorption when tested in accordance with bs en num shall be class num of table num .
num the layout of panels and details at edges chamber covers gullies and other openings shall be as described in appendix num .
num num grass concrete paving shall be laid to true levels and crossfalls and be of the thickness described in appendix num .
num num grass concrete paving shall be laid on a bed of type num unbound mixtures conforming to clause num laid and compacted in accordance with clause num and to the thickness described in appendix num .
in addition panels shall be bedded on a layer of sand conforming to bs en num to the thickness specified in appendix num .
num perforations shall be filled with friable soil free from deleterious matter or with other material as described in appendix num levelled off num mm below the top surface sown with grass seed as described in appendix num covered with a layer of fine soil and levelled .
the seed shall be sown while soil is still loose after filling .
num num access steps num num the contractor shall provide the access steps identified in contract specific appendix num and where identified in contract specific appendix num shall undertake the design of the access steps or elements thereof .
the access steps shall comply with the requirements of bs en iso num and bs en iso num contract specific appendix num and the performance requirements described hereafter .
where required in contract specific appendix num the steps shall be installed in accordance with hcd drawing mcx num sheet numbers num and num .
for the purpose of this clause i the term access steps shall mean access steps provided for highway maintenance purposes to communication cabinets and other roadside items and shall include landings and guardrails .
ii the term machinery referred to under bs en iso num and bs en iso num shall mean communication cabinets and other roadside items .
num num where required by contract specific appendix num working and fabrication drawings indicating material and fabrication of components and fittings shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation for approval .
num num the alignment and location for access steps shall enable the safe access to and egress from any communication cabinet and other roadside items .
the steps shall be located where possible such that they will not require removal for access to services or supplies including motorway communication systems .
volume num series num specification for highway works kerbs footways and paved areas amendment february num num num durability num num the access steps must achieve as a minimum a serviceable life as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
the serviceable life shall be obtained without the requirement for any maintenance other than that resulting from accidental damage and routine maintenance .
num materials num num material for access steps shall conform to bs en iso num section num requirements stated in contract specific num and the following i all components of the steps shall be resistant to theft tampering and fire .
ii where two or more materials are used they shall be compatible and include measures to avoid galvanic action and avoid differential movement .
materials shall be able to resist corrosion provoked by the surrounding atmosphere and ground conditions to achieve its serviceable life .
iii unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num materials listed in table num shall conform to the requirements listed in table num and shall comply with the standards andor clauses listed .
where materials are covered by the construction products regulation the declaration of performance and ce marking shall demonstrate that the product meets or exceeds the performance requirements of the specification .
table num num access step materials material requirements general detailed paving slabs or flags bs en num or bs en num laid in accordance with bs num concrete flags shall be class num or class num as detailed in annex na of bs en num and shall have a minimum breaking strength of num mpa .
natural stone slabs shall have a minimum class of num and minimum breaking load of num kn flags or slabs to be bedded on a layer of mortar of num mm to num mm thick or sand nummm num mm .
engineering bricks bs en num class b compressive strength num nmmnum water absorption by mass num freezethaw resistance category fnum active soluble salts content category snum mortar bs en num bs en num durability designation m or s bedding sand bs en num designation num mm precast concrete edgings bs en num concrete landings series num bs en num exposure class reinforced xcnum or xcnum xdnum xfnum unreinforced xfnum minimum strength class cnum or greater maximum aggregate size nummm ancillary concrete bs num bedding and backing to precast concrete edgings stnum backing to steps stnum fill material series num table num class num general fill galvanised steel guardrails bs en num volume num series num specification for highway works kerbs footways and paved areas amendment february num numf num particular access step criteria num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the design of access steps shall conform to the following i the steps shall have a minimum clear width of nummm .
ii subject to the requirements of paragraph vi below no part of the steps excluding guardrails shall protrude more than the step rise height plus nummm above or below the adjacent finished ground level measured along a line at right angles to the embankment or cutting slope except where necessary to accommodate a landing .
iii in accordance with bs en iso num the steps shall have at least one guardrail unless the width of the steps is greater or equal to nummm when two guardrails are required .
where one guardrail is to be used it shall be located on the right hand side going up the steps .
iv the steps shall have a rise and going which achieves the safety requirements formulae of bs en iso num steps with an angle of pitch greater than num degrees are not permitted .
v the step going shall maintain the as constructed finished level for the serviceable life of the steps .
vi steps with solid edging shall have edging laid at the slope of batter with the top edge set slightly above but not more than nummm above adjacent ground level measured perpendicular to the slope .
the top edge shall also be nummm minimum above the leading edge of the step going measured perpendicular to the slope .
vii there shall be a change in horizontal direction of not less than num degrees after not more than num steps or a climbing height of numm whichever is the lesser by means of a landing .
viii steps shall have adequate drainage for their safe use .
there shall be no areas of standing water on the steps .
ix open steps where a solid riser is not provided are not acceptable .
the step going and landings shall also be solid .
x kneerails are required on landings and steps .
num environment num num the access steps shall conform to the environmental requirements stated in contract specific appendix num .
the access steps shall be visually acceptable have a nonintrusive appearance and be suitable for the location .
the alignment of the steps shall minimise the impact on the environmental assets in the soft estate .
num geotechnical requirements num num where required in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall determine the geotechnical classification of the works in accordance with hd num managing geotechnical risk dmrb num and agree the classification with the overseeing organisation in accordance with hd num .
num records num num the contractor shall provide asbuilt drawings of the access steps to the overseeing organisation .
these shall include details of materials fabrication components and fittings .
volume num series num specification for highway works kerbs footways and paved areas amendment november num nnumf numni precast concrete kerbs channels edgings and quadrants num num except where otherwise specified in this clause precast concrete kerbs channels edgings and quadrants shall conform to bs en num and their dimensions type designations and performances and classes shall be as described in this clause and appendix num .
they shall be laid and bedded in accordance with bs num on a mortar bed on a concrete pavement slab a base or a strength class cnum or stnum in accordance with bs num concrete foundation .
the mortar bed may be omitted if units are bedded onto a concrete slab or foundation that is still plastic .
all precast units laid on a mortar bed or bedded onto plastic concrete shall be backed with a strength class cnum or stnum concrete in accordance with bs num .
num num precast concrete kerbs which are to be bonded to the pavement surface shall conform to bs en num .
the bonding materials and methods of bonding shall be to the manufacturers recommendations for this specific application .
bonded kerbs shall not be less than num mm in width at the base their height shall not exceed their width and they shall be bonded over their full width .
kerbs shall be precast to the dimensions described in appendix num .
the clear distance between unsupported pavement edge and back of kerb shall be not less than num mm .
the bending strength of units shall be established by testing in accordance with bs en num and shall not be less than class num in table num of bs en num .
units shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
they shall be bonded to the pavement surface with a resilient adhesive compatible with the pavement materials and be capable of withstanding a static pushoff load of num knm applied parallel to the pavement surface at right angles to the kerb .
num joints shall be provided in kerbs channels edgings and backing which are laid on or adjacent to a concrete pavement to coincide with the pavement transverse contraction warping and expansion joints .
the joints shall be the same width as the joint sealing grooves of the pavement and shall be caulked and sealed as described in clauses num and num .
concrete foundations to kerbs channels and edgings laid adjacent to a concrete pavement shall be provided with joint filler board complying with clause num placed vertically national alterations of the overseeing organisation of northern ireland through the full extent of the concrete foundation at positions coinciding with the pavement joints .
at expansion joints in bridge decks the kerb joints shall be as described in appendix num .
where the details of bridge expansion joints are proposed by the contractor such details shall include the intended treatment at kerbs and footways .
num num for radii of num m or less kerbs of appropriate radius shall be used as per bs en num .
where radii kerbs are not available straight kerbs shall be used .
for radii of num m to num m kerbs with a maximum length of num mm shall be used and for radii less than num m kerbs with a maximum length of num mm shall be used .
the ends of straight kerbs shall be splayed where necessary to form the required radius .
num the surface level of units of kerb channel edging and quadrant shall not deviate from the design level num mm nor shall the longitudinal surface regularity deviate more than num mm in num m when checked with a num m straight edge .
horizontal alignment shall comply with clause num .
amendment may num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs contents clause title page num regulations sign classification and standards num num general requirements for permanent traffic signs num num foundations for permanent traffic signs and signals num num posts for permanent traffic signs num num sign plates for permanent traffic signs num num faces for permanent traffic signs num num construction and assembly of permanent traffic signs num num location and erection of permanent traffic signs num num covering of permanent traffic signs num num permanent bollards num num permanent marker posts num num num road markings num num num road studs num num traffic cones traffic cylinders flat traffic delineators and other traffic delineators num num road danger lamps and high intensity flashing beacons num num temporary traffic signs num num traffic signals num num detector loops num num controlled and uncontrolled crossings num num traffic signs on gantries num num preparation and finish of metal and other surfaces num national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland clause title page wales numnaw num regulations sign classification and standards wnum northern ireland numni num regulations sign classification and standards nnum numni num road markings nnum numni num road studs nnum denotes a clause or sample appendix which has a substitute national clause or sample appendix for one or more of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales or northern ireland .
num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs traffic signs num num regulations sign classification and standards regulations num num subject to paragraphs num and num below all traffic signs used including retroreflecting road studs and road markings whether permanent or temporary shall be of the size shape colour and type prescribed for that use in the traffic signs regulations and general directions num statutory instrument num no .
num including working drawings for traffic sign design and manufacture volumes num num and num the zebra pelican and puffin pedestrian crossings regulations and general directions num statutory instrument num no .
num and subsequent amending regulations .
other relevant requirements are contained in the above regulations and general directions .
num signs that are not prescribed in regulations need to be specially authorised by the secretary of state .
where the contractor proposes to use nonprescribed temporary traffic signs he shall obtain the agreement of the overseeing organisation to their intended design and location .
where the contractor proposes to use prescribed temporary traffic signs he shall obtain the agreement of the police and the highway authority to their intended location .
the contractor shall obtain authorisation and approval from the overseeing organisation for the use of the signs at the specific locations proposed .
num signs that are changeable by means other than the purely mechanical require statutory type approval for their construction and operating mechanisms by the secretary of state .
this requirement is in addition to the need for the design of the sign to be prescribed or specially authorised .
the contractors proposal for signs that require statutory type approval shall include the reference numbers of any approval already issued in respect of that equipment .
the signs shall not be installed until appropriate approval or confirmation of existing approval by the overseeing organisation has been obtained .
sign classification num for the purposes of the contract the following classifications apply i permanent traffic signs .
any of the traffic signs prescribed in the regulations or specially authorised by the secretary of state or any part thereof designed to remain in position at the completion of the permanent works or a traffic cone cylinder or other traffic delineator to be retained by the employer ii prescribed temporary traffic signs .
any of the traffic signs defined in the regulations or specially authorised by the secretary of state or any part thereof described in appendix num which unless otherwise described in appendix num comply with the requirements of a permanent traffic sign but which will not remain in position at the completion of the permanent works iii temporary traffic signs .
any of the traffic signs defined in the regulations or specially authorised by the secretary of state or any part thereof designed by the contractor in compliance with clause num which will not remain in position at the completion of the permanent works .
num general requirements for permanent traffic signs num num materials for permanent traffic signs and their construction assembly location and erection shall comply with this series series num and the requirements described in appendix num .
the manufacture and installation of traffic signs shall be in accordance with the quality management scheme described in appendix a .
num each complete traffic sign or part thereof shall be capable of passing the tests in bs num part num .
num sign panels of internally illuminated signs and luminaire face panels shall unless otherwise described in appendix num comply with impact category num of bs num part num .
num all lit traffic signs shall comply with category num luminance of bs num part num unless otherwise described in appendix num .
num before the commencement of fabrication of any traffic sign unless otherwise stated in appendix num the contractor shall submit for the overseeing series num traffic signs amendment august num num organisations approval i fabrication drawings for directional informatory and informatory signs as required in appendix num ii the information about warning regulatory and other traffic signs required in appendix num .
num all traffic sign housings shall be provided with vandal and weather resistant locks .
keys in the quantities stated in appendix num shall be provided to the overseeing organisation .
types of lock shall be kept to a minimum .
num the backs of traffic signs shall have a location identifying mark as described in appendix num .
num traffic signs shall be carefully handled to prevent damage transported and stored in accordance with the sign face manufacturers instructions .
num foundations for permanent traffic signs and signals num the type and size of foundations for permanent traffic signs and signals shall be as described in and unless otherwise stated therein shall comply with this clause .
num all excavations for foundations shall be carried out in compliance with clause num and shall be cleared of all loose material before placing of concrete and backfilling .
num unless otherwise described in appendix num traffic signs and signals supported by a single post placed in the ground shall have the post installed centrally in num mm diameter or square holes filled in compliance with clause num with mix stnum concrete to within num mm of the ground surface .
num unless otherwise described in appendix num posts shall be supported for a minimum of num days after placing the concrete and backfilling shall not take place until at least num hours after placing .
num for traffic signals and illuminated signs provision shall be made for cable entry through the foundation by means of ducting as described in appendix num .
num where pockets are formed in concrete foundations their plan dimensions shall be sufficiently larger than those of the post to allow for positioning and bedding of the post and backfilling of the pocket .
num all backfilling of foundations shall comply with clause num except that where pipes or buried cables are installed it shall comply with clauses num and num respectively .
num reinstatement of existing surfaces above foundations shall comply with clause num .
num posts for permanent traffic signs num posts for permanent traffic signs shall be as described in appendix num and shall comply with bs num part num the surface protection requirements of bs num part num and with the following i num steel posts shall be tubular or rectangular hollow section complying with bs en num num joists universal beams or columns complying with bs num and shall be manufactured from steel complying with grade snum jo or snum jnum ii aluminium posts shall be of tubular or rectangular hollow section iii concrete for reinforced or prestressed concrete posts shall comply with series num and appendix num .
num posts shall not protrude above the top of the sign unless supporting an external luminaire in which case the protrusion shall be kept to a minimum .
num internally illuminated posts for pedestrian crossing beacons shall comply with this clause and where appropriate with bs num part num .
num signs erected on a single post shall be positioned so that the post is in the centre of the sign unless otherwise described in appendix num .
num compartments for electrical equipment shall be as described in appendix num and wherever practicable access doors shall be on the side of the compartment furthest from approaching traffic .
in the case of signs supported by more than one post such compartment shall be on the post furthest from the carriageway unless otherwise described in appendix num .
num flange plates shall have holes or slots as described in appendix num to accommodate the attachment system .
num sign plates for permanent traffic signs num all permanent sign plates shall comply with bs num part num and with this clause .
num plate signs not exceeding num m in height and num m width shall be made of a single sheet .
where more than one sheet is used to make up a sign the number of sheets shall be kept to a reasonable minimum and the separate sheets shall be rectangular and of comparable size and shape .
amendment august num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs num num num extruded plank signs up to num m wide shall have no vertical joints .
above this size joints in extruded planks shall preferably be positioned at a vertical support if not then the vertical joints in adjacent planks shall not be less than num m apart and only one joint per extruded plank is permitted .
num num fabricated plank signs up to num m wide shall have no vertical joints but each plank may be constructed from a maximum of two pieces of sub strate material producing one split line .
split lines shall be lined up vertically or horizontally .
above num m wide joints in the stiffening extrusions of adjacent planks shall preferably be positioned at a vertical support if not then the vertical joints in the stiffening extrusions of adjacent planks shall not be less than num m apart and only one such joint per fabricated plank shall then be permitted .
num where top and bottom light spill screens are required in appendix num these shall extend for the whole width of the sign and be fabricated out of the same material as the sign plate .
num top and bottom light spill screens shall be considered as part of the sign plate and any stiffeners and mounting fittings shall be designed to accommodate the combined size .
num faces for permanent traffic signs num faces for permanent traffic signs shall be as described in appendix num .
they shall comply with bs num part num and with this clause .
num all plastics sheeting shall be fixed in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers instructions .
num only vertical and horizontal joints shall be permitted and all joints in plastics sheeting shall be overlapped by not less than num mm .
the overlap in the horizontal joints shall be from the top .
butt joints in plastics sheeting shall not be used except between individual planks or in electro cutable overlay film or as recommended by the sheeting manufacturer .
num all materials comprising the sign face including the background border and legends shall be carefully matched for colour at the time of sign fabrication to provide uniform appearance both by day and night .
the sheeting manufacturers recommendations on colour matching methods shall be observed .
num letters numerals symbols and borders shall be clear cut sharp edged and without cracks .
num any cutout letters numerals symbols and borders shall be of material compatible with the sheeting to which they are applied .
they shall be applied in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers instructions .
num screen processed letters numerals symbols and borders shall be screen printed with materials in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers instructions .
any inks pastes and finishing coats used shall be compatible with the sheeting material or the face panel of internally illuminated signs .
num sheeting materials including letters numerals symbols and borders shall be fully adhered and there shall be no air bubbles creases cracks or other blemishes .
where the sheeting manufacturer requires the assembled materials to be provided with a coat of clear lacquer it shall be uniform and continuous .
all lacquer shall be applied at the time of fabrication of the sign face and shall be of a type specified or supplied by the sheeting manufacturer .
num construction and assembly of permanent traffic signs general num construction and assembly of traffic signs shall comply with bs num part num and with this clause .
num all sign plates and planks frames purlins posts and other components shall be deburred prior to assembly .
num where framing and stiffening are not an integral part of the sign plate their joints shall be welded or joined with suitable brackets utilising nuts bolts and washers .
num where purlins are adopted they shall be attached to each vertical member of the sign frame and the sign stiffening and framing shall be continuous in the vertical direction .
purlins shall be spaced equally apart .
connections shall be made at every point where a purlin crosses a post .
num where purlins are not adopted the sign stiffening and framing shall be continuous in the horizontal direction .
num rivets and other devices used for fixing sheet sign plates to their stiffeners or framework or in the construction of housings shall be of a material compatible with the materials being joined .
spacing of rivets or other fixing devices shall be uniform and shall not exceed num mm around the outside edge of any sheet or section of sheet and shall not exceed num mm on cross braces .
hollow rivets shall not be used .
where sign plates need to be stiffened this shall be achieved in a manner such that the sign face material is not punctured or otherwise damaged to accommodate the stiffening .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs num num an additional washer of neoprene nylon or other suitable material shall be used between the sign face and any metal nuts bolts washers and screws to protect it from corrosive or other damaging effects .
num where supports to traffic signs including external lighting luminaires are required to have flange plates these shall be secured by anchorages and attachment systems complying with series num .
the bolts shall be lightly greased before final installation and they and their anchorages shall be installed so as to achieve the loadings torque settings and other requirements described in appendix num .
num sheet and plank signs shall be connected to posts by an appropriate method .
banding systems shall be of stainless steel complying with aisi grade num .
num plank signs shall be assembled in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num where ferrous components are permitted any drilling of them shall be completed before the application of any finish .
num any hole drilled in plates with plastics sheeting to accommodate a rivet or bolt shall immediately prior to the insertion of the rivet or bolt have a clear lacquer recommended by the plastics sheeting manufacturer applied to its edge to prevent the ingress of moisture .
the surfaces of rivets or bolts exposed on the sign face shall be covered by a suitable material of a colour to match that part of the face .
num num prior to fitting any sign to any lighting column the contractor shall ensure that the sign is included in the technical approval of the lighting column in accordance with the technical approval scheme adopted by the overseeing organisation and with standard bd num .
no holes shall be drilled in the lighting column except those whose location and size are included in the technical approval .
num traffic signs to be erected on road lighting columns shall have fixings compatible with the column cross section and finish .
wiring shall be contained in external conduit complying with bs num .
conduits shall be affixed to concrete lighting columns with stainless steel banding systems complying with aisi grade num .
conduits shall be affixed to other lighting columns with stainless steel clamps which shall be screwed with stainless steel screws into tapped holes in the lighting column .
alternatively permanent cabling shall be placed on the inside of the lighting column and shall exit via a bushed drilled hole .
variable message traffic signs num variable message traffic signs shall comply with this clause .
num location and erection of permanent traffic signs num the approximate location of each traffic sign is described in appendix num .
all traffic signs shall have their exact location determined and recorded in compliance with clause num .
num all posts shall be erected plumb and where two or more posts are provided for any one sign the faces of the posts shall be lined up .
num signs erected on two posts shall have each post positioned so that the distance from the centre of the post to the edge of the sign plate is num mm unless otherwise described in appendix num .
num any pockets formed in concrete foundations to receive the posts shall be cleaned out immediately prior to erection .
the posts shall be placed centrally in the pockets and be bedded on mortar designation i complying with clause num and unless otherwise described in appendix num the pockets shall be filled up to finished foundation level with mix stnum concrete .
num traffic signs mounted on posts except those on gantries shall be erected to have their face plumb and be orientated in relation to the carriageway in accordance with chapter num of the traffic signs manual .
num traffic signs mounted on gantries shall be erected as described in appendix num and all other traffic signs shall be erected as described in appendix num .
num the site records required by clause num shall include daily records for nonlit traffic signs .
num no traffic sign shall be dismantled resited or removed without the prior approval of the overseeing organisation .
num covering of permanent traffic signs num where it is required in appendix num that permanent traffic signs be blankedout or have an alternative message the method to be adopted shall comply with the following unless otherwise described in appendix num i for plate signs a cover plate compatible with the plate signs material or a covering of a suitable opaque non damaging material or for covering periods of up to one year a self adhesive plastic film to support the temporary sign face sheeting ii for other traffic signs a covering of a suitable opaque non damaging material .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs num num cover plates shall be suitably fixed to give a num mm minimum air gap between the sign face and cover plate .
the fixing method shall not cause damage or staining to the sign face .
any holes remaining in the finished sign face after removal of the plate shall be filled with a suitable material of a colour to match that part of the face .
num where self adhesive plastic film is used it shall be compatible with the sign face materials and be applied and removed in compliance with the manufacturers instructions .
num any loose covering used must be sufficiently opaque to prevent reflection from and legibility of the covered sign and be securely fastened to the back of the sign .
under no circumstances shall tape or other adhesive material be applied to the face of the sign .
sufficient space shall be left between the covering and the face to permit air flow over the sign .
num traffic signs which are to be covered shall not be erected on trafficked highways without the covering in place .
num removal of any covering shall be carried out with the minimum disturbance to traffic .
num irrespective of any requirement in appendix num to cover signs any traffic sign erected at such a time that its legend does not relate either wholly or in part to the traffic movement and route in operation shall have its sign face securely covered with one of the materials in subclause num of this clause until such time as its legend is applicable .
num permanent bollards num permanent bollards shall be as described in appendix num and shall comply with appropriate clauses of this series .
num internally illuminated bollards and unless otherwise described in appendix num reflectiveonly bollards shall be secured by stainless steel holding down bolts nuts and washers .
holding down bolts and anchorages cast into the foundation shall be capable of complying with the performance requirements of bs num part num when tested as described therein .
num all bolts shall be lightly greased before final installation and tightening to the bollard manufacturers torque setting .
num permanent marker posts general num permanent marker posts shall be constructed to the dimensions and be installed in the locations and by methods described in appendix num and shall comply with this series and subclauses num and num of this clause .
distance marker posts num distance marker posts shall be made from plastics timber or other materials described in appendix num .
hazard marker posts num hazard marker posts shall comply with bs num part num .
post construction and colour and type of reflective marker shall be as described in appendix num .
num num road markings general num num road markings shall be white or yellow classes ynum and ynum complying with bs en num table num as appropriate except where an alternative shade has been specified in appendix num .
the markings shall consist of continuous or intermittent lines letters figures arrows or symbols and comply with sub clauses num to num of this clause .
statutory requirements controlling road markings are contained in the traffic signs regulations and general directions num statutory instrument num no .
num and subsequent amending regulations .
permanent road markings num num permanent road markings shall be one of the following materials and comply with the colour location and material type requirements described in appendix num i thermoplastic road marking material or paint in accordance with bs en num ii permanent preformed road markings in accordance with bs en num iii other materials as described in appendix num .
they shall be also tested in road trials to the rollover class pnum in accordance with the procedure stated in bs en num to demonstrate compliance with the performance requirements as stated in subclauses num to num .
the test report shall give particulars of the quality and quantity of the material including drop on glass beads laid at the test site for future reference and comparison purposes should such a need arise .
num road markings shall have the following road performance as defined in bs en num for the period of the functional life starting from the date of application or when the road is trafficked whichever is later .
the materials to be used shall be to the same mix material quality quantity and rate of application as used on the test site .
amendment november num volume num series num specification for highway works traffic signs property bs en num reference requirement value colour table num num .
white num .
yellow class ynum ynum x y coordinates given x y coordinates given luminance factor table num num .
class bnum num .
class bnum num num skid resistance table num num .
class snum num .
class snum num num retroreflect ivity table num class of rl for dry markings num .
class rnum num .
class rnum num num note num white num yellow num num the width tolerances and thickness for screed spray preformed and extruded white or yellow lines shall be in accordance with the traffic signs regulations and general direction num .
with the exception of the road markings listed in regulation num num of the traffic signs regulations and general directions in no case shall any materials be laid more than num mm thick .
unless specified all white markings shall be reflectorised with glass beads in accordance with bs en num and bs en num by incorporation apart from preformed markings into the road marking mixture and to the wet surface of the marking .
the glass beads shall not have more than num ppm of arsenic trioxide num ppm of lead and num ppm of antimony .
the contractor shall supply test certificates showing compliance with these requirements .
num where there is requirement for improved visibility in wet conditions at night products showing the following performance in addition to that stated in subclause num shall be used .
property bs en num reference requirement value retroreflect ivity table num class rwnum num num where there is a requirement for improved skid resistance as referred to in appendix num products showing the following performance in addition to that stated in subclause num shall be used .
property bs en num reference requirement value skid resistance table num class snum num num the pavement shall be prepared in accordance with the following i where the marking is to be applied on concrete carriageways the transverse texturing shall be freed from all traces of curing compound by wire brushing or other approved means .
prior to the application of the thermoplastic material a tack coat compatible with the road surface and the marking material shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
ii on surface dressed carriageways all loose chippings where the marking is to be applied shall be removed prior to application .
num the application of permanent road markings shall be in accordance with the sector scheme described in appendix a .
road marking materials shall only be applied to surfaces which are clean and dry .
markings shall be free from raggedness at their edges and shall be uniform and free from streaks .
longitudinal road markings shall be laid to a regular alignment .
raised rib road markings num raised rib road markings shall only be used on motorways with full width hardshoulders or allpurpose roads both single and dual carriageway with at least num metre wide hardstrips .
they shall comply with subclauses num numi num num num num and num of this clause .
num raised rib road markings shall be white lines which are continuous over the sections where they are specified in appendix num .
where specified in appendix num gaps shall be provided for drainage purposes .
num num raised rib road markings shall be in accordance with the traffic signs regulations and general directions num statutory instrument num no .
num diagrams num and num as appropriate .
spacing of the transverse raised ribs shall be num mm or num mm as specified in appendix num .
num raised rib road markings shall not be used adjacent to hatched areas or central reserve crossings except as prescribed for use with diagrams num num and num .
temporary road markings num temporary road markings shall only be adopted with the prior approval of the overseeing organisation .
they shall comply with subclauses num to num of this clause or if required to be removable be constructed only from a proprietary preformed road marking material complying with bs en num .
amendment november num num volume num series num specification for highway works traffic signs num when temporary road markings are used on surfaces that will continue to be used by public traffic after their removal any shadow trace remaining after their removal shall be permanently obliterated .
preformed materials shall not be used for this obliteration .
num temporary road markings constructed from a proprietary preformed road marking material shall only be adopted in locations and on types of road surface as described in appendix num and shall comply with any other requirement therein .
the marking material shall be new and together with any primer shall be stored and installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and within the recommended shelf life .
num temporary preformed road markings shall only be applied to surfaces that are clean and dry .
upon removal they shall be disposed of off site and if any making good is necessary to the road surface it shall be satisfactorily carried out before the road is opened to traffic .
road markings on porous asphalt surfacing num spray paint thermoplastic applied by machine screed spray or extrusion or preformed road markings shall be used for carriageway markings on porous asphalt surfacing .
manual screeding shall not be permitted except for directional arrows and similar markings .
removal of road markings num num the removal of road markings on surfaces that will continue to be used by traffic shall be undertaken in a manner that will avoid damage to the surface .
the removal of temporary road markings shall comply with subclauses num and num of this clause .
for bituminous running surfaces the removal of permanent road markings shall be by mechanical means or forced air abrasive shot blasting only .
hot compressed air hca lance shall be permitted on other types of running surfaces .
in all cases the contractor shall submit details of the proposed method for the overseeing organisations consent .
masking of road markings num num when black masking materials are required to cover existing permanent road markings they shall comply with bs num .
the total thickness of original and masking materials shall not exceed num mm .
num longitudinal road markings lateral tolerances num num for longitudinal road markings the lateral tolerance shall be within nummm from the designed position .
any discontinuities between road markings shall be replaced with a smooth taper from one road marking to the other .
the length of the transition shall be derived from table below .
all road markings shall comply with the dimensions angles and proportions stated in the traffic signs regulations and general directions num statutory instrument num no.num and any subsequent amending regulations .
speed limit mph taper num num in num num num in num num num in num num num in num num num in num num num road studs retroreflecting road studs num num statutory requirements controlling retroreflecting road studs both permanent and tempoarary are contained in the traffic signs regulations and general directions num statutory instrument num no .
num regulations num num and directions num and num the traffic signs amendment general directions num statutory instrument num no .
num and any subsequent amending regulations and general directions .
num num all retroreflecting road studs shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and with the sector scheme described in appendix a .
num num retroreflecting road studs and components which are not within the scope of bs en num but which have statutory type approval by the secretary of state under direction num of the traffic signs regulations and general directions num statutory instrument num no .
num and any subsequent amending general directions can be incorporated into the works .
num num not used .
amendment may num num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs num num permanent retroreflecting road studs num num permanent retroreflecting road studs shall be installed in the locations and to any other requirements as described in appendix num .
temporary retroreflecting road studs num num temporary retroreflecting road studs shall not be used for a second application .
adhesive used for the temporary retroreflecting road studs shall be removed from the carriageway on completion of the works .
non retroreflecting road studs num all non retroreflecting road studs shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions in locations and complying with any other requirements described in appendix num .
retroreflecting road studs on porous asphalt surfacing num num the edges of recesses for inset retroreflecting road studs in porous asphalt surfacing shall be milled when the material has cooled to ambient temperature .
care shall be exercised when removing porous asphalt to form the recess to prevent damage occurring to the cut edges and to prevent detritus clogging the porous asphalt surfacing .
surface applied road studs shall not be applied if there is evidence of moisture present on the surface of porous asphalt nor shall inset road studs be installed if moisture is present in the recess after milling of the asphalt .
num traffic cones traffic cylinders flat traffic delineators and other traffic delineators general num num traffic cones and traffic cylinders hereinafter termed cones and cylinders shall comply with designation num or designation num of bs en num .
cones shall be to category a .
num flat traffic delineators hereinafter termed ftds shall comply with subclauses num to num of this clause .
num an ftd shall comprise a flat blade fixed to a base .
the flat blade may incorporate stiffeners provided that they do not encroach into the white retroreflective area .
num num ftds shall be constructed of rubber or plastic materials .
it shall be possible to insert and remove blades without requiring a special tool .
the height of the ftd shall be num mm or num mm as stated in appendix num .
the width of the top of the blade shall be num num mm .
other dimensions shall be in accordance with diagram num of tsrgd num or the traffic signs regulations northern ireland num as appropriate .
num ftd bases shall be so designed that they will stack without binding and without causing damage to the retroreflective surfaces .
additionally the blades and their attachment to the base or fixing shall be so designed that the blades face presents throughout its design life a plane to the approaching traffic no more than num from the vertical .
num ftd bases may be coloured red black grey or brown .
they may have a num mm wide white reflective line placed on one edge of the base provided i the edge of the base where the white line is to be attached comprises a sloping surface which is at an angle to the road surface of no more than num and is of such dimensions either to fully accommodate the num mm wide white line or where the angle between the road surface and the sloping surface exceeds num to accommodate at least num mm of the width of the white line the excess maximum num mm being returned onto the top surface of the base ii the material from which the base is manufactured allows proper adhesion or attachment of the white reflective line to prevent it becoming detached during normal use iii the coverage of white reflective material is maintained at more than num of the area treated .
num num the white reflective strip material shall comply with bs en num and bs en num or bs en num as appropriate .
additionally when tested using a portable retroreflectometer the white line shall have a coefficient of retroreflectance of class rnum or better to table num of bs en num .
num num ftd blades shall be coloured red and white as indicated in diagram num of tsrgd num or the traffic signs regulations northern ireland num as appropriate .
num the white portions of the ftd blades shall comply with the chromaticity coordinates and luminance factor given in bs num part num .
num num the red portions of the ftd shall comply with the chromaticity coordinates and luminance factor for traffic cones given in bs en num when measured in accordance with bs num part num .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs num num that part of the blade coloured white shall comprise retroreflective material complying with the requirements for class num or class num as specified in bs num part num which shall be securely applied or attached to the blade to prevent it becoming detached during normal use .
num the red portions may also be retroreflective .
num num the minimum mass of the ftd including any ballast recommended by the manufacturer shall comply with the mass of a traffic cone as defined in bs en num .
num ftds shall be clearly and durably marked with the following information in the following order a the name trade mark or other means of identification of the manufacturer or vendor b the title and date of this document ie .
specification for highway works with appropriate date .
the marking shall be in characters legible at a normal reading distance such that the total area of the marking does not exceed num cm .
additionally the legend dual carriageway and motorway use only shall be applied to the lowermost red portion of the blade using block capitals of minimum height num mm in such a location that it can be clearly seen when the ftd is in position .
num all markings shall be sufficiently durable to last the expected life of the ftd to which they are applied and in no case less than num years .
num when checked by inspection and by rubbing lightly first for num seconds with a piece of cloth soaked in water and then for num seconds with a piece of cloth soaked in petroleum spirit followed by num seconds with a piece of cloth soaked in diesel oil the marking shall still be legible .
num ftds shall be supplied with the following information a instructions for ballasting if required b instructions for fixing blades to bases .
num other traffic delineators hereinafter termed delineators shall be as described in appendix num .
num the contractor shall submit to the overseeing organisation a copy of a test certificate confirming that samples of the identical type of cone cylinder ftd or delineator as those to be used in the works and supplied as permanent cones cylinders ftds or delineators under the contract have been tested and found to comply with subclauses num to num of this clause .
permanent cones cylinders ftds and other delineators num num where required in appendix num the contractor shall arrange for the tests described in sub clauses num to num of this clause for cones cylinders ftds and other delineators to be carried out at a ukas approved testing laboratory .
the numbers to be tested as given in appendix num are to be selected at random from the batch to be supplied under the contract .
failure of any test will result in rejection of the batch .
temporary cones cylinders ftds and other delineators num the contractor shall submit to the overseeing organisation certification substantiating that at least num in every num of any batch of cones cylinders ftds and delineators to be used in the temporary works have passed the tests described in subclauses num to num of this clause as appropriate .
testing num num cones and cylinders shall be tested in compliance with bs en num .
num ftds shall be tested in compliance with subclauses num to num of this clause .
num test procedures shall be carried out on each size of ftd and each method of attachment between blade and base .
num when tested in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause with the exception of the white retroreflective material no part of the ftd shall crack split or deform .
num when samples with retroreflective portions attached are tested in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause the coefficient of luminous intensity r as defined in publication cie no num retroreflection definition and measurement after testing shall be not less than num of the value previous to the test .
num when tested in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause no part of the ftd with the exception of white retroreflective material shall crack fracture or split and any ballast or ballast container shall not have become displaced within the base or separated from it .
any ballast container as either an integral part of the base or enclosed within it shall not have been damaged to the extent that ballast is discharged .
caps or bungs to ballast containers shall not have been forced from their sockets or other fixings .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs num num when tested in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause no part of the ftd with the exception of white retroreflective material shall crack fracture or split .
bases shall remain in contact with the reference surface .
num when tested in accordance with subclauses num to num of this clause no part of the ftd with the exception of the white retroreflective material shall crack fracture or split .
bases shall remain in contact with the reference surface .
num throughout the tests in subclauses num to num num to num and num to num of this clause the blade shall remain fixed in position .
on completion of the testing in accordance with subclauses num to num and num to num of this clause the residual deflection of the top of the blade in any horizontal direction measured num seconds to num seconds after completion of the tests shall be not more than num of the height of the ftd .
the height of the ftd h is as measured from the reference surface .
low temperature impact test num the test shall be conducted using a steel ball swung on a pendulum .
the apparatus shall be as shown in hcd drawing number knum .
the steel ball shall have a mass of num num kg and be suspended by one or two steel pendulum wires of not more than num mm diameter so that the pendulum radius is num num mm .
the point of impact shall be vertically beneath the centre of radius of the pendulum and at a height on the specimen of hnum num mm where h is the height of a ftd above the reference surface .
num ftds shall be fixed to the reference surface using the base .
num the test shall be carried out on specimens with and without retroreflective portions attached .
num for samples with retroreflective portions attached the coefficient of luminous intensity r of every such face at an observation angle of num and at an entrance angle normal to the face of the blade prior to the conditioning shall be determined the definitions of observation angle and entrance angle being those given in bs num part num .
num all test samples shall be conditioned for a period of not less than num hours at a temperature of num numc .
impact testing shall be carried out within num seconds after conditioning .
num impact shall be made in ambient conditions of not greater than numc .
num within num hour of impacting samples shall be immersed with retroreflective portions attached in water at num numc for num minutes .
after draining for num minutes the coefficient of luminous intensity r shall be measured in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
num the sample shall be examined and any damage percentage change in the coefficient of luminous intensity or any detachment of a blade from its base shall be reported .
drop test num ftds requiring the addition of ballast shall be ballasted as instructed by the manufacturer .
num the ftd shall be conditioned for a period of not less than num hours at a temperature of num numc .
num within num minute after conditioning the ftd shall be suspended with its normal vertical axis horizontal any cap or bung to a ballast container forming an integral part of the ftd shall be positioned uppermost and with its lowest part num num mm above a solid horizontal surface and dropped once vertically from rest onto the solid surface .
num the test detailed in subclause num shall be repeated after conditioning at a temperature of num numc .
num any damage observed shall be reported .
bending test num the test shall be carried out on specimens with and without retroreflective portions attached .
num the blade shall be fixed to the base in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
the blade and its base shall be conditioned for a period of not less than num hours at a temperature of num numc .
within num minute after conditioning the blade shall be bent over about its base line by applying a force to the face of the blade at a point on its vertical centre line hnum num mm from the top so that the top edge touches the reference surface or a surface coplanar with it as indicated in the hcd drawing number knum .
h is the height of the ftd .
when the top edge of the blade touches the reference surface the bending force shall be removed immediately .
num from num seconds to num seconds after completion the maximum residual horizontal deflection of the top of the blade shall be measured from the vertical axis passing through the centre of the base of the blade and perpendicular to the reference surface .
num the test shall be repeated in the opposite direction .
num the procedure in subclauses num to num of this clause shall be repeated at a temperature of num numc .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs num num the deflections any damage observed any detachment of the blade from its base and any movement of the base shall be reported .
fatigue test num the test shall be carried out on specimens with and without retroreflective portions attached .
this test is to be carried out on a different specimen to that or those tested in subclauses num to num and num to num of this clause .
num the blade shall be fixed to the base in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
the test shall be carried out after conditioning the blade and its base for a period of not less than num hours at a temperature of num numc .
num by applying a force to the face of blade at a point on its vertical centre line hnum num mm from the top the top of the blade shall be oscillated as indicated in the hcd drawing number knum at a frequency of num oscillations per minute to num oscillations per minute at an amplitude of hnum for num minutes with the reference surface held in a horizontal position .
h is the height of the ftd .
one oscillation is the movement from the upright position to the maximum amplitude in one direction then to the maximum amplitude in the opposite direction and then the return to the upright position .
num from num seconds to num seconds after completion the maximum residual horizontal deflection of the top of the blade shall be measured from the vertical axis passing through the centre of the base of the blade and perpendicular to the reference surface .
num the procedure in subclauses num to num of this clause shall be repeated at a temperature of num numc .
num the deflection any damage observed and any detachment of the blade from its base shall be reported .
num other traffic delineators shall be tested in compliance with appendix num .
num road danger lamps and high intensity flashing beacons num num road danger lamps and high intensity flashing beacons shall be used in accordance with regulations num and num respectively of tsrgd num or regulations num and num respectively of the traffic signs regulations northern ireland num as appropriate .
num temporary traffic signs num num temporary traffic signs shall be designed by the contractor comply with clause num satisfy clause num have the consent of the overseeing organisation prior to installation and comply with sub clauses num to num of this clause .
temporary traffic signs shall comply with the traffic signs regulations and general directions num or the traffic sign welsh and english language provisions regulations and general directions num or the traffic signs regulations northern ireland num as appropriate and be designed in accordance with working drawings for traffic sign design and manufacture volumes num num and num and where appropriate local transport notes num and chapter num and any other relevant chapters of the traffic signs manual .
num num temporary traffic signs shall be constructed as follows i plate signs and internally illuminated signs a num the coefficient of retroreflection of the material for the faces of signs used for standard and relaxation works as defined in chapter num part num design of the traffic signs manual and any amendment thereto including the amendments specified in subclause num shall be as given in bs num part num for class num material b where the sign is to be erected for less than num months it shall unless appendix num requires it to be constructed to a similar standard as a permanent sign be either a portable sign complying with bs num part num or a fixed short life sign complying with subclause num of this clause c where the sign is to be erected for periods of num months or more or where appendix num requires it to be constructed to the standard for a permanent sign it shall comply with the requirements for permanent traffic signs d in addition to either b or c above electrical work related to temporary traffic signs shall comply with the series num except clauses num num and num ii bollards and marker posts shall comply with clauses num and num iii road studs a temporary retroreflecting road studs shall comply with clause num and only be installed for periods of up to num months and thereupon be replaced amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs num b num if permanent retroreflecting road studs are used for temporary purposes they shall comply with clause num iv road markings cones cylinders and delineators road danger lamps and high intensity flashing beacons shall comply with clauses num num and num as appropriate v portable traffic signals and haul route crossing signals shall where relevant comply with clause num vi any other signal lamp barrier or device shall be suitable for its intended purpose and where relevant shall comply with appropriate british standards .
num fixed short life signs shall be constructed as follows i materials a sign plates may be constructed of materials to the standard for a permanent sign or alternatively shall be constructed of timber hardboard plywood or chipboard b stiffening frames for sign plates constructed of timber hardboard plywood or chipboard shall be constructed of timber mild steel or aluminium sections c mounting posts shall be constructed of steel cast iron aluminium alloy reinforced or prestressed concrete or timber d fittings for signs made of materials to the standard for a permanent sign shall be similar to those used for permanent signs .
for signs made of timber hardboard plywood or chipboard fittings shall be of steel stainless steel or brass wood screws or wire nails .
adhesives may be used for fixing provided they are weatherproof and are not affected by variations in temperature e sign plates constructed of timber hardboard plywood or chipboard shall be sealed or otherwise treated to ensure that the final finish will provide a satisfactory appearance and will not deteriorate during the period the sign is expected to be in use ii construction a sign plates shall be constructed on similar principles to those required for permanent signs although stiffening may be omitted provided the sign plate passes the bending test given in bs num part num b stiffening frames constructed of timber members shall be jointed so that they withstand adverse weather conditions c mounting posts constructed of timber shall have dimensions that are sufficient to withstand the estimated loading on the sign d fixing of signs to the stiffening frame where required and to the mounting posts shall be by screwing nailing or gluing e timber sign plates stiffening frames and mounting posts shall be preserved with copperchromearsenic cca complying with bs num .
the sign plate face shall be finished to comply with bs num part num .
num erection of temporary traffic signs mounted on posts shall comply with clause num .
num any temporary covering of temporary traffic signs shall comply with clause num .
any temporary covering of road studs and road markings shall comply with any requirements described in appendix num .
num removal of temporary traffic signs shall be carried out as soon as they become superfluous or a hazard to traffic .
methods of removal shall ensure the minimum disturbance to traffic consistent with safety .
making good shall be carried out immediately after removal of the traffic sign .
num posts shall not protrude above the top of the sign unless supporting an external luminaire in which case the protrusion shall be kept to a minimum .
num traffic signals general num traffic signals shall comprise road junction signals pelican and puffin pedestrian crossing signals haul route signals and wigwag signals and shall be of the type described in appendix num .
num num traffic signals shall comply with sub clauses num to num of this clause and the requirements described in appendix num .
the installation and amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs num maintenance of traffic signals shall be in accordance with the quality management scheme described in appendix a .
num num traffic signal equipment shall comply with bs num num amd num num as amended by specification tr num .
it shall consist of control equipment including detector loops of a type which has received statutory type approval by the secretary of state in accordance with the procedure described in specification trg num .
traffic signal equipment with such statutory type approval shall be deemed valid for use in northern ireland .
they shall be maintained and serviced as described in appendix num .
num all traffic safety and management measures associated with work on traffic signals shall comply with clause num and any work entailing the switching off of existing signals shall not be carried out until the highway authority has been informed and until agreed alternative traffic management measures are in operation to safeguard and control vehicles using the highway .
controllers num controllers shall be provided and installed as described in appendix num .
the cabinet shall be mounted on a foundation with or without an adjacent inspection chamber as described in appendix num .
the foundation shall make provision for the entry of the appropriate number of cable ducts .
num traffic signal controllers shall in addition to any testing carried out in compliance with clause num be tested before delivery to site and again after installation but before commissioning to ensure they comply with the specification in appendix num .
cabling and electrical requirements num traffic signal equipment on each post shall be connected to the controller in accordance with the requirements described in appendix num .
num the installation shall comply with bs num regulations for electrical installations iee wiring regulations and the rules and regulations of the electricity supplier which provides the supply .
num num cables shall be pvc insulated and sheathed num v grade with steel wire armouring to bs num and shall be installed in ducts in compliance with clause num and terminated in compliance with clause num .
reinstatement shall be in compliance with clause num .
num earthing of all posts pushbutton boxes and the controller cabinet shall comply with clause num .
one conductor in each cable between a post and the equipment cabinet shall be a protective conductor and shall bond the earth terminal at the post to the main earth terminal .
num cable testing shall be in accordance with clause num .
tests a b c e f g h and j as defined in subclause num shall be conducted and all measurements recorded .
telecommunications carrier interface num where a connection interface to the plant of a telecommunications carrier is specified in appendix num the installation shall comply with the rules and regulations of that carrier .
posts num posts for traffic signals shall be installed in compliance with clause num and in the locations specified in appendix num .
signal heads num all backing boards shall have a border of class num retroreflective material white .
pressure sensitive material shall normally be supplied but vacuum applied material may be used in accordance with the manufacturers process .
application of pressure sensitive material shall take place only on dry surfaces .
an ambient temperature of numc minimum is recommended for satisfactory adhesion .
the material shall have a num mm width throughout .
where the continuous border bridges each backing boardsignal head a distinct cut edge shall be made to avoid any subsequent stretching shrinkage of dissimilar surfaces .
the finished border shall be of a neat appearance and not made up of short lengths of cuttings .
road markings num road markings associated with traffic signals shall comply with clause num .
num detector loops num the installation and testing of detector loops shall be in accordance with specification mch num .
num controlled and uncontrolled crossings num the location of controlled and uncontrolled crossings shall be as described in appendix num .
details shall be as described in appendix num .
num num surfacing of zebra crossing areas shall be laid with materials and to methods specified in appendix num .
the finished surfacing shall have a amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs num minimum skid resistance class of snum when tested in compliance with bs en num .
num num non retroreflecting road studs shall comply with clause num .
num road markings shall be white and comply with clause num for permanent markings and be of the material described in appendix num .
num traffic signals related control and other equipment where incorporated in controlled crossings together with installation and reinstatement shall comply with clause num for permanent traffic signals .
num traffic signs on gantries num where traffic signs including signals are erected on gantries the signs shall comply with the requirements of the relevant clauses of this series .
num fabricated steel gantries shall be constructed to the requirements described in appendix num and to comply with series num .
reinforced or prestressed concrete gantries shall be as described in appendix num and shall comply with series num .
num preparation and finish of metal and other surfaces general num permanent traffic signs and where specified in appendix num prescribed temporary traffic signs shall be prepared protected against corrosion and finished in compliance with bs num part num and with subclauses num to num of this clause .
faces num faces of sign plates shall be prepared to receive sign face materials in compliance with bs num part num and to the recommendations of the sign face material manufacturer following completion of any preparation and finish in subclauses num and num of this clause .
steel sign plates purlins frames and fittings num steel sign plates frames and fittings and purlins shall be prepared and protected in compliance with bs num part num and be as described in appendix num .
preparation to clean steel numnd quality and painting of surfaces shall comply with series num .
steel posts and post housings num num steel posts and post housings shall be prepared and protected in compliance with bs num part num .
painting shall comply with series num and be as described in appendix num .
aluminium or aluminium alloy posts and post housings num num aluminium or aluminium alloy posts and post housings shall unless otherwise required in appendix num be left unpainted except for the bituminous coating required by bs num part num below ground level .
a matt appearance shall be achieved in accordance with subclause numii of this clause .
aluminium or aluminium alloy sign plates framework and stiffening and luminaire housings num num backs of aluminium or aluminium alloy sheet and planks forming plate signs and external parts of luminaire housings and other permanently exposed components shall to prevent specular reflection be dulled using a method to be agreed by the overseeing organisation or be coated with either paint or plastics as follows i plastics coating and pretreatment before its application shall be in compliance with bs num part num ii surfaces to be painted shall be lightly abraded in accordance with subclauses num and num or degreased and etch primed with primer detailed in standard bdnum item no .
num .
except for etch primed surfaces all surfaces shall be immediately cleaned in accordance with subclause num .
all surfaces including etch primed surfaces shall be applied with one coat of matt polyurethane paint to standard bdnum item no .
num and colour as described in appendixnum .
the paint application shall comply with the appropriate recoat times over etch primer as detailed in the paint manufacturers data sheet and clauses in series num .
internally housed electrical components and ancillary equipment num ferrous steel shall be finished inside and out by galvanizing electroplating or zinc or aluminium spray all in accordance with series num or other equivalent preparation and finish .
aluminium and other metals shall unless otherwise required in appendix num be left untreated .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs stainless steel components num num unless otherwise required in appendix num stainless steel shall be left untreated except where the component is visible against the sign face when it shall be covered by a suitable material of a colour to match that part of the face .
cast iron and cast steel components num num external surfaces shall be prepared and protected as described in appendix num .
cabinets and feeder pillars shall have final coats of paint applied on site after final installation including the fitting of any internal apparatus required as part of the permanent works .
internal surfaces shall unless otherwise specified in appendix num receive the same treatment as for external surfaces except that final paint coats shall be applied before internal components are installed .
numf amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs wnumf numnaw num regulations sign classification and standards regulations num num subject to paragraphs num and num below all traffic signs used including retroreflecting road studs and road markings whether permanent or temporary shall be of the size shape colour and type prescribed for that use in the traffic signs regulations and general directions num statutory instrument num no .
num the traffic signs welsh and english language provisions regulations and general directions num statutory instrument num no .
num the zebra pelican and puffin pedestrian crossings regulations and general directions num statutory instrument num no .
num and subsequent amending regulations .
other relevant requirements are contained in the above regulations and general directions apart from bilingual sign layouts which shall be as stated in appendix num .
num num signs that are not prescribed in regulations need to be specially authorised by the welsh assembly government .
where the contractor proposes to use nonprescribed temporary traffic signs he shall obtain the agreement of the overseeing organisation to their intended design and location .
where the contractor proposes to use prescribed temporary traffic signs he shall obtain the agreement of the police and the highway authority to their intended location .
the contractor shall obtain authorisation and approval from the overseeing organisation for the use of the signs at the specific locations proposed .
num num signs that are changeable by means other than the purely mechanical require statutory type approval for their construction and operating mechanisms by the welsh assembly government .
this requirement is in addition to the need for the design of the sign to be prescribed or specially authorised .
the contractors proposal for signs that require statutory type approval shall include the reference numbers of any approval already issued in respect of that equipment .
the signs shall not be installed until appropriate approval or confirmation of existing approval by the overseeing organisation has been obtained .
national alterations of the overseeing organisation of wales sign classification num for the purposes of the contract the following classifications apply i num permanent traffic signs .
any of the traffic signs prescribed in the regulations or specially authorised by the welsh assembly government or any part thereof designed to remain in position at the completion of the permanent works or a traffic cone cylinder or other traffic delineator to be retained by the employer ii num prescribed temporary traffic signs .
any of the traffic signs defined in the regulations or specially authorised by the welsh assembly government or any part thereof described in appendix num which unless otherwise described in appendix num comply with the requirements of a permanent traffic sign but which will not remain in position at the completion of the permanent works iii num temporary traffic signs .
any of the traffic signs defined in the regulations or specially authorised by the welsh assembly government or any part thereof designed by the contractor in compliance with clause num which will not remain in position at the completion of the permanent works .
amendment august num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs nnum numni num regulations sign classification and standards num num subject to subclauses num and num below all traffic signs used including retroreflecting road studs and road markings whether permanent or temporary shall be the size shape colour and type prescribed for that use in the traffic signs regulations northern ireland num the zebra pelican and puffin pedestrian crossings regulations northern ireland num and subsequent amending regulations .
num signs that are not prescribed in regulations need to be specially authorised by the overseeing organisation .
where the contractor proposes to use nonprescribed temporary traffic signs he shall obtain the agreement of the overseeing organisation to their intended design and location .
where the contractor proposes to use prescribed temporary traffic signs he shall obtain the agreement of the police and the highway authority to their intended location .
the contractor shall obtain authorisation and approval from the overseeing organisation for the use of the signs at the specific locations proposed .
num signs that are changeable by means other than the purely mechanical require type approval by the overseeing organisation .
this requirement is in addition to the need for the design of the sign to be prescribed or authorised .
the contractors proposal for signs that require type approval shall include the reference numbers of any approval already issued in respect of that equipment .
the signs shall not be installed until appropriate approval or confirmation of existing approval by the overseeing organisation has been obtained .
sign classification num for the purpose of the contract the following classifications apply i permanent traffic signs .
any of the traffic signs prescribed in the regulations or specifically authorised by the overseeing organisation or any part thereof designed to remain in position at the completion of the permanent works or a traffic cone cylinder or other traffic delineator to be retained by the employer ii prescribed temporary traffic signs .
any of the traffic signs defined in the regulations national alterations of the overseeing organisation of northern ireland or specifically authorised by the overseeing organisation or any part thereof described in appendix num which unless otherwise described in appendix num comply with the requirements of a permanent traffic sign but which will not remain in position at the completion of the permanent works iii temporary traffic signs .
any of the traffic signs defined in the regulations or specifically authorised by the overseeing organisation or any part thereof designed by the contractor in compliance with clause num which will not remain in position at the completion of the permanent works .
numni num road markings general num road markings shall be white or yellow classes ynum and ynum complying with bs en num table num as appropriate except where an alternative shade has been specified in appendix num .
the markings shall consist of continuous or intermittent lines letters figures arrows or symbols and comply with subclauses num to num of this clause .
statutory requirements controlling road markings are contained in the traffic signs regulations northern ireland num and subsequent amending regulations .
permanent road markings num num permanent road markings shall be one of the following materials and comply with the colour location and material type requirements described in appendix num i thermoplastic road marking material or paint in accordance with bs en num ii permanent preformed road markings in accordance with bs en num iii other materials as described in appendix num .
they shall be also tested in road trials to the rollover class of pnum in accordance with procedure stated in bs en num to demonstrate compliance with the performance requirements as stated in subclauses num to num .
the test report shall give particulars of the quality amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs nnum and quantity of the material including drop on glass beads laid at the test site for future reference and comparison purposes should such a need arise .
num road marking shall have the following road performance as defined in bs en num for the period of the functional life starting from the date of application or when the road is trafficked whichever is later .
the materials to be used shall be to the same mix material quality quantity and rate of application as used on the test site .
property bs en num requirement value reference colour table num num .
white x y coordinates given num .
yellow class x y coordinates ynum ynum given luminance table num num .
class bnum num factor num .
class bnum num skid table num num .
class snum num resistance num .
class snum num retroreflect table num class num .
class rnum num ivity of rl for dry num .
class rnum num markings note num white num yellow num num the width tolerances and thickness for screed spray preformed and extrusion white or yellow lines shall be in accordance with the traffic signs regulations northern ireland num .
with the exception of the road markings listed in regulation num num of the traffic signs regulations northern ireland in no case shall any materials be laid more than num mm thick .
unless otherwise specified all white markings shall be reflectorised with glass beads in accordance with bs en num and bs en num by incorporation apart from preformed markings into the road marking mixture and to the wet surface of the marking .
the glass beads shall not have more than num ppm of arsenic trioxide num ppm of lead and num ppm of antimony .
the contractor shall supply test certificates showing compliance with these requirements .
num where there is requirement for improved visibility in wet conditions at night products showing the following performance in addition to that stated in sub clause num shall be used .
property bs en num requirement value reference retroreflect table num class rwnum num ivity num where there is a requirement for improved skid resistance as referred to in appendix num products showing the following performance in addition to that stated in sub clause num shall be used .
property bs en num requirement value reference skid table num class snum num resistance num the pavement shall be prepared in accordance with the following i where the marking is to be applied on concrete carriageways the transverse texturing shall be freed from all traces of curing compound by wire brushing or other approved means .
prior to the application of the thermoplastic material a tack coat compatible with the road surface and the marking material shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions ii on surface dressed carriageways all loose chippings where the marking is to be applied shall be removed prior to application .
num the application of permanent road markings shall be in accordance with the sector scheme described in appendix a .
road marking materials shall only be applied to surfaces which are clean and dry .
markings shall be free from raggedness at their edges and shall be uniform and free from streaks .
longitudinal road markings shall be laid to a regular alignment .
raised rib road markings num raised rib road markings shall only be used on motorways with full width hardshoulders or allpurpose roads both single and dual carriageway with at least num metre wide hardstrips .
they shall comply with sub clauses num numi num num num num and num of this clause .
num raised rib road markings shall be white lines which are continuous over the sections where they are specified in appendix num .
where specified in appendix num gaps shall be provided for drainage purposes .
num raised rib road markings shall be in accordance with the traffic signs regulations northern ireland num diagrams num and num as appropriate .
spacing of the transverse raised ribs shall be num mm or num mm as specified in appendix num .
num raised rib road markings shall not be used adjacent to hatched areas or central reserve crossings amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs nnum except as prescribed for use with diagrams num num and num .
temporary road markings num temporary road markings shall only be adopted with the prior approval of the overseeing organisation .
they shall comply with subclauses num to num of this clause or if required to be removable be constructed only from a proprietary preformed road marking material complying with bs en num .
num when temporary road markings are used on surfaces that will continue to be used by public traffic after their removal any shadow trace remaining after their removal shall be permanently obliterated .
preformed materials shall not be used for this obliteration .
num temporary road markings constructed from a proprietary preformed road marking material shall only be adopted in locations and on types of road surface as described in appendix num and shall comply with any other requirement therein .
the marking material shall be new and together with any primer shall be stored and installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and within the recommended shelf life .
num temporary preformed road markings shall only be applied to surfaces that are clean and dry .
upon removal they shall be disposed of off site and if any making good is necessary to the road surface it shall be satisfactorily carried out before the road is opened to traffic .
road markings on porous asphalt surfacing num spray paint thermoplastic applied by machine screed spray or extrusion .
or preformed road markings shall be used for carriageway markings on porous asphalt surfacing .
manual screeding shall not be permitted except for directional arrows and similar markings .
removal of road markings num the removal of road markings on surfaces that will continue to be used by traffic shall be undertaken in a manner that will avoid damage to the surface .
the removal of temporary road markings shall comply with subclauses num and num of this clause .
the removal of permanent road markings shall be by mechanical means only .
the contractor shall submit details of the system he proposes to use to the overseeing organisation for approval .
masking of road markings num num when black masking materials are required to cover existing permanent road markings they shall comply with bs num .
the total thickness of original and masking materials shall not exceed num mm .
num longitudinal road markings lateral tolerances num num for longitudinal road markings the lateral tolerance shall be within num mm from the designed position .
any discontinuities between road markings shall be replaced with a smooth taper from one road marking to the other .
the length of the transition shall be derived from table below .
all road markings shall comply with the dimensions angles and proportions stated in the traffic signs regulations northern ireland num and any subsequent amending regulations .
speed limit mph taper num num in num num num in num num num in num num num in num num num in num numni num road studs retroreflecting road studs num statutory requirements controlling retroreflecting road studs are contained in the traffic signs regulations northern ireland num and subsequent amending regulations .
num all retroreflecting road studs shall comply with bs en num and num and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and the sector scheme described in appendix a .
num retroreflecting road studs and components which do not fall into a category of bs en num but which have type approval of the overseeing organisation can be incorporated into the works .
they shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num the contractor shall submit details of the retroreflecting road studs he proposes to use in the works to the overseeing organisation for approval .
amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num traffic signs nnumf permanent retroreflecting road studs num permanent retroreflecting road studs shall be installed in the locations and to any other requirements as described in appendix num .
temporary retroreflecting road studs num temporary retroreflecting road studs shall be of the fluorescent greenyellow type to bs en num and shall be appropriate for the situation concerned .
they shall not be used for a second application .
adhesive used for the temporary retroreflecting road studs shall be removed from the carriageway on completion of the works .
non retroreflecting road studs num all non retroreflecting road studs shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions in locations and complying with any other requirements described in appendix num .
retroreflecting road studs on porous asphalt surfacing num num the edges of recesses for inset retroreflecting road studs in porous asphalt surfacing shall be milled when the material has cooled to ambient temperature .
care shall be exercised when removing porous asphalt to form the recess to prevent damage occurring to the cut edges and to prevent detritus clogging the porous asphalt surfacing .
surface applied road studs shall not be applied if there is evidence of moisture present on the surface of porous asphalt nor shall inset road studs be installed if moisture is present in the recess after milling of the asphalt .
amendment november num amendment november num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works series num num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts contents clause title page num num general num num num design of lighting columns brackets cctv masts cantilever masts foundations anchorages and attachment systems num num num data sheets num num num identification and location markings num num installation of foundations anchorages and attachment systems num num site tests on anchorages in drilled holes num num materials and surface finishes num num num handling transport and erection num num num amendments and additions to bs num num amd num num for lighting columns num num num amendments and additions to bs en num and bs en num for lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts num num num amendments and additions to bs num for lighting columns cctv masts and cantilever masts num num num attachments to lighting columns cctv masts and cantilever masts num num num laminated glass fibre reinforced plastic gfrp lighting columns num num brackets for laminated gfrp lighting columns num num national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland northern ireland numni num general nnum numni num handling transport and erection nnum denotes a clause or sample appendix which has a substitute national clause or sample appendix for one or more of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales or northern ireland .
volume num specification for highway works series num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts num num num general num num this series shall apply to the design supply and installation of lighting columns and brackets and cctv masts and cantilever masts for traffic signals andor speed cameras hereafter called cantilever masts within the following dimensional limitations i for steel aluminium and concrete lighting columns a post top columns not exceeding num m nominal height b columns with brackets not exceeding num m nominal height c bracket projections not exceeding num x nominal height or num m whichever is the lesser .
ii for glass fibre reinforced plastic lighting columns a columns not exceeding num m nominal height b bracket projections not exceeding num m. iii for steel cctv masts a post top masts not exceeding num m nominal height .
iv num for steel cantilever masts a nominal height not exceeding num m b cantilever projection not exceeding num m. where nominal height is taken as the distance between of the underside of the flange plate and the highest point of the mast see figure num of bd num dmrb num .
num num the contractor shall propose lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts which have been designed by the manufacturer .
the manufacture supply and verification of lighting columns and bracket arms shall comply with the quality management scheme described in appendix a .
the contractor shall design foundations for planted lighting columns and cantilever masts in accordance with bd num chapter num dmrb num or of bd num chapter num dmrb num using the soil type information as described in appendices num and num .
the contractor shall where required design i anchorages and attachment systems for columns and masts with flange plates to foundation or bridge deck ii foundations for columns and masts with flange plates as described in appendices num num and num .
num num lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts shall be supplied and installed in compliance with the relevant requirements of bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs num bs num and bs num together with the amendments and additions stated in clauses num num and num and all the other requirements of this series .
num brackets for lighting columns shall include wall mounted brackets and fixtures .
num temporary lighting on temporary diversions for traffic and crossovers shall comply with this series .
num num where lighting columns cctv masts and cantilever masts are to be in the vicinity of overhead power lines the contractor shall ensure that the appropriate electricity authorities are notified and give written agreement to the specific clearances to be provided and that warning notices as described in appendices num num and num are permanently fixed to these columns prior to erection .
num num headroom over the carriageway for cantilever mast shall be in accordance with the requirements of paragraph num of standard bd num dmrb num .
num num design of lighting columns brackets cctv masts cantilever masts foundations anchorages and attachment systems num num lighting columns brackets cctv masts cantilever masts the foundations of both planted columns and columns and masts with flange plates and the anchorages and attachment systems for columns and masts with flange plates shall be designed to comply with the requirements of standards bd num dmrb num bd num dmrb num bd num dmrb num and the technical approval scheme adopted by the overseeing organisation .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts num the contractor shall submit to the overseeing organisation a copy of the design and check certificates for lighting columns brackets cctv masts cantilever masts and foundations .
the design of the foundations shall be appropriate to the soil types encountered on site as identified in appendices num num and num .
aesthetic requirements num num the aesthetic design of lighting columns luminaires including those with bracket arms cctv masts and cantilever masts shall be submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation .
the design of lighting columns and luminaires including those with bracket arms shall comply with the general advice given in bs num for the appearance of lighting installations by day and by night both from the viewpoint of the road and from the surrounding neighbourhood .
num num data sheets num num the contractor shall complete the details in appendices num num and num in accordance with the instructions given in appendices num num and num .
the contractor shall provide the overseeing organisation with triplicate copies of the completed data sheets for each type of column and bracket cctv mast and cantilever mast not later than the date stated in appendices num num and num .
num num the columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts shall not be ordered or erected until the overseeing organisation has notified its acceptance of the completed data sheet in writing to the contractor .
num num identification and location markings num num all lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts shall carry unique identification marks which indicate the name of the manufacturer year of manufacture the unique product code and other relevant information to enable details of the lighting column and bracket cctv masts and cantilever masts to be determined by reference to the appropriate lighting column and bracket cctv masts and cantilever masts data sheets .
num the column and mast identification marks shall be permanent legible and clearly visible and be i on a permanent fixed label or ii hard stamped or iii formed in the material of the columnmast on an external face only .
it shall be located either within the base compartment or except in the case of hard stamping immediately above or below the door .
it shall not be located on the door .
all hard stamping shall be made only in a secondary member of the columnmast and shall be done in a manner which will not induce any stresses in the material of the main member of the columnmast .
num the bracket identification mark shall be permanent and legible and be i hard stamped or ii formed in the material of the bracket on an external face only .
the mark shall be located either on the luminaire spigot or on the underside of the bracket adjacent to the column shaft or wall or pole mounting plate .
num alternatively the bracket identification mark shall be hard stamped or formed in a detachable label supplied fixed to the bracket .
this label shall be moved from its temporary position and fixed on erection to a suitably provided hole next to the label on the column .
num num in addition location marks for inspection and maintenance purposes shall be applied to each column as described in appendices num num and num .
num installation of foundations anchorages and attachment systems num planted lighting columns and cantilever masts num num a layer of stnum concrete num mm thick complying with clause num shall be placed and compacted in the bottom of the excavation up to the base of the column or mast post .
num the cable entry slot shall be temporarily plugged as necessary in order to prevent any ingress of concrete or filling material during the concreting and backfilling operations .
num num the hole into which the lighting column or cantilever mast is placed shall be backfilled as follows i in the case of metal and glass fibre reinforced plastic columns with concrete or other material described in appendix num ii in the case of concrete columns with concrete or earth fill complying with subclause num of this clause or other material described in appendix num iii num in the case of cantilever masts with concrete or other material described in appendix num .
amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts num num num concrete backfill shall be stnum concrete complying with clause num well compacted by vibration over the full planting depth of the column mast post .
a duct equal in size to the width of the cable entry hole shall be formed through the concrete filling using a suitable preformed lining tube capable of retaining its crosssectional shape during compaction .
the concrete shall be placed num mm above ground level adjacent to the columnmast post and taper to ground level num mm from the columnmast post face .
num num earth backfill shall be class num material complying with clause num table num unless otherwise described in appendices num and num .
the material shall be placed in num mm thick layers and shall be well rammed and compacted in order to provide full lateral support to the planting depth of the columnmast post .
if the backfilling is disturbed for any reason it shall be reinstated in compliance with this clause .
a duct equal in size to the width of the cable entry hole shall be made through the backfill material using a suitable preformed lining tube capable of retaining its cross sectional shape during compaction .
num columns cctv masts and cantilever masts with flange plates num num concrete in the foundations shall comply with series num .
num num the bedding mortar between the underside of the columnmast flange plate and the top of the concrete base shall comply with clause num .
the bearing stresses in any bedding mortar under the flange plates shall not exceed num nmmnum .
num num a cable duct num mm diameter shall be provided through the foundation or bridge component as described in appendices num num and num .
num num steel anchorages and attachment systems shall be used and the anchorage shall include an internally threaded component to receive the attachment system i.e .
holding down bolt .
num num where anchorages in drilled holes are to be used the contractor shall unless otherwise described in appendices num num or num submit to the overseeing organisation at least num weeks before installation well attested and documented evidence that the proposed anchorage is i capable of complying with the test requirements specified in clause num and ii capable of resisting pulsating loading .
anchorages in drilled holes of an expanding type shall not be used .
num for anchorages in drilled holes the hole location shall be checked to ensure that the hole will be clear of reinforcement before drilling is carried out .
num before installation of anchorages in drilled holes the hole shall be sound clean and dry and the tolerance of the hole shall be within the values given by the anchorage manufacturer .
num the threads of steel anchorages shall be lined with grease having a high resistance to creep and being suitable for hot or cold smearing .
the grease shall provide protection to the threads for a minimum of either num months under cover or num months exposed on site .
num num attachment systems shall be tightened to the appropriate torque and have the minimum thread engagement calculated in accordance with the requirements of bs num num amd .
no .
num num march num subclause num .
num all voids in anchorages attachment systems and flange plates shall be filled with a nonsetting passive filler to prevent the collection of water .
num site tests on anchorages in drilled holes num num the contractor shall carry out site tests on anchorages in drilled holes .
for the purpose of this subclause the types of fixing referred to in clause num of bs num shall include anchorages .
where anchorages are tested they shall be loaded incrementally in tension in accordance with bs num except that they shall be capable of resisting a test load equal to num per cent above the nominal tensile load to be resisted by the anchorage in lieu of testing to failure .
the tensile load shall be determined in accordance with the criteria given in subclauses num to num of standard bd num dmrb num chapter num of standard bd num dmrb num and chapter num of bd num dmrb num .
incremental loads shall be held for not less than half a minute and the test load for not less than five minutes .
readings shall be taken immediately after applying load and at the end of the time intervals stated above .
num num the total movement of the anchorage shall not exceed num mm during the test .
any evidence of slip during loading up to the test load as demonstrated by a significant change in the slope of the loadextension curve shall constitute failure .
num the contractor shall test anchorages selected on behalf of the overseeing organisation at the testing frequency in accordance with appendix num .
amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts num num materials and surface finishes num num all steel fixings including doors door hinges chains and locks shall be stainless steel to bs en num bs num or bs en iso num and bs en iso num as appropriate or steel to bs en num bs en num or bs en num and bs en num as amended in clause num galvanized in compliance with series num .
num where different metals are in contact consideration shall be given to the necessary measures to avoid galvanic corrosion .
num num the surface preparation and protection of steel lighting columns brackets and wall mountings steel cctv masts and steel cantilever masts mountings and housings shall comply with appendix num and the relevant clauses in series num .
num num the exterior and interior surfaces of the intended planted depth of an aluminium alloy lighting column shaft and a length of num mm above the ground level shall be coated with a nonporous electrically insulating bitumen with a minimum layer thickness of num microns .
the coating shall only be applied after degreasing and after an approved preliminary treatment in order to ensure adhesion .
num the underside of an aluminium alloy flange plate shall be treated before erection with bituminous paint complying with bs num or bs num .
num the finish to concrete lighting columns and brackets shall be class fnum in compliance with clause num .
num num handling transport and erection num num lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts shall be handled transported and stored in such a way as to avoid any structural damage or damage to the surface protection system .
any damage incurred shall be made good in such a way that the structural performance and durability of the item shall be in no way reduced .
num num lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts shall be stored clear of the ground in such a way that contact with cement groundwater soil or ash or other deleterious material is prevented and that water does not accumulate on any surfaces or inside sections .
suitable packings shall be placed between the columnsmasts to allow a free passage of air and dispersion of water .
num all rivets bolts nuts washers screws small plates and small articles generally shall be suitably packed and identified .
all such items shall be stored under cover .
num num columns and masts shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the door shall face the direction described in appendices num num and num .
num wall mounted lighting brackets and fixtures shall be fixed as described in appendix num .
num num amendments and additions to bs num num amd num num for lighting columns num page num clause num delete note lantern fixing angle num or num and insert note lantern fixing angle num num or num .
in the table insert additional bracket projections w of num m num m num m and num m. num page num clause num figure num delete cable entry slot width dimension num mm and insert cable entry slot width dimension x. insert additional note as follows num cable entry slot width dimension x shall be either num mm or num mm as described in appendix num .
num page num clause num delete existing tables and replace by the following h sa a dnum a dnum m min min min num num num mnum num num num num mnum num num num num mnum num num delete num from figure num and c from figure num .
insert additional notes as follows num unless otherwise described in appendix num circumferential slotted holes shall be used instead of round holes in the flange plates in order to allow num of rotational adjustment .
num where slotted holes are required in the flange plate to allow for rotational adjustment of the column then the flange plate sizes shall be increased to give a suitable edge distance .
amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts num num the distance from the edge of the hole or slot to the edge of the plate shall be not less than dnum .
num washers complying with bs num shall be used between the holding down fastener and the flange plate .
num page num clause num delete existing table for post top lanterns and replace by the following dnum b lnum num num num num num num num num num num delete existing table for side entry lanterns and replace by the following dnum b lnum num num num num num num num num num num num num page num note b delete iso num num and insert iso num num page num clause num num column crosssection insert additional subclause as follows num material thickness tolerance unspecified num .
num deviation in shape delete content of entire subclause and insert the following crosssection dimensional tolerances num with a maximum of num mm .
num diameter of lantern connection ungalvanised num delete iso num num and insert iso num num num amendments and additions to bs en num and bs en num for lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts num for lighting columns and brackets num bs en num and bs en num shall apply subject to the following amendments and additions num page num clause num bs en num delete the last five lines in subclause num and replace with the steel shall be equivalent to or better than bs en num bs en num grade snum jr or bs en num grade snum joh .
num page num clause num bs en num and bs en num delete subclause num and replace with the steel used for foundation bolts shall be equivalent to or better than bs en num bs en num grade snum jr. num page num clause num bs en num and bs en num num replace pren num with bs num num amd num num num page num clause num bs en num and bs en num num replace pren num with bs num num pages num and num clause num bs en num and bs en num num delete subclauses num num and num and insert the following num.steel and aluminium lighting columns num num general .
arc welding of ferritic steels shall comply with bs en num and bs en num welding recommendations for welding of metallic materials .
arc welding of stainless steels shall comply with bs num .
arc welding of aluminium alloys shall comply with bs en num and bs en num .
num num procedures .
written welding procedures shall be used with testing to bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num for steel and bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num for aluminium alloys and shall apply to all production and repair procedures .
these shall be subject to reapproval after a period of seven years .
when applying bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num the welding consumables and procedures used for steel shall be such that the mechanical properties of deposited weld metal will not be less than the respective minimum specified values of the parent metal being welded .
weld testing shall be undertaken by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subclauses num and num .
approval shall be by an independent inspecting authority using registered amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts num welding engineers registered welding quality engineers or equivalent .
welding procedures shall be approved in accordance with bs en iso num .
preproduction test pieces shall represent the main assembly types .
num num welder qualification .
all welders shall be approved to bs en num for steel and bs en iso num for aluminium alloys .
the tests shall include in addition an application test representative of the main structural joints on which the welder is to be approved to work .
the main structural joints shall include where relevant the flange plate joint the base compartment to shaft joint the door reinforcement any intermediate column joint the column to bracket joint and the column seam weld .
welders shall be subject to reapproval in accordance with bs en num and bs en iso num .
weld testing shall be undertaken by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subclauses num and num .
approval shall be by an independent inspecting authority using registered welding engineers registered welding quality engineers or welding inspectors certified by the certification scheme for weldment inspection personnel cswip or equivalent .
test results shall be kept current and made available for review on request .
num inspection and nondestructive testing num num inspection personnel .
the manufacturer shall provide suitable personnel to carry out inspection of production welds as required in num to num .
personnel conducting visual inspection shall have a nationally recognised certificate of competence appropriate to the type of welding being inspected .
personnel conducting nondestructive testing ndt shall be certified according to a nationally recognised certification scheme appropriate to the equipment used and the weld groups inspected all in accordance with bs en num .
evidence of training and qualification shall be retained and made available for examination when required .
the results of all weld inspections shall be recorded .
num num visual inspection .
all welds shall be subject to visual inspection in accordance with bs en num prior to any ndt and galvanizing .
weld surfaces shall be free of slag residues and sharp edges .
all surfaces shall be free of traces of weld spatter arc strikes and contaminants .
the apparent throat dimensions of butt welds and the apparent leg length and apparent throat dimensions of fillet welds as measured by a welding gauge and taking into account any known lack of fit shall not be less than those specified except that local shortfalls up to num mm may be accepted provided the average over any num mm length is not less than the specified dimension .
the toe angle shall not be less than num .
the surface of all welds shall be free from cracks lack of fusion including overlap and slag .
isolated discontinuous porosity may be accepted provided it is not detrimental to the galvanizing process .
undercut shall not result in a section loss of more than num over any num mm length of joint nor shall its depth exceed num mm or num of the thickness whichever is the less .
num num magnetic particle inspection mpi and liquid penetrant inspection .
mpi shall be applied in accordance with bs en iso num to joints in steel lighting columns selected in accordance with num where any of the material thickness exceeds num mm .
liquid penetrant inspection in accordance with bs en num shall be applied to transverse welds in aluminium columns selected in accordance with num .
notwithstanding the requirements of num one of the above methods shall be applied as appropriate where on visual inspection the presence of cracking or lack of fusion may be suspected .
to aid inspection the profile of the weld may be dressed by burr grinding provided that the specified throat size and leg length is still maintained .
the surface of the weld shall be free of cracks lack of fusion and slag .
num num ultrasonic testing .
all butt joints selected in accordance with num shall be ultrasonically tested in accordance with bs en num where the column shaft is num mm thick or greater .
the weld shall be free of cracks .
the height of buried slag lack of fusion or lack of penetration shall not exceed num mm .
within num mm of the outer surface their individual length shall not exceed num mm .
the resulting net throat area loss over any num mm length of weld shall not exceed num .
num frequency of testing .
joints for mpi liquid penetrant inspection or ultrasonic testing shall be selected as follows num of lighting columns of each type shall be inspected .
the sample shall include all variations in joint geometry material thickness and weld size covered by the basic type that are within the scope of num and num .
if nonconformances are found the scope of mpi liquid penetrant inspection and ultrasonic testing shall be doubled .
if further nonconformances are found the whole batch shall be tested .
num reporting .
inspection records for production welds shall be retained by the manufacturer for seven years and those covering the production periods relating to the lighting columns supplied shall be made available for examination .
num destructive testing .
copies of certified reports of destructive tests on lighting columns supplied under earlier contracts with the overseeing organisation shall be made available for examination .
amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts num the contractor shall supply sample joints cut from complete lighting columns for destructive testing as selected on behalf of the overseeing organisation .
the sample joints shall be cut from the column extension piece bracket and welded anchorage where relevant .
the basis of selection shall be as follows a for orders of num to num lighting columns one complete lighting column for each type unless destructive testing has been carried out within the last year on a lighting column of that type .
the manufacture supply and verification of lighting columns and bracket arms shall comply with the quality management scheme described in appendix a. b for orders of num to num lighting columns one complete lighting column for each type unless destructive testing has been carried out within the last month on a lighting column of that type where the lighting column to be tested was also selected on behalf of the overseeing organisation .
c for orders exceeding num lighting columns two complete lighting columns for each type .
acceptance criteria shall be as specified in num except that in num the throat and leg dimension shall apply to the true rather than the apparent dimension .
in the event that there is a nonconformance arising from a serious deviation in materials preparation assembly or welding procedure the batch concerned shall be rejected and further production of the columns affected stopped until such time as the fault has been corrected .
a minor nonconformance shall only be accepted on the basis that further sampling and testing shows that fault is not repetitive and in the view of the overseeing organisation will not in that instance impair structural integrity .
if the problem can be traced to a particular manufacturing period operator piece of equipment or batch of materials and if proper traceability to individual batches of components can be assured only those batches affected may be subject to rejection .
the destructive test reports shall be retained by the manufacturer and recorded in a register for a period of two years .
the destructive test specimens shall be retained for a period of num months .
these shall be made available for examination on future contracts with the overseeing organisation .
num remedial work .
welds which do not comply with the specification may be repaired to an approved procedure as described in num .
num page num subclause num bs en num and bs en num num in the first paragraph delete in num in third paragraph delete num and add num num num and num num pages num and num clause num bs en num and bs en num delete subclauses num num and num num pages num num and num clause num bs en num and bs en num delete subclauses num num num and num num num for cctv masts and cantilever masts num bs en num applies subject to the following amendments page num clause num num delete the last five lines in subclause num and replace with the steel shall be equivalent to or better than bs en num bs en num grade snum jr or bs en num grade snum joh .
num delete subclause num and replace with the steel used for foundation bolts shall be equivalent to or better than bs en num bs en num grade snum jr .
page num clause num delete subclauses num num and num and insert the following num num.steel cctv masts and cantilever masts num num general .
arc welding of ferritic steels shall comply with bs en num and bs en num .
arc welding of stainless steels shall comply with bs en num .
num num procedures .
written welding procedures shall be used with testing to bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num for steel and shall apply to all production and repair procedures .
these shall be subject to reapproval after a period of seven years .
when applying bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num the welding consumables and procedures used for steel shall be such that the mechanical properties of deposited weld metal will not be less than the respective minimum specified values of the parent metal being welded .
weld testing shall be undertaken by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subclauses num and num .
approval shall be by an independent inspecting authority using registered welding engineers registered welding quality amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts num engineers or equivalent .
welding procedures shall be approved in accordance with bs en iso num .
preproduction test pieces shall represent the main assembly types .
num num welder qualification .
all welders shall be approved to bs en num .
the tests shall include in addition an application test representative of the main structural joints on which the welder is to be approved to work .
the main structural joints shall include where relevant the flange plate joint the base compartment to shaft joint the door reinforcement any intermediate mast joint the mast to bracket joint and the mast seam weld .
welders shall be subject to reapproval in accordance with bs en num .
weld testing shall be undertaken by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subclauses num and num .
approval shall be by an independent inspecting authority using registered welding engineers registered welding quality engineers or welding inspectors certified by the certification scheme for weldment inspection personnel cswip or equivalent .
test results shall be kept current and made available for review on request .
num inspection and nondestructive testing num num inspection personnel .
the manufacturer shall provide suitable personnel to carry out inspection of production welds as required in num to num .
personnel conducting visual inspection shall have a nationally recognised certificate of competence appropriate to the type of welding being inspected .
personnel conducting nondestructive testing ndt shall be certified according to a nationally recognised certification scheme appropriate to the equipment used and the weld groups inspected all in accordance with bs en num .
evidence of training and qualification shall be retained and made available for examination when required .
the results of all weld inspections shall be recorded .
num num visual inspection .
all welds shall be subject to visual inspection in accordance with bs en num prior to any ndt and galvanizing .
weld surfaces shall be free of slag residues and sharp edges .
all surfaces shall be free of traces of weld spatter arc strikes and contaminants .
the apparent throat dimensions of butt welds and the apparent leg length and apparent throat dimensions of fillet welds as measured by a welding gauge and taking into account any known lack of fit shall not be less than those specified except that local shortfalls up to num mm may be accepted provided the average over any num mm length is not less than the specified dimension .
the toe angle shall not be less than num .
the surface of all welds shall be free from cracks lack of fusion including overlap and slag .
isolated discontinuous porosity may be accepted provided it is not detrimental to the galvanizing process .
undercut shall not result in a section loss of more than num over any num mm length of joint nor shall its depth exceed num mm or num of the thickness whichever is the less .
num num magnetic particle inspection mpi and liquid penetrant inspection .
mpi shall be applied in accordance with bs en iso num to joints in steel cctv masts and cantilever masts selected in accordance with num where any of the material thickness exceeds num mm .
liquid penetrant inspection in accordance with bs num shall be applied to transverse joints in masts selected in accordance with num .
notwithstanding the requirements of num one of the above methods shall be applied as appropriate where on visual inspection the presence of cracking or lack of fusion may be suspected .
to aid inspection the profile of the weld may be dressed by burr grinding provided that the specified throat size and leg length is still maintained .
the surface of the weld shall be free of cracks lack of fusion and slag .
num ultrasonic testing .
all butt joints selected in accordance with num shall be ultrasonically tested in accordance with bs en num where the mast shaft is num mm thick or greater .
the weld shall be free of cracks .
the height of buried slag lack of fusion or lack of penetration shall not exceed num mm .
within num mm of the outer surface their individual length shall not exceed num mm .
the resulting net throat area loss over any num mm length of weld shall not exceed num .
num num frequency of testing .
joints for mpi liquid penetrant inspection or ultrasonic testing shall be selected as follows num of cctv masts of each type shall be inspected except for orders of num to num masts in which case num shall be inspected .
the sample shall include all variations in joint geometry material thickness and weld size covered by the basic type that are within the scope of num and num .
if nonconformances are found the scope of mpi liquid penetrant inspection and ultrasonic testing shall be doubled .
if further non conformances are found the whole batch shall be tested .
num num reporting .
inspection records for production welds shall be retained by the manufacturer for seven years and those covering the production periods relating to the cctv masts andor cantilever masts supplied shall be made available for examination .
num num destructive testing .
copies of certified reports of destructive tests on cctv masts andor cantilever masts supplied under earlier contracts with the overseeing organisation shall be made available for examination .
amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts num the contractor shall supply sample joints cut from complete cctv masts andor cantilever masts for destructive testing as selected on behalf of the overseeing organisation .
the sample joints shall be cut from the mast extension piece bracket and welded anchorage where relevant .
the basis of selection shall be as follows a num for orders of num to num cctv masts andor cantilever masts no requirement .
b num for orders of num to num cctv masts andor cantilever masts one complete cctv mast andor cantilever mast for each type unless destructive testing has been carried out within the last month on a cctv mast andor cantilever mast of that type where the cctv mast andor cantilever mast to be tested was also selected on behalf of the overseeing organisation .
c num for orders exceeding num cctv masts andor cantilever masts two complete cctv masts andor cantilever masts for each type .
acceptance criteria shall be as specified in num except that in num the throat and leg dimension shall apply to the true rather than the apparent dimension .
in the event that there is a nonconformance arising from a serious deviation in materials preparation assembly or welding procedure the batch concerned shall be rejected and further production of the masts affected stopped until such time as the fault has been corrected .
a minor nonconformance shall only be accepted on the basis that further sampling and testing shows that fault is not repetitive and in the view of the overseeing organisation will not in that instance impair structural integrity .
if the problem can be traced to a particular manufacturing period operator piece of equipment or batch of materials and if proper traceability to individual batches of components can be assured only those batches affected may be subject to rejection .
the destructive test reports shall be retained by the manufacturer and recorded in a register for a period of two years .
the destructive test specimens shall be retained for a period of num months .
these shall be made available for examination on future contracts with the overseeing organisation .
num num remedial work .
welds which do not comply with the specification may be repaired to an approved procedure as described in num .
page num subclause num in first paragraph delete numand add num in third paragraph delete num and add num num num and num page num clause num delete subclauses num num and num page num clause num delete subclauses num num num and num num num amendments and additions to bs num for lighting columns cctv masts and cantilever masts num num for lighting columns cctv masts and cantilever masts page num num after paragraph num insert additional paragraphs as follows num the door arrangement shall be such that it can be opened by releasing a single threaded locking fastener .
the fastener shall be of stainless steel to bs en iso num and bs en iso num or bs num with the dimensions given in hcd drawing number knum .
when the door is secured the fastener head shall be completely recessed into the door in a circular recess as indicated in hcd drawing number knum .
six door keys as shown on hcd drawing number knum or for alternative vandal resistant locks approved by the overseeing organisation shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation .
the locking fastener shall be suitable for opening with the standard key detailed in hcd drawing number knum .
num for lighting columns page num num after paragraph num insert additional paragraph as follows where a cable entry slot width of num mm is provided the minimum size of cableway from the cable entry slot to the base compartment shall be num mm after page num insert hcd drawing number knum .
amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts num num num attachments to lighting columns cctv masts and cantilever masts num attachments to lighting columns and cctv masts shall be by means of circumferential clamps of stainless steel complying with aisi grade num or other suitable material which shall not damage the column or its protective coating .
num num attachments to cantilever masts shall be in accordance with chapter num of bd num dmrb num .
num num laminated glass fibre reinforced plastic gfrp lighting columns manufacture of gfrp laminates num the columns shall be produced either by hand lay up or mechanical moulding technique .
the mechanical manufacture shall be carried out either by filament winding centrifugal casting compression moulding resin injection or any other appropriate method accepted by the overseeing organisation .
num an exterior resin rich layer of at least num mm thickness shall be provided to ensure adequate protection of the reinforcing fibres against adverse effects of the weather and possible chemical attack .
num columns containing bubbles cracks holes pits or other voids each greater than num mm in area shall be rejected .
num num the dimension and tolerances shall be those given in bs num for seamless metal columns .
the outer surface shall have a smooth uniform taper along its total length .
materials for gfrp laminates num the fibre reinforced plastic shall be in the form of laminate made of thermosetting resin fibre reinforcement mainly glass fibre catalyst system and filler .
num the resins used shall conform to the appropriate british standards .
polyester resins shall be based on isophthalic acid and conform to bs num type b .
num any fillers and pigments incorporated in the resin shall form part of the total resin system and shall be subject to acceptance of the overseeing organisation .
num num fibre reinforcement shall conform to the appropriate british standards .
where glass fibre is used as the base for mat or chopped fibre it shall conform to bs en num bs en num and bs en num and shall be treated with an appropriate finish compatible with the resin system used .
num all accelerators catalysts and hardeners shall be used in accordance with the resin manufacturers instructions .
testing of gfrp laminates num the properties of the laminates shall be verified by testing as described in subclauses num to num of this clause .
any material failing any of the tests listed shall be rejected .
such tests shall unless otherwise described in appendix num be carried out on samples representing the batch of columns to be supplied under the contract .
num two types of samples shall be provided for the tests i samples from a specially prepared flat laminate for type tests or where changes in raw materials or manufacturing techniques are proposed .
these shall comprise tests for colour fastness electric strength water absorption and impact strength .
ii num samples cut from complete columns to be used for quality control purposes to be carried out at a frequency of one in each fifty production columns .
each column for tests will be selected on a random basis and will be examined by visual inspection and for loss on ignition .
num a flat laminate sample num mm num mm square by num mm num mmnum mm thick shall be prepared by hand layup method using the same curing conditions resin and reinforcement systems as used for production columns .
the total glass fibre content shall not exceed num by weight .
num num the colour fastness test shall be conducted in accordance with bs en iso num bs num method numb and the results assessed by method numa .
material with a colour change assessed greater than moderate will not be accepted .
num num the electric strength test shall be carried out in accordance with bs en num iec num .
the electric strength shall be not less than num kvmm .
num num the water absorption test shall be carried out in accordance with bs en iso num .
the absorption of water shall be not greater than num milligrammes .
num num the impact strength test shall be carried out in accordance with bs en iso num bs num method numb .
the impact resistance shall be at least num kjm .
num num the loss on ignition tests shall be carried out in accordance with bs num method num .
the loss on ignition on samples taken at random throughout the length of a column shall not exceed num after amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts subtracting the amount allowed for non combustible fillers .
the percentage of glass fibre remaining following ignition shall be at least num by weight .
num samples cut randomly throughout the length of a column shall be visually inspected to confirm that there are no delaminations or voids greater than specified in subclause num of this clause and that the laminate is fully densified and includes the required number of laminations .
num brackets for laminated gfrp lighting columns general num brackets shall consist of a galvanized steel tube assembly with an external selfskinning rigid polyurethane foam moulding .
materials num num the steel tube assembly shall comply with bs en num and bs num and the requirements of this series .
num num the rigid polyurethane foam shall be moulded in accordance with the manufacturers instructions to give a bulk density within the range of num num kgmnum when in the form of a test sheet in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
the surface shall be free from obvious defects such as voiding pitting or cracking .
it shall have a surface hardness of at least dnum when measured in accordance with bs en iso num .
num the polyurethane moulding shall be primed with a two part polyurethane primer and finished with a two part polyurethane top coating all in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
testing of polyurethane foam num properties of foam shall be verified by testing using specimens cut from moulded test sheets of num mm nominal thickness using the same material as in the manufacture of the bracket arms .
num the apparent bulk density of a specimen shall be determined and be within the range of num num kgmnum .
the method of testing shall be in accordance with the polyurethane foam manufacturers instructions .
num num the impact strength of a specimen shall be determined in accordance with bs en iso num bs num method numb and shall be at least num kjm .
num the flexural stress at a deflection of num mm carried out on a specimen shall be in the range of num to num mpa .
the method of testing shall be in accordance with the polyurethane foam manufacturers instructions .
num the tests specified in subclauses num num and num of this clause shall each be carried out on two specimens and unless otherwise stated in appendix num the results shall be representative of the batch of columns to be supplied .
num evidence of quality control including results of tests similar to those required in subclauses num num and num of this clause shall be made available when required by the overseeing organisation .
num tests specified in subclauses num num and num of this clause shall be carried out when changes in raw materials or manufacturing techniques are proposed .
for quality control purposes testing shall be carried out in accordance with subclause num of this clause on each production batch of brackets which are to be fitted to columns .
numf amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts nnum numni num general num num this series shall apply to the design supply and installation of lighting columns and brackets and cctv masts and cantilever masts for traffic signals andor speed cameras hereafter called cantilever masts within the following dimensional limitations i for steel aluminium and concrete lighting columns a post top columns not exceeding num m nominal height b columns with brackets not exceeding num m nominal height c bracket projections not exceeding num x nominal height or num m whichever is the lesser .
ii for glass fibre reinforced plastic lighting columns a columns not exceeding num m nominal height b bracket projections not exceeding num m. iii for steel cctv masts a post top masts not exceeding num m nominal height .
iv num for steel cantilever masts a nominal height not exceeding num m b cantilever projection not exceeding num m. where nominal hieght is taken as the distance between of the underside of the flange plate and the highest point of the mast see figure num of bd num dmrb num .
num num the contractor shall propose lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts which have been designed by the manufacturer .
the manufacture supply and verification of lighting columns and bracket arms shall comply with the quality management scheme described in appendix a .
the contractor shall design foundations for planted lighting columns and cantilever masts in accordance with bd num chapter num dmrb num or of bd num chapter num dmrb num using the soil type information as described in appendices num and num .
national alterations of the overseeing organisation of northern ireland the contractor shall where required design i anchorages and attachment systems for columns and masts with flange plates to foundation or bridge deck ii foundations for columns and masts with flange plates as described in appendices num num and num .
num num lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts shall be supplied and installed in compliance with the relevant requirements of bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num num bs en num and bs num bs num and bs num together with the amendments and additions stated in clauses num num and num and all the other requirements of this series .
num brackets shall include wall and wood pole mounted brackets and fixtures .
num temporary lighting on temporary diversions for traffic and crossovers shall comply with this series .
num num where lighting columns cctv masts and cantilever masts are to be in the vicinity of overhead power lines the contractor shall ensure that the appropriate electricity authorities are notified and give written agreement to the specific clearances to be provided and that warning notices as described in appendices num num and num are permanently fixed to these columns prior to erection .
num num headroom over carriageway for cantilever masts shall be in accordance with the requirements of paragraph num of standard bd num dmrb num .
numni num handling transport and erection num num lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts shall be handled transported and stored in such a way as to avoid any structural damage or damage to the surface protection system .
any damage incurred shall be made good in such a way that the structural performance and durability of the item shall be in no way reduced .
num num lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts shall be stored clear of the ground in such a way that contact with cement groundwater soil or ash or other deleterious material is prevented and amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num road lighting columns and brackets cctv masts and cantilever masts that water does not accumulate on any surfaces or inside sections .
suitable packings shall be placed between the columnsmasts to allow a free passage of air and dispersion of water .
num all rivets bolts nuts washers screws small plates and small articles generally shall be suitably packed and identified .
all such items shall be stored under cover .
num num columns and masts shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the door shall face the direction described in appendices num num and num .
num wall and wood pole mounted lighting brackets and fixtures shall be fixed as described in appendix num .
nnumf amendment november num amendment may num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works series num electrical work for road lighting and traffic signs contents clause title page num general num num site records num num location of lighting units and feeder pillars num num change of lighting arrangements num num temporary lighting num num radio interference num num luminaires num num lamps num num photoelectric control units pecus num num shorting plugs dummy pecus num num time switches num num ballasts num num ignitors for discharge lamps num num starters for fluorescent lamps num num capacitators num num cutouts fuse holders fuses and miniature circuit breakers mcbs num num base compartment fixing arrangements num num feeder pillars num num wiring num num earthing num num underground and ducted cable num num cable joints num num armoured cable terminations num num inspection and testing to be carried out by the contractor num num preparation and finish of metal and other surfaces num num national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland northern ireland clause title page numni general nnum denotes a clause or sample appendix which has a substitute national clause or sample appendix for one or more of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales or northern ireland .
volume num specification for highway works series num electrical work for road lighting and traffic signs electrical work for road lighting and traffic signs num num general num num materials equipment and workmanship required under the contract shall comply with bs num regulations for electrical installations iee wiring regulations and the rules and regulations of the electricity supplier who provides the supply .
the installation and maintenance of electrical apparatus and cabling for road lighting and traffic signs shall comply with the quality management scheme detailed in appendix a .
the contractor shall take into account engineering recommendation g.num model code of practice covering electrical safety in the planning installation commissioning and maintenance of public lighting and other street furniture .
other relevant requirements are contained in the electricity at work regulations num .
the contractor shall employ only competent personnel each of whom holds a competent persons authorisation certificate in accordance with the model form in appendix b of the above document g.num but modified as specified below which has been duly completed by the contractor and authorised by a designated responsible person in the authority or company as defined in clause num of g.num all in accordance with clause num of g.num .
the form of certificate as specified above shall be modified on page bnum of g.num by insertion of the following after the space for name and address of employer name of authority or company in addition to the requirements of subclauses num and num of g.num each competent person as defined in g.num clause num shall be provided by the contractor with not less than one copy of the above certificate duly completed and signed as approved and such certificates shall be retained and be available at all times for inspection on the works on request by the overseeing organisation .
a suitable work allocation record shall be kept by the contractor to enable works to be identified with the operatives and supervisors responsible for those works .
num the following definitions shall apply i a road lighting unit shall consist of the following as described in the contract column bracket wall mounting electrical equipment as defined in iv below and wiring excluding electrical supply cable .
ii a lit sign unit shall consist of a traffic sign requiring an electricity supply and electrical equipment and wiring as in i above .
iii the term lighting unit applies to both road lighting units and lit sign units .
iv electrical equipment for lighting units shall consist of the following as described in the contract luminaires photoelectric control units pecus shorting plugs lamps time switches ballasts ignitors starters capacitors cutouts fuses fuse holders and miniature circuit breakers mcbs .
v the network is the electrical distribution system installed by the contractor from the electricity suppliers interface to the lighting units .
num num each network shall operate on a single phase numv num to num or three phase numv num to num .
num the contractor shall provide facilities for the electricity supplier for service connections and commissioning of the network .
num a dedicated feeder pillar shall be provided for the overseeing organisations network .
supplies provided to electrical equipment and lighting units for third parties shall not be connected to the overseeing organisations network .
where required and described in appendix num electrical isolation pillars shall be provided on the network at the maintenance boundaries between the overseeing organisation and third parties with the prior agreement of the overseeing organisation .
num site records num in accordance with the requirements of the electricity at work regulations the contractor shall on the completion of the electrical work provide a set of asinstalled drawings or transparencies showing as a minimum the position and identification mark including luminaire type modification status lamp setting lamp type and serial numbers of equipment requiring electrical connections ducts underground cables and joints and the type and depth of cables .
the contractor shall also supply test certificates and operation and maintenance manuals .
any additional requirements for records shall be as described in appendix num .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num electrical work for road lighting and traffic signs num num locational measurements shall be taken of the underground equipment to the nearest num mm from the nearest edge of the carriageway or fence line .
offsets to cables and ducts shall be recorded at num m intervals along their line .
offsets shall be defined longitudinally by distance from a permanent highway feature a marker post or other suitable point .
num the contractor shall keep a daily record of the work in sufficient detail including the type and drum number of underground cables to enable site records to be completed .
a copy of the daily record shall be provided by the contractor on the next working day for retention and use by the overseeing organisation .
num num the contractor shall supply to the overseeing organisation one master and two prints of the asbuilt drawings of power supply arrangements for road lighting and traffic signal installations immediately upon completion of the installation work .
num location of lighting units and feeder pillars num the position of lighting units and feeder pillars is described in appendix num .
the exact location will be agreed on site before commencement of any associated ground work .
the contractor shall be responsible for recording the actual location .
num in cases where the location of an item has been determined as indicated above and it is impossible because of underground obstruction to install the item then any excavation shall be backfilled and reinstated to its original condition .
num change of lighting arrangements num num no lighting unit shall be switched on or off dismantled resited replaced or removed without prior approval of the overseeing organisation .
num temporary lighting num the standard of temporary lighting units shall conform to the clauses in this series and appendix num .
num the contractor shall ensure that any temporary lighting he provides does not cause glare to traffic using any highway nor annoyance to occupants of surrounding property .
num radio interference num num electrical equipment shall be installed so that levels of radio interference given in bs en num are not exceeded .
num luminaires num where described in appendix num luminaires fitted with integral control gear shall have a fuse holder adjacent to the terminal block with a cartridge fuse protecting each set of control gear .
num luminaires for road lighting shall i num comply with bs en num and be as described in appendix num ii be fitted in accordance with manufacturers instructions with no gap between the luminaire and the shoulder of any bracket arm iii num for the luminaire optical system lamp housing have degree of protection rating ip num to bs en num unless a higher rating is specified in appendix num iv num for the luminaire control gear housing have a degree of protection rating ip num to bs en num unless a higher rate is specified in appendix num v num be fitted with a pecu socket located in the canopy unless otherwise specified in appendix num vi num meet the structural design and aesthetic approval requirements of clause num .
num num traffic sign luminaires shall comply with bs num appendix num and the following i external lighting luminaires shall be correctly positioned to meet the luminance requirements of the sign .
ii num mean sign luminance shall be category num of bs num unless otherwise stated in appendix num. iii num impact strength shall be category num of bs num unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
num lamps num lamps shall be compatible with the luminaires used .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num electrical work for road lighting and traffic signs num num num the initial luminous flux of a lamp multiplied by the lamp flux maintenance factor for the projected lamp life shall be taken as its light output for road lighting design .
num lamps shall not be fitted until columns brackets and sign posts have been erected and the luminaires have been installed .
lamps for road lighting num num low pressure and high pressure sodium vapour lamps shall comply with bs en num .
num photoelectric control units pecus num photoelectric control units pecus shall comply with bs num .
they shall have differential switch on switch off levels as described in appendix num .
they shall be designed where possible so that in the event of a fault occurring in the unit they cause the load to be switched on .
num pecus shall i be secured as appropriate to the a road lighting luminaire canopy b top of pole located close to feeder pillar c top of sign post d internally illuminated sign housing or e luminaire of externally illuminated sign ii include a delay device to prevent the lamp being switched in response to transient changes in light conditions iii be indelibly marked with the a manufacturers identification mark b model number and c switch on level iv be provided with a gasket or grommet to maintain the ip protection rating of the luminaire v be installed to the manufacturers instructions .
num where luminaires are a pair mounted on twin arm brackets unless otherwise specified in appendix num one luminaire shall be fitted with a pecu to control both luminaires and the other luminaire shall be fitted with a shorting plug .
the luminaire to be fitted with the shorting plug shall be as described in appendix num .
num where described in appendix num circuits shall be group switched as specified therein .
num shorting plugs dummy pecus num shorting plugs shall i be interchangeable with pecus ii have the line and load terminals permanently connected internally and iii be clearly distinguishable from pecus .
num time switches num time switches shall i be electrically or electronically driven ii have an electrically wound spring or battery reserve of not less than num hours unless otherwise described in appendix num iii be equipped with a solar dial suitable for the geographic location or equivalent means of setting and seasonal adjustment iv have num switched onoff periods per num hours v be capable of switching a num a inductive load current at the specified operating voltage of the network .
num ballasts num num unless otherwise specified in appendix num ballasts shall comply with bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en num or bs en num as appropriate and be tap selected to the specified operating voltage of the network .
num the terminals shall be indelibly marked to indicate all wiring connections and operating voltages .
num ignitors for discharge lamps num unless otherwise specified in appendix num ignitors shall not be incorporated in the lamps .
num ignitor lamp and ballast shall be mutually compatible .
num starters for fluorescent lamps num starters shall comply with bs en num and shall be incorporated in the electrical equipment where applicable .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num electrical work for road lighting and traffic signs num num capacitors num capacitors shall comply with bs en num and bs en num and be supplied complete with fixing clips discharge resistors and either sealedin cable tails or shrouded terminals .
num capacitors shall correct the lamp circuit power factor to not less than num lagging .
num cutouts fuse holders fuses and miniature circuit breakers mcbs num cutouts fuse holders and mcbs shall have moulded dripproof housings to ip num or above .
num cutouts shall be double pole and comply with bs num .
num terminals shall be sufficient for the conductors as described in appendix num .
they shall be clearly labelled to differentiate circuits and phases .
num when fuse holders are intended to be used as isolating devices special tools or protective measures shall not be necessary to extract them .
num num fuse links shall comply with the requirements of either bs en num bs en num bs numbs num or bs num .
they shall be of high breaking capacity type and be of a value specified in appendix num to protect the circuit .
num num miniature circuit breakers shall be in accordance with bs en num and bs en num for use on the specified operating voltage of the network at single or three phase as appropriate .
their short circuit current rating and type shall be as described in appendix num .
thermal or magnetic excess current tripping devices shall be provided with a mechanism to ensure that the contact can not be held closed against a fault .
num num where mcbs are intended to be used as isolating devices a lock off facility shall be provided .
num base compartment fixing arrangements num electrical equipment described in clauses num to num installed within the base compartment of columns or posts shall be positioned as described in appendix num and appendix num and fixed in accordance with manufacturers instructions with corrosion resistant fixing screws .
num feeder pillars num feeder pillars shall be constructed in the materials described in appendix num .
they shall comply with ip num of bs en num .
they shall include a full size back board of varnished marine plywood at least num mm thick or other suitable nonhygroscopic material .
alternatively a purposedesigned equipment mounting system may be used .
the entry for cables shall be via the root .
num num the distribution mcbs or fuse boards shall have sufficient spare capacity to accommodate at least one extra circuit .
one three phase spare way on a three phase distribution unit and one single phase spare way on a single phase distribution unit .
there shall be at least num usable spare space on the back board .
num num the feeder pillar shall be fitted with a suitably rated num to numphase and neutral switch fuse to bs en num as appropriate for the supply cable .
num num the pillar doors shall be fitted with tamper proof locks all locks being identical in pattern and two sets of keys shall be provided .
all hinges and locks shall be of stainless steel unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
num num distribution boards shall be provided with an external earth phase barriered and colour coded .
they shall be fitted with the same number of live and neutral bus bar terminals as there are outgoing circuits plus at least one spare way .
num num circuit details and labelling shall be provided in each feeder pillar as described in appendix num .
num num the main earthing terminal in each feeder pillar shall be connected to earth as described in appendix num .
num num unless otherwise stated in appendix num feeder pillars shall be mounted on a num mm thick foundation of stnum concrete in compliance with clause num .
after completion of the cabling the feeder pillar base shall be filled to num mm below the door with rounded coarse aggregate conforming with table num of bs en num num aggregate with a grading category of gcnum .
num num a durable warning sign indicating danger num volts or danger num volts as appropriate shall be fixed to the front of the pillar where applicable .
num wiring num all wiring and installation of components within the column post or lit sign unit shall be as described in appendix num and appendix num .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num electrical work for road lighting and traffic signs num num num wiring between the terminal block in the luminaire and the components in the base of the column or sign unit shall be pvc or xlpe insulated and sheathed single multicore or composite cable to bs num of num volt grade .
phase and neutral copper conductors shall be not less than num mm in crosssectional area except that where the vertical unsupported length does not exceed num metres their crosssectional area may be reduced to num mm .
cable types and sizes shall be selected to ensure that the operation of the lighting systems shall not be adversely affected .
num where electronic ignitors are used with remote control gear single core cable shall be used .
num the final connection between equipment mounted in the base compartment and the cut out shall be made using pvc or xlpe insulated and sheathed single core cable of a minimum crosssectional area of num mm .
num all cables shall be correctly colour coded throughout their length and labelled appropriately at the feeder pillar and the cutout .
num unsupported lengths of cable shall be kept to a minimum and shall not be allowed to come into contact with components by their freedom of movement .
where there is more than one cable they shall be secured together at one metre intervals throughout the unsupported length .
vertical cables within posts or columns shall be adequately supported along their length at the top of the cable run .
num on double bracket columns the wiring shall connect pecu sockets in series unless otherwise specified in appendix num .
num wiring shall wherever possible be housed inside columns wall brackets and posts or stiffening members .
where it is external it shall be as described in appendix num .
connections between conduit and sign housings switchboxes and other components shall be waterproof and be smooth internally .
num all unused cores in cables shall be cut to a minimum length long enough to connect to the furthest workingoff point within the unit and shall be cut to equal length .
the ends of the cores shall be tied together and sealed with selfamalgamating waterproof jointing tape .
the unused cores shall be coiled and strapped in a suitable unobtrusive position .
num earthing num circuit protective and equipotential conductors shall be installed as shown on the drawings and shall be greenyellow pvc or xlpe insulated or sleeved .
where bolted connections are required these conductors shall be terminated in accordance with manufacturers instructions in correctly sized purpose made lugs .
such connections shall be made with non ferrous nuts bolts and washers .
num a circuit protective conductor shall connect the earth terminal on each luminaire to the main earth terminal associated with the service cutout unit .
num a separate circuit protective conductor of not less than num mm crosssectional area shall connect all metal enclosures of all electrical components to the main earth terminal .
num all extraneous conductive parts as described in bs num and including doors to feeder pillars lighting columns and lit sign units shall be bonded to the main earth terminal using an equipotential bonding conductor of num mm crosssectional area when the lighting unit is directly serviced by a tncs supply .
earth electrodes shall be installed where necessary .
num all street lighting and other electrically supplied street furniture shall be earthed and bonded in compliance with bs num .
num underground and ducted cable num num cables shall have xlpe insulation and sheathing material coloured in accordance with national joint utilities group publication guidelines on the positioning and colour coding of utilities apparatus .
the identification of the conductors by colour shall be as per table num of bs num and every core shall be identifiable by colour throughout its length .
the sheathing material shall be appropriate to the ground conditions in which it will be laid .
in ground that is liable at any time to become waterlogged then the sheathing material shall have an astm fnum tested maximum permeability of num g.dnum num r.h nummm .
the cables shall be num v grade with steel wire or aluminium strip armouring to bs num or bs num and all conductors shall be of equal cross sectional area .
the contractor shall provide to the overseeing organisation evidence that each cable length delivered to site has been tested at the place of manufacture and complies with the testing requirements of bs num or bs num according to the cable used .
num num service ducts shall be self coloured in accordance with national joint utilities group publication guidelines on the positioning and colour coding of utilities apparatus and shall comply with series num and appendix num .
num cable covers for protection of underground cables shall comply with bs num and shall be installed as described in appendix num .
when cable covers are installed marker tapes are not required .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num electrical work for road lighting and traffic signs num num cable trenches shall be excavated to the lines described in appendix num and in accordance with clause num .
the depth of excavation shall be such that cables laid under verges footways or open ground shall have a minimum cover of num mm and under carriageways of num mm or num mm below formation whichever is the greater depth .
num cables shall be laid without sharp bends and kinks and in accordance with any particular requirements in appendix num .
if required additional protection and support shall be provided as described in appendix num .
num num where cables are laid across or within num mm of filter drains they shall be contained within a duct .
the duct shall be surrounded with num mm of stnum concrete in compliance with clause num .
num cables following the same route shall unless otherwise described in appendix num occupy the same trench with a clearance of num mm between the outer sheath of the cables .
num power supply cables other than those associated solely with the communications system shall not be installed within num mm of signal or communication cables within num mm of telecommunication cables or within num mm of hv cables unless otherwise described in appendix num .
num cables shall only be laid when the ambient temperature is above numc and the cable has been stored at a temperature greater than numc for the previous num hours .
num cables shall not be bent to an internal radius of less than num times the external diameter of the cable or less than the radius recommended by the manufacturer whichever is greater .
num sufficient length of cable shall be allowed for its termination .
when termination does not proceed immediately following the installation of the cable its end shall be sealed against the ingress of moisture .
if such cable ends are buried their positions shall be marked with a permanent marker block consisting of a num mm square x num mm deep precast concrete block having a mark as described in appendix num indented into its top surface and recorded on the site records .
num when duct or trough alignments differ from those of the trench the transition from one to the other shall not exceed num horizontally or vertically .
num cables laid in trench shall unless otherwise specified in appendix num be both bedded on and covered by a num mm thickness of lightly compacted graded sand or equivalent material passing a num mm bs sieve .
class num material complying with table num and compacted to the requirements therein shall then be deposited to a thickness of num mm prior to further backfilling in compliance with subclause num of this clause .
num a yellow selfcoloured pvc or polythene plastic tape for cable marking not less than num mm thick and num mm wide with the wording street lighting cables below printed in black along the full length so as to occupy not less than num of its available length and occurring at least at num m intervals shall be laid approximately num mm above any power supply cable .
where several cables are laid in one trench only one line of marker tape need be installed .
num where cables are required to be laid in ducts the contractor shall swab through the duct prior to drawing in the cables and a further draw rope .
on completion of cabling ducts shall be left with a draw rope in place and resealed with split plugs or suitable alternative material to adequately seal the ducts against the ingress of foreign matter .
where cables are laid in troughs they shall be covered with sand or equivalent material passing a num mm bs sieve up to the level of the cover .
num backfilling to cable trenches shall comply with clause num and to prevent damage by the ingress of foreign matter shall whenever practical be undertaken immediately after the specified operations preceding it have been completed .
the contractor shall backfill above the cable marking tape duct or trough with class num num or num material complying with table num and compacted to the requirements therein except that he shall i spread and compact the material evenly without dislodging disturbing or damaging cables ducts or troughs and ii not use power rammers within num mm of cables ducts or troughs .
num where described in appendix num buried cables shall be taken up and removed by the contractor .
conductors shall be disconnected from the equipment in which they are terminated the terminal screws and glands retightened and the cable withdrawn clear of the equipment .
num unused cores in cables shall be dealt with as described in subclause num .
num unless ducts terminate at cabinets or mounting posts or columns their ends shall be marked as described in appendix num with marker blocks complying with subclause num of this clause and location posts so that their location can be clearly identified without exploratory excavation .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num electrical work for road lighting and traffic signs num num cable joints num num joints shall be made using jointing kits complying with bs num which shall be installed in compliance with bs num .
num prior to any cable laying the contractor shall provide evidence to the overseeing organisation of the jointers competence in the use of the adopted cable joint kit .
a record shall be kept to enable cable joints to be identified with the jointer responsible for the work .
num cable joints shall be made where described in appendix num .
additional joints shall not be provided on cables in duct or trough .
approval is required from the overseeing organisation for additional joints using other fixing methods .
num jointing shall only be carried out when all materials to be used in the jointing are free from visible signs of moisture and joints shall be left protected from the weather during the curing period .
num joints shall be adequately supported at all times .
backfilling shall not take place until the joint is fully completed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions including curing times and is in a fit condition to withstand any stresses which may be imposed upon it .
num where described in appendix num a cable joint marker block as described in subclause num shall be placed over the cable joint and reference measurements taken from nearby permanent features .
num all cable jointing shall be made under the protection of a specialist jointing tent .
num armoured cable terminations num num cables shall be individually terminated and existing cables reterminated and secured at switches cutouts and other electrical apparatus by means of an armour securing clamp or an aluminium compression type gland complying with bs num bs en num and a gland plate all as described in appendix num .
num the armour securing clamp or compression gland and plate assembly shall incorporate at least one non ferrous earthing terminal .
num all glands shall be shrouded overall with pvc sleeves and the conductor shall be terminated with cable lugs .
num an antioxidant mastic or paste protective coating shall be applied to all aluminium conductor terminals where they are exposed to the atmosphere .
num phase connections shall be clearly indicated by a suitable colour marking system .
num inspection and testing to be carried out by the contractor num every lighting unit and network on completion and before being energised shall be inspected and tested to verify that the requirements of bs num have been met .
the method of testing shall be such that no danger to persons or property or damage to equipment can occur even if the circuit tested is defective .
num the following tests shall be carried out in the sequence indicated below and recorded on a schedule in an appropriate format which shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation immediately after completion of all the tests including those on lighting units within each network i for lighting units b d f g apply .
ii for networks a b c e f g h j apply .
standard methods of testing are given in bs num. a cable sheath insulation test .
b continuity of protective conductors including main and supplementary equipotential bonding .
c earth electrode resistance .
d insulation resistance at a test voltage of num v to be not less than num m ohm .
e insulation resistance at a test voltage of num v to be not less than num m ohm .
f insulation of the sitebuilt assemblies .
g polarity including the continuity of circuit conductors .
h earth fault loop impedance at every cutout .
j operation of residual current devices .
num the cable sheath insulation test shall be carried out using an insulation tester .
the insulation resistance test of num v direct current shall be applied and maintained for not less than one minute between the continuous cable armouring or earth conductor and the general mass of earth .
the measured insulation resistance shall not fall below num m ohm for the full duration of the test .
the cable sheath insulation test shall be carried out after the cable has been laid and the trench backfilled but before jointing has taken place .
num voltage readings shall be taken at each feeder pillar and at the terminals of the last currentusing equipment on each circuit with all equipment energised .
num the contractor shall give not less than num days notice to the overseeing organisation of his intention to carry out any of the tests specified and the overseeing amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num electrical work for road lighting and traffic signs organisation shall be given the opportunity to witness such tests .
num the contractor shall furnish the overseeing organisation with two copies of a certificate verifying compliance with bs num upon satisfactory completion of the inspection and tests .
num num the contractor shall ensure that all test instruments have been calibrated and adjusted in accordance with bs en iso num and come complete with calibration certificates to verify that bs en iso num has been complied with .
num preparation and finish of metal and other surfaces num electrical components and ancillary equipment shall be prepared and finished in compliance with sub clauses num and num .
numf amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num electrical work for road lighting and traffic signs nnumf numni general num num materials equipment and workmanship required under the contract shall comply with bs num regulations for electrical installations the iee wiring regulations and the rules and regulations of the electricity supplier who provides the supply .
the installation and maintenance of electrical apparatus and cabling for road lighting and traffic signs shall comply with the quality management scheme detailed in appendix a .
the contractor shall take into account engineering recommendation g.num model code of practice covering electrical safety in the planning installation commissioning and maintenance of public lighting and other street furniture .
other relevant requirements are contained in the electricity at work regulations northern ireland num .
the contractor shall employ only competent personnel each of whom holds a competent persons authorisation certificate in accordance with the model form in appendix b of the above document g.num but modified as specified below which has been duly completed by the contractor and authorised by a designated responsible person in the authority or company as defined in clause num of g.num all in accordance with clause num of g.num .
the form of certificate as specified above shall be modified on page bnum of g.num by insertion of the following after the space for name and address of employer name of authority or company in addition to the requirements of subclauses num and num of g.num each competent person as defined in g.num clause num shall be provided by the contractor with not less than one copy of the above certificate duly completed and signed as approved and such certificates shall be retained and be available at all times for inspection on the works on request by the overseeing organisation .
a suitable work allocation record shall be kept by the contractor to enable works to be identified with the operatives and supervisors responsible for those works .
num the following definitions shall apply i a road lighting unit shall consist of the following as described in the contract column bracket wall mounting electrical equipment as defined in iv below and wiring excluding electrical supply cable .
national alterations of the overseeing organisation of northern ireland ii a lit sign unit shall consist of a traffic sign requiring an electricity supply and electrical equipment and wiring as in i above .
iii the term lighting unit applies to both road lighting units and lit sign units .
iv electrical equipment for lighting units shall consist of the following as described in the contract luminaires photoelectric control units pecus shorting plugs lamps time switches ballasts ignitors starters capacitors cutouts fuses fuse holders and miniature circuit breakers mcbs .
v the network is the electrical distribution system installed by the contractor from the electricity suppliers interface to the lighting units .
num num each network shall operate on a single phase numv num to num or three phase numv num to num .
num the contractor shall provide facilities for the electricity supplier for service connections and commissioning of the network .
amendment may num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendment february num num series num highway communications contents clause title page num num introduction num num num general requirements num num num materials equipment and workmanship num num num site records num num num provision of cabinets cables and ancillary items num num num cables num num num cable installation num num num installation of cabinets and signal posts num num num gantries for motorway signals num num num installation of telephones num num num marker tape num num num installation of ancillary items num num num jointing and termination of multipair communications cables num num num cable connectors num num num termination of optical fibre communication cables num num num termination and jointing of power supply cables for communications num num num earthing bonding and lightning protection num num num cable testing num num num labelling and numbering num num num not used num num removal and resiting of existing equipment num num num enforcement and other systems num num num detector systems num num num trial pits num num num safeguarding the existing highway communications network num num num the inspection and testing of electrical installations num clause title page num num cable installation at transmission stations num num num modifications to equipment and circuitry associated with existing cabinets num num num temporary emergency telephones num num num cable ducts general num num num installation of ducts general num num num chambers for highway communications cables num num num proving and testing of ducts num num num closed circuit television num num num provision of the telecommunications services num num num electricity connections num national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland contract specific additional requirements a and substitute requirements s may be included for contracts where the overseeing organisation is not highways england or its successor .
where required these will be issued by scotland transport scotland numth floor buchanan house num port dundas road glasgow gnum numhf .
wales the welsh government transport department cathays park cardiff cfnum numnq .
northern ireland director of engineering the department for infrastructure clarence court num num adelaide street belfast btnum numgb .
the overseeing organisation may also issue an initial list of alternative requirementsdepartures .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications highway communications num num introduction num num where this document contains specification requirements it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
where this document contains design requirements it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in gd num dmrb num gd num dmrb num and gd num dmrb num and with all other dmrb documents relevant to the design for the particular works to be undertaken .
where this document contains technology requirements that fall within the scope of the tss plans registry it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in tr num tr num and tr num and with all other tssr documents relevant to the particular works to be undertaken .
num num where there is a requirement in this document for compliance with any part of a british standard technical specification or quality mark that requirement may be met by compliance with gd num .
where there is a requirement in this document for compliance with any part of a british standard technical specification or quality mark that requirement may be met by compliance with series num of the specification .
where there is a requirement in this document for compliance with any part of a british standard technical specification or quality mark that requirement may be met by compliance with tr num .
num num a safety risk assessment shall be carried out in accordance with gd num .
num num where the design falls within the scope of the equality act an equality impact assessment shall be carried out by the designer .
num num where a product falls within the scope of a harmonised standard the contractor shall provide the declaration of performance and manufacturers installation instructions for the product as part of the safety file .
num num series num applies to the strategic road network i.e .
both to all purpose trunk roads and motorways .
num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num a telecommunications services provider is responsible for the highway communications transmission network from a service delivery point sdp where roadside technology interface with that network to the sdp in the overseeing organisations central facilities such as the regional control centres .
where the contractor is responsible for the highway communications transmission network the requirements placed on the contractor shall be as set out within amended or substitute clauses to this num series with detail of the works contained in contract specific appendices num and num .
the contractor is responsible for all cabling termination and linking downstream or otherwise termed beyond the sdp where such cabling is required by the installation but not directly linked to the sdp .
the contractor shall install all communications infrastructure comprising but not limited to ducts chambers hardstandings transmission station bases cabinet bases including any castin frames that may be provided by the telecommunications services provider access infrastructure and protection infrastructure as stated in contract specific appendix num .
with exception of cables and equipment provided by the telecommunications services provider the contractor shall supply and install all cables cable terminations and equipment as stated in contract specific appendix num .
this shall include all power cabling and local communications cables that are installed beyond the sdp and any other local cables required by the installed equipment and systems .
num num the telecommunications services and all related equipment necessary to provide the telecommunications services shall be as scheduled in contract specific appendix num .
these shall be installed by the telecommunications services provider into infrastructure constructed by the contractor unless the contract specific appendix num defines otherwise .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num general requirements num num the contractor is responsible for the supply of all equipment except that scheduled in contract specific appendix num as to be supplied by the overseeing organisation .
the procurement responsibilities in respect of the telecommunications services to be provided by the telecommunications services provider shall be as set out within the contract .
details of the telecommunications services to be provided by the telecommunications services provider and any specific instructions relating to the provision of the telecommunications services shall be as stated in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall comply with the requirements of the telecommunications services provider as stated in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall confirm and amend as appropriate with the telecommunications services provider details of the telecommunications services contained in the contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall establish and maintain a programme of interfacing liaison planning and coordination with the telecommunications services provider taking account of the requirements within contract specific appendix num throughout the period of performing the works as necessary to permit the telecommunication services provider to provide the telecommunications services .
num num in response to requirements set out in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall contribute to and provide support to the telecommunications services provider in the establishment joint periodic review and update of an interface agreement comprising a memorandum of understanding between the contractor and the telecommunications services provider .
this interface agreement covering the period of the works shall as a minimum capture the joint requirements in respect of i the scope and geographic coverage of the interface agreement ii a description of the contractual and operational interfaces including current and future plans iii contacts and rolesresponsibilities including fault reporting handling and escalation iv requirements in respect of meetings and written and electronic communications v requirements in respect of authorisations and the provision of notices vi specific access boundaries and access protocols vii definition of responsibilities for maintenance including any shared maintenance responsibilities viii the booking and provision of temporary traffic management ix a schedule and details of special requirements including references to sitespecific special requirements such as site health and safety requirements and permits to work x any additional requirements within contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall organise all operations and works so that the highways communications installation the provision of services by the telecommunications services provider is completed tested and the test results accepted by the overseeing organisation or in accordance with contract specific appendix num by the date or dates specified in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall allow time in the programme for any remedial works repairs and retesting which may be required to be completed satisfactorily before the date or dates specified in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall include within the programme key dates as appropriate to the work relating to the telecommunications services providers activities including any sectional completion .
this programme shall include dates for i installation and removal of telecommunications bypasses ii deactivation and reactivation of existing telecommunications services iii removal of existing telecommunications equipment and infrastructure amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications iv setting out of telecommunications infrastructure at site prior to the start of construction activities v completion of telecommunications infrastructure including periods for inspection and acceptance vi the availability of cabinets for the installation of cabling or equipment vii installation of the contractors cables viii installation of the telecommunications services providers cabinets cables and equipment based on information provided by the telecommunications services provider ix activation of new telecommunications services x provision of temporary traffic management by the contractor for the telecommunications services provider xi dates for any additional activity types including notice and mobilisation periods and constraints regarding the telecommunications services providers activities contained within contract specific appendix num .
num num the location of existing buried services and infrastructure shall be detected confirmed marked on the ground and protected in accordance with the relevant special requirements contained in the contract documents and any additional requirements detailed in contract specific appendix num and contract specific appendix num in the case of buried services and infrastructure owned operated or maintained by the telecommunications services provider .
in respect of buried services and infrastructure owned operated or maintained by the telecommunications services provider the contractor shall arrange for the location and marking of buried services and infrastructure and shall subsequently comply with the requirements for excavation in the proximity of such buried services and infrastructure in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
the location of buried cables shall be detected confirmed and protected in accordance with the relevant special requirements of name of statutory undertaker or similar notice or instruction issued by a statutory undertaker and any additional requirements determined by the telecommunications services provider in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
num num prior to the start of telecommunications infrastructure construction activities the contractor shall comply with any requirements of the telecommunications services provider contained in contract specific appendix num in respect of the setting out of communications infrastructure that will be handed over upon the completion of the works for the telecommunications services provider to maintain .
num num mitigation methods to prevent metal theft shall be contained in contract specific appendix num as agreed with the overseeing organisation .
num num materials equipment and workmanship num num all electrical works shall comply with bs num requirements for electrical installations iet wiring regulations and the rules and regulations of the electricity distribution network operator dno .
num num site records num num the contractor shall keep a record on drawings or as specified in contract specific appendix num of all work carried out as it proceeds .
copies shall be kept available for the use of the overseeing organisation and during the contract at intervals shown in the programme .
the compilation of records drawings and other information specified in contract specific appendix num including timing of submissions shall be coordinated with and reflect the requirements of the telecommunications services provider as specified in contract specific appendix num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications upon completion of the works the contractor shall produce record drawings in accordance with mchnum and contract specific appendix num which shall be issued to the overseeing organisation and the telecommunications services provider for record purposes .
the following information shall be recorded on the drawings i duct locations including depth number and size of ducts and duct material .
ii cable chamber locations including type depth incoming and outgoing ducts subducts type of chamber cover and details of cable joints within .
iii cabinet positions and type .
iv cabinet cabinet function and cable chamber references .
v other than those cables installed by the telecommunications services provider the cable routes including cable lengths .
additionally within a ducted network the number and type of cable allocated to each duct and the length of each cable unless the telecommunication services provider is to provide the cable route .
vi other than those cables installed by the telecommunications services provider the cable size type and drum number .
vii power supply installations .
viii sdp interfaces with telecommunications services provider .
ix signals .
x telephones .
xi sheath repair and cable joint positions .
xii any additional requirements stated in contract specific appendix num and contract specific appendix num .
the drawings shall be submitted for the approval of the overseeing organisation at weekly intervals during the contract .
num num position measurements both horizontal and vertical shall be taken of the underground equipment to the nearest num mm .
the interval and method of recording including any datum shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation and shall be in accordance with the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall keep records of the work in sufficient detail including type and drum number of installed cables to enable site records to be completed .
a copy of the records shall be provided by the contractor for retention and use by the overseeing organisation .
num num the contractor shall keep record sheets for ducts subducts and chambers which shall indicate details of all cables installed by the contractor ironwork and plugs or seals installed and tests undertaken .
num num for all cables installed by the contractor each drum of cable delivered to the site will have quality inspection certificates attached to each side flange in accordance with the relevant cable specification and shall be ce marked .
the contractor shall ensure that the certificate relates to the cable to which it is attached .
the certificate shall be given to the overseeing organisation prior to the installation of cable .
num num the contractor shall produce handover records in accordance with mchnum .
num num record information shall include details of any test equipment used to produce test results .
for each set of results details of the test equipment manufacturer model serial number and confirmation that the test equipment is within its calibration period as recommended by the manufacturer at the time of performing the test .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num provision of cabinets cables and ancillary items num num cabinets cables and ancillary items including cabinet bases cabinet fittings equipment mounting posts and similar items may be supplied by the overseeing organisation or the telecommunications services provider to the contractor .
these along with the organisation responsible for delivery installation and maintenance will be listed in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall supply a programme of required delivery dates and other information in accordance with the overseeing organisations requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
the notice period required for this programme of required equipment and delivery dates is given in contract specific appendix num .
this programme shall be reviewed and revised by the contractor to suit the progress of the works and any revised programme and associated schedule of equipment submitted to the overseeing organisation in accordance with their requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall provide a dry and heated store to ensure that the equipment is stored in the manner recommended by the manufacturer as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall be responsible for examining the equipment and cable from the overseeing organisation and shall report any defects within five working days to the overseeing organisation .
num num on completion of the works all unused overseeing organisation equipment cables and cable drums shall be set aside .
the ownership status of these items from this point and any instructions for the contractor to deliver these items to the overseeing organisation or make them available for collection by the overseeing organisation shall be as set out in contract specific appendix num .
num num cables num num communications cables installed by the contractor shall meet the requirements of trhnum or as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
num num power cables for communications systems shall meet the requirements of trhnum or as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
num num on receipt and at various stages before laying armoured cables the contractor shall ensure that no damage has been sustained by the cable which will compromise the integrity of the sheath .
the contractor shall also determine that the quantity is sufficient based on the optimum cut lengths and based on the drum quantities and also ensuring minimum wastage .
the location in the ground of cable lengths by reference to their drum numbers shall be kept with the daily records .
num num the cable end shall be cut terminated and the ends sealed to prevent the ingress of water to ipxnum .
num num cable installation num num the approximate location of roadside technology cabinets sdps contractor installed cables ducts and trenches are described in contract specific appendix num and contract specific appendix num .
the contractor and as appropriate the overseeing organisation or telecommunications services provider shall agree the exact location of these items before commencement of any associated works including groundworks .
num num cables shall be stored and laid in accordance with manufacturers written instructions .
cable occupancy for multiple cables installed in the same duct shall allow for installation and future cable replacement .
the cross sectional area of all cables shall not exceed num of the inner cross sectional area of the duct or as stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num sufficient length of cable shall be allowed for its correct termination .
when termination does not proceed immediately following the installation of the cable the cable ends shall be sealed against the ingress of water to ipxnum .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num the schedule of existing and new ducts is contained in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall verify that all ducts are prepared and proven suitable for cable installation in accordance with clause num prior to the drawing in of cable including where the telecommunications services providers cables are to be installed by the telecommunications services provider .
requirements for the preparation and proving of new or existing ducts and subducts for the installation of cables by the telecommunications services provider are specified in contract specific appendix num .
the requirement for the contractor to install certain cables prior to the installation of cables by the telecommunications services provider is specified in contract specific appendix num .
on completion of the cable installation a draw cord in accordance with subclause num shall remain secured in each duct .
where specified in contract specific appendix num or as determined by survey including surveying using cctv during construction works existing ducts may be considered by the contractor or telecommunications services provider as unsuitable to install new cables .
an unsuitable duct in this context shall be determined through the failure of a mandrel test in accordance with manual of contract documents for highway works volume num highway construction details or the presence of visible sharp edges or discontinuities along the length of the duct .
in such circumstances the existing duct may be sleeved or subducted with a single highdensity polyethylene hdpe continuous subduct acting as a sleeve for the installation of multiple cables or multiple hdpe continuous subducts in accordance with subclause num with one subduct for each cable .
the diameter of each cable including pulling arrangement shall not exceed num of the cross sectional area of the inner diameter of the subduct .
subducts shall be retained within the chamber at each end of the continuous run of subducts using a clamping plate or duct plug or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam that retains the subducts to the outer duct at each chamber .
num num no cable shall be left exposed at the end of any work period .
any cable stolen andor vandalised shall be replaced in its entirety at the contractors expense .
num num shall any damage occur to a cable during installation however slight the contractor shall identify and record the damage and report it to the overseeing organisation .
the damage shall be repaired with cable accessories meeting bs en num in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and at the contractors expense .
num num every cable shall be temporarily or permanently labelled immediately following its installation .
temporarily labels shall be subsequently replaced with a permanent label prior to the completion of the works .
num num cables shall be handled and installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
the installation of cables shall not damage the cable being installed existing cables in the duct or the duct itself .
where permitted by the manufacturer a biodegradable lubricant may be used .
num num unless specifically identified in contract specific appendix num and agreed by the owner of the service duct sharing of individual service ducts for power and data services shall not be permitted .
num num where cables pass through intermediate chambers the contractor shall immediately after installation label each cable with the destination of the cable joint chamber or equipment reference as appropriate num mm from the entry and exit points of the chamber .
num num the contractor shall take account of the requirements of the telecommunications services provider as specified in contract specific appendix num when determining the order of the installation of cables within ducts and subducts .
num num the sections of optical fibre cables that are visible inside chambers shall additionally be marked at intervals of num mm along their length inside each chamber .
the marking shall be num mm wide yellow pvc adhesive tape or alternative fit for the purpose .
num num cables shall not be bent to an internal radius less than the manufacturers recommendations taking account of the tensile load present in the cable during installation .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num cables shall be secured to the chamber walls using fixings recommended by the manufacturer and kept within the permitted bend radius .
cable management shall be laid such that it maximises the available space allowing for future cabling of the remaining ducts .
the contractor shall provide cable management fixings to chambers in accordance with the telecommunications services provider as stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num on completion of cabling within chambers including cabling installed by the telecommunications services provider the ducts shall be resealed with purpose made mechanical duct plugs or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam installed in compliance with subclause num .
the locations and responsibility for the provision and installation of duct plugs or duct sealing systems other than by the contractor shall be as stated in contract specific appendix num .
the cables shall be looped around within the chambers and secured to the cable support steelwork .
num num unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num all types of cable installed on gantries shall be provided with continuous protection against mechanical damage or vandalism from ground level to a point a minimum of num m above the adjacent ground level within a covered cable tray or by other means .
other means shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
in addition cables installed on gantries in those areas that are accessible from walkways or ladders shall be protected from mechanical damage or vandalism by the provision of covered cable tray or other means unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
where specified in contract specific appendix num cables shall also be protected against environmental damage e.g .
through prolonged exposure to ultraviolet radiation .
where cables are to be installed across gantries by the telecommunications services provider then the contractor shall be responsible for the final design and installation of the cable management and cable containment solution to satisfy any requirements in respect of design proving and testing as specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num the depth of excavation shall be such that directly buried cables laid under verges footways or open ground shall have a minimum cover of num mm and under carriageways of num mm or num mm below formation whichever is the greater depth .
trench detail does not apply to cables laid under carriageways or below formation .
for trenches requiring topsoiling grass seeding andor turfing shall be as described in clauses num num and shall be placed in the top num mm of the cable trench unless otherwise specified in contract specific appendix num .
with the agreement of the overseeing organisation where minimum cover can not be achieved cables can be laid in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
num num cables laid in trenches shall be both bedded on and covered by a num mm thickness of sand complying with subclause num ii class numc material complying with table num and compacted to those requirements .
an additional num mm of sand shall be deposited to reach a total cover thickness of num mm prior to final backfilling .
cables shall be laid in sand bedding and surround material in accordance with clause num to a depth of num mm .
class numc material in accordance with clause num and table num shall be laid on top of the sand to a depth of num mm .
class num material in accordance with clause num and table num shall be laid on top of the class numc material to a depth of num mm .
where shared ownership of cables applies in the one trench the requirements of contract specific appendix num shall take precedence .
num num backfilling shall be in accordance with clause num with material class num complying with table num and compacted to the requirements therein .
the material shall be spread and compacted evenly without dislodging disturbing or damaging cables ducts or troughs .
vibrating compaction equipment shall not be used within num mm of cables ducts or troughs .
for trenches requiring topsoiling grass seeding andor turfing shall be as described in clauses num num and shall be placed in the top num mm of the cable trench unless otherwise specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num cable marker tape complying with clause num shall be laid in the cable trench .
where several cables are laid in one trench one line of marker tape shall be installed for each num mm of trench width .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num before installing any cables the ducts shall be free from foreign matter and detritus .
when cables are required to be laid in ducts the contractor shall swab through the duct prior to drawing in the cables and a further draw cord .
the ducts shall be sealed with a draw cord in place following cabling and resealed with split plugs or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam to adequately seal the ducts against the ingress of foreign matter .
num num where cables are installed in existing troughs they shall either as defined in contract specific appendix num be installed in subducts suitably retaining in position or be covered with sand up to the level underside or seating of the cover whichever is the lower .
the sand shall pass as num mm size test sieve as specified in bs en num .
num num the telecommunications services providers use of armoured communications cables shall be limited by design rules where specified in contract specific appendix num .
unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num longitudinal armoured cables that are to be installed by the telecommunications services provider shall be installed within sacrificial ducting installed by the contractor .
longitudinal cables shall generally be run parallel to the fence line or edge of the hardshoulder .
transverse cables shall run at right angles to the carriageway .
subject to the approval of the overseeing organisation transverse cables installed diagonally with respect to the carriageway may be accepted .
num num all armoured communications cables exceeding num metres in length shall be provided with buried loops to allow for retermination following a cabinet knockdown .
these loops shall be installed at each end of the cable immediately adjacent to the entry and exit ducts at cabinet locations and the location included on the record drawings .
num num when duct or trough alignments differ from those of the trench the transition from one to the other shall not exceed num horizontally or vertically .
num num when more than one cable is laid in a trench they shall be accommodated in one horizontal layer in order to locate them in the future .
this applies to both communications and power cables as long as the power cables are associated solely with communications equipment .
num num the minimum separation between cables shall be such that safety and heat transfer as defined in bs num or interference as defined in bs en num from adjacent cables will not affect the cable or the safety and functionality of the equipment the cable is connecting both communications and power and as stated in appendix num .
the separation between a cable and the wall of the trench shall be such that the cable shall not be damaged during infill or future ground movement .
num num following completion of work unused cable ends shall be sealed according to the manufacturers written instructions to comply with ipxnum .
num num installed cables including any cable joints shall have a design life of not less than num years unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num installation of cabinets and signal posts num num where described in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall construct hardstanding areas and foundations incorporating plinths for cabinets and signal posts .
plinths shall make allowance for ducts to enter cabinets from beneath .
hardstanding areas shall be constructed these shall extend at least num mm plus the depth of any raised plinth away from each opening within a face of a cabinet or num mm in respect of signal posts fence line cabinets and gantry cable interfaces to the ducted network requiring access for maintenance .
individual hardstanding areas within groups of cabinets and posts shall be interconnected by paths of minimum num mm width .
hardstanding areas shall be continuous between opposing cabinet or post doors where the spacing between the door faces is up to num m. amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications hardstanding areas shall be constructed such that any water drains away from cabinet plinths .
cabinet plinths shall be constructed and cabinets installed such that cabinet doors shall be capable of opening and closing without being fouled by the paved area or each other .
the cabinets and signal posts shall be mounted on plinths using the fixings provided .
plinths shall be constructed such that the orientation of the cabinets shall allow the hinged doors to open towards the carriageway unless otherwise required by space or fouling constraints .
the contractor shall construct hardstanding areas and foundations incorporating plinths for cabinets for use by the telecommunications services provider as described in contract specific appendix num .
the responsibilities for the provision of castin frames erection of cabinets labelling installation of cables and sealing of cabinet bases and ducts shall be as described in contract specific appendix num .
the orientation spacing and clearance around cabinets and cabinet doors shall comply with the telecommunication services provider in contract specific appendix num .
num num after the completion of all cable terminations and testing the cabinet bases and ducts shall be sealed so that the ingress protection ip rating of the cabinet rodent protection and ability to add and replace cables without damage is maintained following the manufacturers guidelines .
num num the contractor shall keep the interior of cabinets free from moisture and debris .
the contractor shall ensure prior to the installation of equipment that for cabinets requiring power for environmental conditioning that power is applied to the cabinets and is subsequently maintained and that the cabinets are clean and dry .
subsequently the contractor shall ensure that the doors of each cabinet are closed and properly secured after the installation of equipment in the cabinet and after the completion of any other work .
num num entryexit ducts to cabinets on a ducted network shall be sealed using duct plugs in compliance with subclause num or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed to prevent the ingress of water and soil gravel etc .
the use of expanding foam is prohibited .
the locations and responsibility for the provision and installation of sealing systems other than by the contractor shall be as stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num where cabinets are situated in groups they shall be located in a consistent sequence as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall install additional security measures to deter unauthorised access to cabinets including cabinets operated and maintained by the telecommunications services provider as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall install secure cabinets for enforcement systems as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
num num when installing a sign in an area where a concrete safety barrier is present it is permissible to install signal posts on top of the concrete safety barrier providing the mounting height as required by the traffic signs regulations and general directions tsrgd is maintained and the access door is accessible as defined in contract specific appendix num .
num num where power or communications interface cabinets are installed within the overseeing organisations boundary fence line to permit access by a third party to the interface the cabinet and the associated communications infrastructure shall be wholly contained within the overseeing organisations land .
num num gantries for motorway signals num num details of cables and electrical equipment for traffic signs including variable message signs and matrix signals on gantries are given in contract specific appendix num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num installation of telephones num num the contractor shall construct a hard standing area and install the telephone base as described in contract specific appendix num .
access for disabled users shall be provided .
num num an area of hard standing shall be provided adjacent to the telephone .
it shall be suitable to allow a person in a wheelchair to access the telephone .
num num a further hard standing where required in accordance with clause num of sufficient working area shall be installed behind the telephone to provide a flat level surface for maintenance purposes .
num num where not protected by a safety barrier the telephone holding down arrangements shall pass the requirements of en num when tested in accordance with speed class num and num nonenergy absorbing structures occupant safety level num .
num num spare cabling as stated in contract specific appendix num shall be provided at ert locations to allow for ert knockdowns .
a cable remake loop should be retained in the cable pit moulding or nearby underground chamber .
unless otherwise stated where new cable is being installed a minimum num m length remake loop of unhindered cable shall be retained in the cable pit moulding .
num num each telephone column instrument module and header module shall be orientated such that i locations where the telephone site is not protected by safety barrier the instrument module door is on the downstream of traffic side of the unit meaning that the road user is facing oncoming traffic while using the telephone ii locations where a safety barrier is present that the instrument module door faces the kerb to allow the road user to access the telephone .
num num where telephones are installed on existing highways they shall be covered with purpose made not in use covers until they have been commissioned and are available for use by the public .
where solar panel powered telephones are used the bag used shall ensure that it does not prevent the charging of the telephone .
num num telephones shall be aligned within num of the vertical .
num num the telecommunications services provider sdp shall be within the telephone column or instrument module or as agreed by the overseeing organisation as defined in the contract specific appendix num .
num num an underplinth duct shall be used for all wired plinth installations .
in ducted systems a suitable proprietary sealed joint shall be used to connect the underplinth duct to the ducted network .
the underplinth duct shall also be sealed against water ingress by suitable means at its junction with the cable pit moulding .
duct to extend minimum of num mm beyond edge of plinth for sites without existing ducts .
num num marker tape num num all cables and ducts installed underground shall have their position indicated by the use of marker tape in accordance with bs en num that is detectable from above ground .
marker tape shall be buried in the trench above the cableduct .
num num the wording on the marker tape shall read caution communications power cables below .
the marker tape shall be compliant to en num .
num num marker tape shall be yellow in colour with wording in black .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num installation of ancillary items num num unless otherwise specified in contract specific appendix num all boxes shall be mounted onto the baseboards or frames of cabinets the knockouts for cable access removed as necessary and holes bushed or fitted with cable glands .
termination frames shall be fitted within the boxes where appropriate .
num num distributors shall be mounted onto the baseboards of posts .
distributors and electrical switches shall be mounted at the gantry or as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num power switchgear and protective devices shall be installed in power supply cabinets and other locations as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall provide and install connectors for the termination of cables as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
all terminations and link cabling from the telecommunication services providers sdp to the equipment installed within the cabinet shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
num num where the telecommunications services providers active equipment is installed in a cabinet a minimum of two separately protected circuit ways from the main distribution point within the cabinet shall be provided for the sole use by the telecommunications services provider .
sufficient spare cable terminations and entry points to allow the fitting of num mm cable glands or the provision of outlet sockets to iec num part num sheet f shall be provided to permit the telecommunications services provider to make connections to the power supply .
unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num protection devices on each of the circuit ways shall be numa type b miniature circuit breakers that meet the relevant essential requirements for overcurrent protection under the low voltage directive .
num num jointing and termination of multipair communications cables num num unless described otherwise in contract specific appendix num jointing and termination of multipair communications cables up to the sdp shall be undertaken by the telecommunications services provider .
the contractor shall be responsible for jointing and termination of multipair communications cables beyond the sdp including detector systems and cables to gantry mounted equipment .
the contractor shall provide space and fixing points to accommodate the telecommunications services providers terminations including terminations up to the sdp .
num num cable joints provided by the contractor except within inroad detector systems will only be permitted at the locations described in contract specific appendix num .
where cable joints house a sdp then these joints shall be located and readily accessible as determined by the contractors consultation with both the telecommunications services provider and the overseeing organisations technology maintenance services provider .
the responsibility for providing the cable joint that houses an sdp shall be the telecommunications services provider unless otherwise specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num cable joints in road detector systems shall comply with clause num .
num num all jointing and termination shall be carried out in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
all cable conductors shall be protected from strain prior to their termination .
cables shall be dressed neatly in accordance to the manufacturers instructions .
num num the contractor shall ensure that the lay of the cable is maintained up to the termination position without exerting undue stress on the conductors and terminals .
all conductor pairs shall be identified by means of a numbered plastic sleeve collar or other method as agreed with the overseeing organisation .
num num termination of cable using insulation displacement connectors shall be undertaken in accordance with the manufacturers instructions using any specialist tools necessary .
the contractor shall provide the requisite tools .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num within cabinets links shall be terminated in terminal blocks complying with subclause num .
the conductors shall be secured in terminals in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
links shall be tied and supported and of sufficient length to facilitate routine maintenance and allow for subsequent re terminations .
the correct pairing shall be maintained at all times .
the contractor shall clearly identify links by using collets at either end .
num num where the contractor is required as scheduled in contract specific appendix num to terminate cables into cabinets containing operational circuitry the contractor shall give two weeks notice or as specified in contract specific appendix num whichever is the longer to allow the opportunity for a representative of the overseeing organisations technology maintenance services provider to attend each site to oversee all work within the cabinet for which the contractor is responsible .
i the contractor shall also comply with the telecommunications services providers requirements for notification and attendance by the telecommunications services provider where necessary in accordance with the requirements specified in contract specific appendix num .
this work shall not compromise operational systems .
num num for cable joints installed by the contractor cable joint enclosures cje shall be installed in chambers and above ground joints agj or other cable joint type in cabinets as described in contract specific appendix num .
if cable joints are to be located in the same chamber as a telecommunications services providers cable joints then the accommodation requirements shall be as per contract specific appendix num .
num num at rural post mounted signal sites or other locations where the accommodation of a suitable sdp connection is not possible or readily accessible within the equipment housing the contractor shall provide sufficient space within a segregated compartment for the telecommunications services provider to install a cje to house an sdp and to facilitate the isolation and testing of rsnum and other communication circuits .
num num cable continuity kits to ensure the integrity of protective and screening conductors shall be installed on every cable except in the case of screening conductors where specified otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
num num links shall be installed and connected within cabinets and connection boxes with jumper leads installed between connection boxes wherever two are installed within one cabinet using as appropriate the insulated conductors of multipair cable with its outer sheath armour and inner sheath removed .
the leads shall be of sufficient length to facilitate routine maintenance and allow for several subsequent reterminations and shall not obstruct any accessory in the connection box .
the contractor shall maintain multipair colour coding so that colour code duplication does not occur .
the correct pairing shall be maintained at all times .
num num cable connectors num num where shown on the contract specific drawings cables shall be terminated using insulation displacement connectors that are designed to accommodate the conductor and outer insulation sizes of the cables being terminated and the number of conductors terminated into a single terminal .
num num unless otherwise shown on the contract specific drawings the contractor shall use terminal blocks that meet the relevant essential requirements for copper conductors under the low voltage directive with an impulse withstand voltage rating of at least numkv .
terminals shall employ either screwtype or screwlesstype clamping arrangements to retain individual conductors without any direct screw to conductor contact .
terminal blocks shall be compatible with the stranding and size of conductors being terminated and shall incorporate or be fitted with indelible identification labels to uniquely identify each terminal way .
num num the requirements for ethernet and optical patch cords shall be as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num termination of optical fibre communication cables num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the telecommunications services provider shall be responsible for the termination of optical fibre cables up to the sdp and the contractor shall be responsible for the termination of optical fibre cables beyond the sdp .
subclauses num to num give the requirements where the contractor is required to execute optical fibre cable jointing .
num num the contractor shall be responsible for the safe disposal of any optical fibre cable waste created by the contractor .
num num cables shall be terminated in such a way to prevent damage due to the occurrence of moisture to ipxnum .
the fibres shall be fusion spliced and protected from mechanical strain .
num num copper conductors in composite optical fibre cables shall be secured in terminals in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num num termination and jointing of power supply cables for communications num num the method and responsibility of the termination of power supply cables for communications shall be described in contract specific appendix num .
num num cable joints in power cables shall be made where described in contract specific appendix num .
additional joints shall not be permitted to overcome inaccuracies in measurement or cable damage .
cable joints shall not be situated in a duct or trough .
heatshrink or coldshrink type joints shall not be used .
num num cables greater in size than num mmnum shall not be terminated within cabinets unless the cabinet is specifically designed to terminate a large sized cable as identified in contract specific appendix num .
as specified in contract specific appendix num or on the cable schematic contract specific drawings the cable shall be jointed to a length of num mmnum or num mmnum cable manufactured to specification trh num part num .
the num mmnum or num mmnum cable shall be terminated within the cabinet .
an underground cable reduction joint shall be installed at the change in cable size .
within a ducted cable network the cable joint shall be made in the adjacent chamber or for a direct buried network near to the cabinet cable entry duct .
the type of chamber shall be as shown on the contract specific drawings .
details of the reduction joint shall be displayed within the cabinet where the jointed cable is terminated .
num num power supply cable joints including reduction joints for cables of cross section greater than num mmnum are not permitted within chambers containing longitudinal below ground cable joints .
power supply cable joints for cables of cross section greater than num mmnum shall be housed in separate chambers as shown on the contract specific drawings .
details of the locations of chambers that will contain power supply cable joints are provided in contract specific appendix num .
power cables shall be supported and routed in a manner that does not impede access to the telecommunications infrastructure nor create a hazard when using the access steps where present .
num num joints shall be made using a suitable jointing system in which all components are mutually compatible and adequate for the type of cables to be jointed .
joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
num num jointing shall only be carried out when all the materials used in the joint are free from visible signs of moisture .
joints shall be protected from water frost direct sunlight and extremes of temperature during the curing period for the joint materials in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
joints shall be adequately supported at all times .
backfilling shall comply with this specification and shall not take place until the joint is completely cured and able to withstand any stresses which may be imposed on it .
num num where a new power supply is being provided to existing equipment or an existing power supply is modified which will result in a disruption to or the loss of existing facilities signals cctv etc .
written authority shall be obtained by the contractor from the overseeing organisation and telecommunications services provider as appropriate who will advise their individual stakeholders of the anticipated duration so that the effects of the amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications power supply disruption can be assessed .
the contractor shall provide at least two weeks notice in writing of all planned disruptions to the overseeing organisation and take into account any other notice periods that are in place as stated in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall undertake all necessary preparatory work to ensure that the period of disruption is minimised .
num num where described in contract specific appendix num at each existing gantry the contractor shall carry out tests to confirm that the lighting supply and the communications power supply are fed from the same phase .
where tests show the two supplies are not in phase the contractor shall isolate the lighting power supply at the power isolation cabinet from the mains supply and carry out the remedial works necessary to bring both supplies into the same phase as agreed with the overseeing organisation .
num num cable joint markers complying with the requirements of duct end markers subclause num but with the letters cj replacing the letter d shall be provided and installed to indicate the position of below ground joints .
alternatively the letters cj can be added to the chamber label described in subclause num .
temporary markers shall be provided if necessary to ensure the accurate positioning of permanent markers alternatively an active marker may be provided .
num num earthing bonding and lightning protection num num lightning protection and power supply earthing and the labelling of such earthing arrangements shall be provided for all metalwork including gantries and cantilever structures in accordance with bs en num bs num and bs num .
specific lightning protection and earthing requirements are defined in contract specific appendix num .
num num the area of gland plates or boxes which will come in contact with a cable gland shall be cleaned of all paint and corrosion before a cable gland is fitted .
once the gland is fitted exposed metalwork of gland plates or boxes shall be suitably treated to protect against corrosion .
num num all connections to bolted fixtures shall be made through crimped type lugs .
num num adjacent cabinets less than two metres distant shall be effectively equipotentially bonded together in accordance with bs num .
num num lightning protection for gantries and other structures such as camera masts shall be provided as described in contract specific appendix num .
gantry lightning protection system components shall comply with bs en num .
num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the telecommunications services provider shall provide lightning protection components to protect the telecommunications services delivered to the sdp .
num num the contractor shall provide space and fixing points to accommodate the telecommunications services providers lightning protection components .
num num the contractor shall provide suitable earthing point or earthing arrangements in accordance with contract specific appendix num for use by the telecommunications services provider to provide earthing for the telecommunications services providers lightning protection components .
num num cable testing num num the contractor shall undertake tests on cables as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
the telecommunications services provider shall undertake tests on all cables installed by the telecommunications services provider .
num num all cables shall be tested by the contractor post installation in accordance with specification mcg num for armoured or nonarmoured copper cables or to the manufacturers specifications for continuity and insulation as appropriate .
the cable sections and scope of tests shall be as described in contract specific appendix num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num three copies of all cable test results shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation on the completion of each test .
num num all test instruments requiring calibration shall have a current calibration certificate copies of which shall be available at the time of testing .
num num the contractor shall give at least two weeks advance notice in writing to the overseeing organisation of any cable testing .
num num in the event of the contractor opening up a trench or drawing further cables through a duct after cables have been installed and tested then all cables in the trench or duct shall be retested .
any damage identified by this test shall be rectified by the contractor and the cables then retested .
num num after testing the contractor shall locate and expose any damaged outer sheath and shall report all such damage to the overseeing organisation .
the overseeing organisation shall be informed prior to the commencement of any operation to expose damaged cable and shall be allowed to be in attendance during the operation .
the contractor will be informed by the overseeing organisation whether a sheath repair shall be permitted .
for cables installed on behalf of the telecommunications services provider the criteria to determine whether a cable sheath repair is permitted or other action required shall be as defined in contract specific appendix num .
should sheath repairs be permitted the contractor shall provide and install cable joint markers complying with subclause num .
num num no tests shall be carried out until the cable trench has been backfilled and the ground above the cable reinstated and the cable ends have been installed unterminated in the respective termination cabinets .
num num labelling and numbering num num gantries cable joint enclosures cje above ground joints agj cable chambers cabinets signal posts and telephones shall be numbered and cables shall be labelled in accordance with the details described in contract specific appendix num .
num num labels shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
labels shall be fitted so as not to compromise the ip rating of the cabinet or enclosure .
the label material and fixing method shall be capable of lasting the design life of the equipment it is fitted to .
num num the contractor shall reference individual telecommunications services in correspondence and site records using the telecommunications service and sdp labelling information as provided and installed by the telecommunications services provider and as stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num cables shall not be left unlabelled at any time temporary labelling may be applied to facilitate testing and termination prior to the implementation of permanent labelling .
num num all cabinets and enclosures containing power distribution and control equipment shall be labelled to indicate the source of supply destination and user where this is a third party e.g .
telecommunications services provider circuit arrangements and test details in accordance with regulations .
refer to contract specific appendix num for examples of such labels .
num num where the contractor carries out modification work to existing cabinets new labels shall be fitted in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall submit to the overseeing organisation for acceptance proposals for cabinet labels .
the contractor shall allow seven working days for acceptance of the proposals .
num num cabinets enclosures and distribution equipment containing power shall be fitted with warning labels as per the requirements in bs num .
num num the contractor shall refer to tsrgd for proportions and forms of numbers and letters for all external labels .
external cabinet identification labels shall contain details of marker post number carriageway designation letter and internal equipment or cabinet function identification .
cabinet identification references shall be consistent across a scheme and with references used within record information and drawings .
text shall be upper case amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications and readable when standing adjacent to the cabinet .
cabinet labels shall be installed on the side of the cabinets facing the carriageway .
at electrical interface ei locations the label shall be fitted on each cabinet door due to orientation of the cabinet in the fence line .
num num external labels for post num signal posts and target boards shall have numbers and upper case letters .
the label shall be fitted as near to the bottom of the post as possible and viewed from the carriageway .
the label can be fitted to the door if the signal obscures the bottom of the post e.g .
when an advanced motorway indicator ami is fitted .
num num external labels for gantries shall be fitted to each gantry leg facing traffic num m above road level .
num num for telephone installations although the door may face the carriageway or downstream of the traffic direction depending on installation the header module shall always be oriented so that external labels face upstream and downstream .
num num all cables shall be clearly and unambiguously marked to show details of cable destinations .
at cjes the cable shall be marked immediately adjacent to the cje .
at agjs the cable shall be marked immediately prior to the glanding of the cable before its entry into the terminal housing .
num num where the overseeing organisations cables are terminated into cabinets or locations for which the telecommunications services provider is solely responsible for maintaining then the contractor shall identify the overseeing organisations cables in accordance with the requirements in contract specific appendix num .
num num not used num num removal and resiting of existing equipment num num existing communications equipment and infrastructure shall be removed or resited where required in the works as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
no equipment shall be removed or cables disconnected or cut until agreed by either the overseeing organisation or telecommunications services provider as appropriate .
the contractor shall coordinate and schedule the deactivation of telecommunications services resiting of equipment reactivation of telecommunications services and removal of telecommunications services and associated equipment and infrastructure as identified in contract specific appendix num in accordance with a programme agreed with the telecommunications services provider as and in compliance with the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
num num existing highway communications equipment as detailed in contract specific appendix num shall be removed in a manner that would enable its reuse and stored by the contractor as directed by the overseeing organisation .
existing equipment operated by the telecommunications services provider shall be removed by the telecommunications services provider .
cables and other infrastructure maintained by the telecommunications services provider shall as scheduled in contract specific appendix num be removed or broken out and disposed of by the contractor in compliance with clause num .
num num where the telecommunications services provider is required to attend site and remove equipment no longer required or that requires resiting the notice period set out in contract specific appendix num shall be given by the contractor to the telecommunications services provider .
num num conductors shall be disconnected from the equipment in which they are terminated the terminal screws and glands retightened and the cable withdrawn clear of the equipment .
num num items of equipment to be resited shall be unbolted from their plinths or supports together with their holding down bolts stored and resited as described in contract specific appendix num .
plinths and concrete foundations shall be broken out and disposed of in compliance with clause num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num cables including those to be removed shall be located and marked at ground level by the telecommunications services provider where these are maintained by the telecommunications services provider or the contractor in respect of other cables throughout their routes .
the marking shall clearly distinguish the cables to be removed from other cables .
the contractor or telecommunications services provider as appropriate shall also excavate trial holes to expose these cables at the predetermined locations detailed in contract specific appendix num together with the method of cable removal .
where described in contract specific appendix num the contractor or telecommunications services provider as appropriate shall excavate that part of the cable route carefully by hand .
where the cable to be removed is sharing a trench with other existing cables on completion of removal all stones and contaminated material shall be removed from the cable trench clean sand and warning tape shall be provided and installed and the cable trench shall then be reinstated in compliance with clause num the contractor or telecommunications services provider as appropriate shall then remove and dispose of all unsuitable and surplus material in compliance with clause num .
cable in ducts shall be carefully withdrawn .
the contractor or telecommunications services provider as appropriate shall also fulfil the requirements for removal of duct seal resealing and reroping .
cables in troughs shall be carefully segregated and lifted out .
the contractor or telecommunications services provider as appropriate shall also remove all trough lids all debris from troughs and all sand from troughs .
on completion the contractor or telecommunications services provider as appropriate shall provide and install clean sand reinstate all trough lids and provide and install new trough lids to replace any breakages caused during the preceding operation .
num num the sites of cabinets plinths and cable trenches shall be reinstated to the level of the surrounding ground unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
num num the disposal of any waste shall be in accordance to the contractors waste management plan .
num num enforcement and other systems num num secure equipment cabinets required for enforcement systems shall be installed in accordance with clause num .
num num the contractor shall construct foundations for enforcement system camera masts as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num mountings cable tray and other ancillary items for enforcement system equipment shall be installed as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num detector systems num num the installation of detector systems shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
num num where detector loops are specified detector loop installation and testing shall comply with clause num .
other detection systems shall comply with the installation requirements detailed in contract specific appendix num .
num num any cabinet equipped for detector system use shall be installed in accordance with clause num .
num num loop feeder cables shall be terminated as described in contract specific appendix num .
the loop feeders shall be terminated in terminals complying with clause num secured to the equipment frame .
each feeder shall have num mm of cable coiled in the bottom of the cabinet to allow subsequent reterminations .
each feeder shall be individually identified by means of a label .
num num trial pits num num trial pits shall be excavated as described in contract specific appendix num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num safeguarding the existing highway communications network num num the highway communications network forms part of the national network operated by the telecommunications services provider and consequently any damage to equipment or infrastructure within the works area including power supplies to the telecommunications services providers equipment cabinets can have severe consequences to the system as a whole .
the contractor shall coordinate with the telecommunications services provider a programme of works that supports the installation by the telecommunications services provider of measures to maintain service continuity throughout the affected area there may be more than one affected areas within the works boundary and to implement temporary communications arrangements that allow the contract to complete each phase of the works whilst minimising the disruption to the national communications network and local communications services .
the requirements for implementing measures to maintain service continuity and for giving notice to the telecommunications services provider to implement these measures and other temporary communications services are specified in contract specific appendix num .
any provisional agreements in respect of network bypass cables shall be scheduled in contract specific appendix num .
num num telecommunications services to be suspended deactivated pending activation at a later date re located or removed by the telecommunications services provider shall be as scheduled against location and equipment type in contract specific appendix num .
telecommunications services to be maintained using temporary arrangements are to be implemented by the telecommunications services provider .
in each case the contractor shall give notice for service suspension relocation service removal and the implementation of temporary communications arrangements in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall give at least three weeks written notice of the proposed change to the network which shall have been identified in advance in the contractors programme .
any such proposal shall be subject to the agreement of the overseeing organisation and the telecommunications services provider .
num num the contractor shall allow representatives of the overseeing organisation and the telecommunications services provider access to all equipment within the works which has been identified as operational .
the contractor shall comply with the telecommunications services providers requirements for access to install maintain and remove operational equipment and telecommunications bypasses as specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall recognise the importance of the need for the telecommunications services provider to gain access for the maintenance and repair of temporary communications arrangements particularly those that support the national communications network .
the contractor shall accommodate and prioritise requests made by the telecommunications services provider to enable the repair of temporary communications arrangements to restore the telecommunications services providers services .
num num areas within the works boundary where the nature of the works performed has a potential impact upon the integrity of the national communications network and local telecommunications services shall be jointly identified and agreed between the contractor the overseeing organisation and the telecommunications services provider .
measures to maintain service continuity throughout the affected areas including any routes for the implementation of network bypass cables and to implement temporary communications arrangements shall be agreed between the contractor the overseeing organisation and the telecommunications services provider .
num num the contractor shall be responsible for the provision of cable protection for network bypass cables and other temporary communications cables .
the requirements for protection shall be as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
the locations for the installation of cable protection and the measures to be applied over the entire length of network bypass cables shall be agreed with the telecommunications services provider taking account of the following .
i the risk of damage due to construction work activities including plant crossings .
ii the risk of damage due to vandalism or theft e.g .
close exposure to public footpaths or known areas of vandal damagetheft .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications iii the close proximity to running traffic lanes and where the cables can only be located at a low level where they directly face running traffic e.g .
close proximity to running traffic with cables installed near to ground level risk of damage by stones or other debris .
iv the installation of protection infrastructure at carriageway crossings on overbridges or gantries where this enables cable installation without the need to implement significant lane closures .
all of the above requirements shall apply to the full extent of network bypass cables and other temporary cabling including where they extend beyond the works boundary .
num num where in accordance with criteria set out within contract specific appendix num construction works are to be performed in close proximity to the telecommunications services providers buried services and infrastructure then the contractor shall provide notice to the telecommunications services provider to attend site during periods of relevant construction work .
the contractor shall provide construction method statements and a programme of these works to the telecommunications services provider .
no construction works in close proximity to the telecommunications services providers buried services and infrastructure shall be performed by the contractor without either i the attendance at site by the telecommunications services provider or ii the written consent of the telecommunications services provider .
num num the inspection and testing of electrical installations num num the contractor shall carry out the inspection and testing of electrical installations in accordance with bs num .
the contractor shall provide inspection and completion certificates to the overseeing organisation in accordance with bs num and to notice periods determined in contract specific appendix num .
num num where the inspection tests show that an existing electrical installation or earthing arrangement is not determined as safe in accordance with the requirements of bs num the contractor shall immediately notify the overseeing organisation giving full details of noncompliance .
the contractor shall not undertake any work on such an installation until written instructions have been issued by the overseeing organisation .
num num electrical inspection records test results and electrical installation certificates shall form part of the records produced in compliance with clause num .
num num in the case where the telecommunications services provider shares power with the overseeing organisation the telecommunications services provider shall unless specified otherwise within contract specific appendix num be responsible for the inspection and testing of the electrical installation from the point that the supply becomes for the sole use of the telecommunications services provider .
num num cable installation at transmission stations num num cables shall be installed into and terminated within transmission station buildings and transmission cabinets by the telecommunications services provider .
num num unless detailed otherwise in contract specific appendix num work shall not be undertaken in transmission station buildings or transmission cabinets by the contractor without the approval of the telecommunications services provider .
the work shall be identified in the contractors programme and agreed with the telecommunications services provider .
the contractor shall comply with the requirements for access to transmission stations and transmission cabinets to perform work as specified in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall ensure that no unplanned disruption occurs to any operational systems .
num num modifications to equipment and circuitry associated with existing cabinets num num the contractor shall carry out modifications to equipment and circuitry associated with existing cabinets as described in contract specific appendix num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num the contractor shall prior to laying any cable to the cabinets locate including as appropriate scheduling the telecommunications services provider to attend site and to mark buried services and infrastructure the position of all cabling exposing all cables that are not in ducts by careful hand excavation and identify the type size and designation of each cable .
num num where appropriate the contractor shall undertake the following i remove retain for reuse and reinstall the cabinet duct seals and base pea gravel ii remove and relay any hardstanding iii excavate to expose cable remake loop and excavate cable routes iv reroute cable to gain sufficient lengths for the proposed modification v reinstate cable trenches vi break open and reseal resin filled base vii disconnect and reconnect undo existing gland and regland including the provision of new ducts seals gland assemblies and cable termination ancillaries where required viii withdraw and reinstall cables at cabinet base .
num num any work required to operational circuitry shall be undertaken by a representative of the overseeing organisation or telecommunications services provider as appropriate .
the contractor shall give at least two weeks written notice and take into account any other notice periods that are in place as stated in contract specific appendix num of the need for such work and shall in respect of work to be performed by the telecommunications services provider comply with the requirements stated within contract specific appendix num .
num num temporary emergency telephones num num where described in contract specific appendix num temporary emergency telephones shall be installed for use by the public when it would otherwise be necessary for the public to cross either a live traffic lane or the works to use the nearest working emergency roadside telephone .
when not in use temporary emergency telephones shall either be removed or covered up .
the direction of temporary emergency telephones shall be indicated in a manner agreed by the overseeing organisation at num metre intervals .
the location and orientation of temporary emergency telephones shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation .
num num when temporary emergency telephones are required they shall be supplied by the overseeing organisation or the contractor as stated and detailed in contract specific appendix num .
the use of global system for mobile communications gsm or other wirelessly connected temporary emergency telephones may be agreed by the overseeing organisation as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
num num locations for cable for temporary emergency telephones shall be identified by the contractor and the telecommunications services provider .
providing the location of a temporary emergency telephone is within close proximity within num metre and on the same side of the carriageway of an existing emergency roadside telephone location the telecommunications services provider shall be responsible for the installation and termination of temporary cables to support local telecommunications services in accordance with the requirements stated in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the additional cost of works performed by the telecommunications services provider where the location of any temporary emergency telephone is not in close proximity of an existing emergency roadside telephone .
num num the contractor shall give at least two weeks written notice of the need for connections and disconnections from the live communications network by the overseeing organisation or telecommunications services provider and shall in respect of work to be performed by the telecommunications services provider comply with the requirements stated within contract specific appendix num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num the contractor shall install place in position maintain cover up uncover reposition recable and remove temporary emergency telephones and associated work as necessitated by the progress of the works and upon completion of the works return them to the overseeing organisation .
num num maintenance of temporary emergency telephones connected onto the network shall only be undertaken by a representative of the overseeing organisation or telecommunications services provider as appropriate .
the contractor shall allow full access arrangements to representatives of the overseeing organisation and the telecommunications services provider .
num num cable ducts general num num the term cable duct is used in this series to describe the ducts subducts or conduits used for installing the highway communications cable network .
the ducts shall comply with this series and any other requirements described in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall be responsible for ensuring that all components used within the duct are compatible with each other and with existing ducts .
num num with the exception of the cases listed in this subclause below cable ducts shall comply with the general essential requirements for cable management systems and for buried conduit systems under the low voltage directive with a type numn compression and impact resistance rating .
the specification of cable ducts for the following cases shall be listed in the contract specific appendix num in respect of i ducts in transverse crossings installed using trenchless installation techniques ii ducts located within or adjacent to filter drains refer to subclausenum iii ducts specified by the telecommunications services provider in accordance of the telecommunications services providers standards for communications infrastructure the telecommunications services providers duct standards to meet the telecommunications services providers requirements in contract specific appendix num .
num num subducts shall be either i continuous hdpe subducts with a standard dimension ratio sdr of num or less installed between chambers individual subducts may be joined by low external profile mechanical or welded couplers welded couplers shall not present an internal bead of subduct material that locally reduces the internal diameter of the subduct either by more than num or has a bead height of greater than num mm or ii sectional hdpe or upvc subducts preinstalled into hdpe or upvc outer main ducts as a modular arrangement using internal spacers and keyed coupler and duct sealing arrangements to prevent misalignment of subducts and to preserve their colour coding between chambers outer main duct and inner subduct seals to provide protection to at least ipnum for the subduct or iii continuous or sectional hdpe subducts moulded directly within an outer main duct with keyed coupler arrangements and duct sealing to prevent misalignment of subducts outer main duct and inner subduct seals to provide protection to at least ipnum for the subduct individual subducts where exposed shall be uniquely identifiable within chambers .
num num for cable ducts identified in contract specific appendix num to be handed over to the telecommunications services provider upon completion of the works the contractor shall be free to elect whether the ducts to be handed over comply with the overseeing organisations standards or whether the ducts comply with the telecommunications services providers duct standards .
whichever duct standards are used the standard shall be applied consistently throughout the works .
chambers shall be positioned at all locations where there is a change to a ducting standard and the ducting systems are not directly compatible by the application of standard duct couplers to achieve a smooth and ridge free internal bore .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications where the contractor elects to use the telecommunications services providers duct standards then the telecommunications services providers duct standards shall in the case of a change or conflict in requirements have precedence over requirements stated in clauses num num num and num otherwise the requirements of these clauses remain .
num num the internal bore shall be smooth and even throughout the length of the duct and the duct joints to ensure the outer sheath of the cable is not damaged during installation .
num num the use of ducts that are designed to be laid to a small bend radius and do not present a smooth bore for the installation of cables shall not be used as ducts for longitudinal cable routes .
use of such ducts shall only be permitted to avoid unforeseen obstacles within local ducts routes .
two sections of such ducts each up to num m in length separated by at least num m shall be permitted in a local duct route .
num num with the exception of ducts in transverse crossings installed using trenchless installation techniques and unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num the sizes of the ducts shall be as shown on the contract specific drawings .
the internal diameter of standard sized ducts shall be num mm num mm or num mm .
nonstandard sized ducts may be used where a duct is used to sleeve an existing duct or subducts are installed .
num num ducts shall not be bent to internal radius less than the manufacturers requirements .
the internal radius of installed ducts shall be such that the performance of the cable and duct is safeguarded following cable pulling .
num num with the exception of ducts in transverse crossings installed using trenchless techniques and subducts the external wall of the ducts shall be selfcoloured purple in accordance with national joint utilities group publication guidelines on the positioning and colour coding of utilities apparatus .
num num the materials from which the duct and fittings are made shall be treated so that they are protected from the deleterious effects of short term exposure to ultra violet light and shall be resistant to degradation by acids alkalis common chemicals bacteria fungi and moulds occurring in soils .
the contractor shall protect the duct and fittings on site in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
num num each duct shall be fitted with a pigmented rotproof material draw cord of numkn breaking load and having a design life of not less than num years the ends of which shall be made fast within the chambers to which the duct is terminated .
draw cords shall be secured within a chamber .
draw cords shall not be knotted within ducts .
num num ducts in transverse crossings installed without a sleeve using directional drilling techniques conforming to the requirements of series num shall consist of four num mm internal diameter medium density polyethylene pe num pipes conforming to bs en num and any other requirements described in contract specific appendix num. i where stated in contract specific appendix num the number of ducts may be reduced .
the pipe bores shall be smooth and even and terminated in a chamber at each end .
num num the ducts shall be securely bundled together and installed through the crossing with a minimum cover above the top of the combined bundle of eight times the reamed diameter of the bored hole .
each duct shall be tested after installation in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
num num the duct network shall be protected against the ingress of water to ipxnum and gases .
this shall be achieved by the ducts having suitable joints and plugs or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam at the entry to all chambers and cabinets .
in addition the telecommunications services providers requirements for duct plugs sealing systems and sealing of ducts shall be as stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num the minimum longitudinal duct provision is one communications duct of at least num mm diameter fitted with four subducts complying with subclause num and of a subduct size to accommodate the telecommunications services providers cables .
ducts for local communications cables may either be incorporated as subducts within a single longitudinal duct or as separate local ducts .
local ducts and separate ducts for power cables installed in the same trench as ducts for longitudinal communications cables need not be continuous throughout the duct network .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num the contractor shall provide and install in the end of every duct and subduct and at every point of entry to chambers reusable duct plugs or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam to achieve ingress protection rating of ipnum on completion of mandrel and air pressure tests .
when cable is installed within the ducts the sealing system will be replaced with a plug preformed with the appropriate cable port configuration or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam to maintain the ingress protection rating of ipnum after cable installation .
the responsibility for the provision and installation of duct plugs or duct sealing systems shall be as stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num after installation ducting shall not cause damage to cables when they are drawn through .
ducts shall be supplied with purpose made spacers and strapping in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
the strapping shall bind the ducts tightly in the specified formation during installation backfilling and for the whole life of the duct .
strapping shall be spaced longitudinally to ensure a duct separation of no more than num mm .
num num installation of ducts general num num ducts shall be laid at the levels and lines shown on the contract specific drawings and schedules contained in contract specific appendix num .
longitudinal ducts shall generally be run parallel to the edge of the adjacent carriageway unless otherwise shown on the contract specific drawings .
transverse ducts shall cross at right angles to the carriageway unless otherwise shown on the contract specific drawings .
transverse duct crossings of existing carriageways shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of series num mchw num .
the exact location of the ducts shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation before the commencement of any associated works .
excavations shall comply with clauses num and num .
immediately following the excavation of the trench the ducts shall be jointed and laid on the bedding material or prepared trench where the standard of duct installation does not require the duct to be laid on a bedding material .
the deviation in level from that specified at any point shall not exceed num mm .
num num ducts and fittings shall be examined for damage and the joint surfaces and components shall be cleaned immediately before laying .
measures shall be taken to prevent soil or other material from entering ducts and to anchor each duct to prevent movement before the work is complete .
num num ducts other than those in structures using conduits shall be installed in trenches .
the trenches and the fill shall be such that compaction either during installation or after by use e.g .
a vehicle shall not crush or damage the ducting or distort its route such that pulling a cable through will damage the cabling .
the bed and surround for ducts shall be granular material to clause num .
this shall provide a minimum depth of cover to the uppermost duct of num mm .
the minimum cover depth of overall backfill in nonhardened verges shall be num mm in respect of longitudinal ducts and num mm in respect of local ducts the balance comprising of class num material in accordance with clause num and table num .
alternative installations or where minimum cover can not be achieved shall be as stated in contract specific appendix num subject to agreement with the overseeing organisation and telecommunications services provider .
num num transverse crossing ducts shall be installed in granular material to clause numi .
for shallow transverse crossing ducts with between num mm and num mm cover the fill above the ducts shall be replaced with stnum concrete to clause num a minimum depth of num mm above the ducts .
backfill shall be in accordance with clause num .
num num for installation of transverse ducts on existing highways a line and level drainage survey shall be conducted in order to determine the appropriate depths of the ducts to avoid groundwater .
num num duct joints shall have the following characteristics i the joint and duct shall be free from burrs and other irregularities that may cause damage to cables when they are drawn through the duct .
ii the joint shall hold and maintain the ducts in axial alignment during installation and afterwards when subjected to foreseeable ground movement in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
requirements for duct joints are defined in contract specific appendix num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications iii the joint shall not compromise the duct network protection of ingress protection rating ipnum .
num num cable duct configurations and any alternative or additional requirements for bedding haunching surround backfilling surfacing or reinstatement shall be as in contract specific appendix num .
num num backfilling shall be undertaken immediately after the required operations preceding it have been completed .
num num trenches for the cable ducts shown shall be backfilled with class num lower trench fill material as described in subclause num of this clause and subclause num .
num num for duct trenches requiring topsoiling grass seeding andor turfing shall be as described in clauses num num and shall be placed in the top num mm of the cable duct trench unless otherwise specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num in order to prevent damage from other works all trenched ducts shall have marker tape laid within the trench excavation at a depth of num mm or at the class num topsoil interface whichever is the greater depth .
num num prior to the interruption or extension of the cable duct network the contractor shall confirm the operational and future status of cables within the duct route to be interrupted .
where there is a requirement to permanently remove or pull back cables within a duct route the contractor shall liaise with the telecommunications services provider and coordinate the works with them .
the contractor shall comply with telecommunications services providers requirements for interruption or extension of the cable duct network as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
following the completion of the works necessitating the interruption of a duct route chambers shall be installed at the interface to the new section of duct .
chambers shall be installed at each end of the new duct route and at any intermediate transition points where any of the following conditions are met i the new duct section is routed through a structure or ii the new duct section includes a change of direction horizontal axis andor a step change in the vertical axis of the duct route that would otherwise impede the continuous pulling of cables through the completed duct route or iii the total length of the new duct section includes more than ten intermediate duct joints or a distance of num m whichever is the greater or iv where there is a change of ducting standard or duct types that can not be directly mated to each other .
where the above criterion is not met then new sections of duct may be mated with existing ducts without installing new chambers .
new sections of duct installed between chambers shall be tested and proved in accordance with clause num .
existing duct mated directly to a section of new ducting shall be cleaned and swabbed prior to the installation of new cables or reinstallation of old cables .
there shall be no need to air pressure test existing sections of duct .
num num ducts shall be provided for armoured or unarmoured cables that are laid across or within num mm of filter drains .
the ducts shall be surrounded with num mm of stnum concrete in compliance with clause num .
where a duct crosses the filter drain it may be necessary to provide additional drainage capacity or other measures to compensate for the volume occupied by the duct and associated concrete surround .
the contractor shall provide the overseeing organisation with details of the proposed arrangements for additional capacity or other measures for acceptance .
this shall be clearly identified in the contractors programme of works .
in the event that a duct route coincides with the line of a filter drain an alternative duct line shall be determined .
any damage caused by the contractor to any drain shall be satisfactorily repaired and reinstated at no cost to the overseeing organisation .
it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to identify to the overseeing organisation any existing damage to drains prior to the commencement of works .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num where cables are subsequently to be laid by the telecommunications services provider the contractor shall lay sacrificial ducting along the cable route leaving cable pulling pits at intermediate locations in accordance with the telecommunications services providers requirements in contract specific appendix num .
details of sacrificial duct routes lengths number type and depth of sacrificial ducting the requirements for reinstatement and locations of intermediate cable pulling pits shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num chambers for highway communications cables num num chambers shall be constructed of materials of sufficient strength for the purpose .
the walls base and top shall be of sufficient strength to prevent collapse and settlement for the local soil conditions depth of chamber number of ducts passing through the wall weight of cover and frame and any additional force for example a vehicle that may be applied to the top of the chamber .
in addition to these requirements plastic chambers shall be installed to manufactures requirements .
chambers shall be as detailed in the schedule in contract specific appendix num and the telecommunications services providers requirements in contract specific appendix num .
chambers may be designated by type size and usage by a letter a to e. num num chambers shall i be used solely for highway communications cables including power cables used for highway communications ii be located at the interface point to duct sections installed through a structure or under a carriageway iii be located where a section of duct includes a change of direction horizontal axis andor a step change in the vertical axis of the duct route that would otherwise impede the continuous pulling of cables through the completed duct route .
num num the exact location size and usage of these chambers shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation and the telecommunications services provider as appropriate on site prior to the commencement of any associated works .
num num brickwork chambers shall comply with the series num and be built with mortar designation in english bond .
the joints of brickwork where exposed shall be finished as specified for unpointed joints in clause num .
the ends of all ducts shall be neatly built into the brickwork and finished flush with mortar designation to prevent the ingress of water .
the walls of the chambers shall be num mm in thickness and shall be treated with waterproofing material to prevent the ingress of moisture .
num num precast concrete chambers shall comply with bs num concrete pipes and ancillary concrete products specification for unreinforced and reinforced concrete manholes and soakaways and bs en num concrete manholes and inspection chambers unreinforced steel fibre and reinforced .
cast in situ chambers shall be constructed of stnum concrete complying with clause num unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
num num chambers may be constructed from plastic units that comply with the requirements of bs num .
where plastic chambers are comprised of multiple sections all sections shall be sealed in accordance with the manufacturers requirements to prevent the ingress of water throughout the intended design life of the chamber .
the foundation and backfill for plastic chambers is location specific and shall be as described in appendix num .
num num the design of the chamber shall allow sufficient access for a person to enter and exit the chamber access to the ducting and provide a safe working environment appropriate to the needs and purpose of the chamber that would allow industry standard interchangeability .
the design of the chamber shall take into account all hazards that could occur as a result of a confined space .
where steps are required for entry and exit from the chamber these shall conform to bs en num .
hinged covers shall allow safe access without the cover unintentionally closing .
access shall be possible by a single person .
the dimensions for chamber cover openings and chamber length and breadth shall be described in appendix num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications where the depth of chambers exceeds num mm below the finished surface of the carriageway or the adjacent ground manhole steps complying with bs en num shall be included .
num num chamber covers gratings and frames shall be as described in contract specific appendix num and shall comply with bs en num .
chambers containing a joint shall be equipped with num x num mm access ports to chambers for the installation of network bypass interrupter cables .
reinforced concrete cover slabs shall be installed at the top of the chamber on all sides to provide suitable support for the chamber covers to be installed .
where access ports are required for temporary interrupter cables these shall be agreed by the telecommunications services provider as stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num where required by contract specific appendix num lockable chamber covers or other measures to deter unauthorised access to chambers shall be provided .
where the telecommunications infrastructure is provided for the operation and maintenance of the telecommunications services provider lockable covers shall also meet requirements in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall supply four sets of keys for each type of locking system to the overseeing organisation and four sets of keys for each type of locking system to the telecommunications services provider .
num num four sets of chamber cover lifting keys as described in contract specific appendix num shall be delivered to the overseeing organisation and to the telecommunications services provider for each type of cover supplied .
i additionally a suitable cover lifter shall be delivered for each type of cover to the overseeing organisation or telecommunications services provider as appropriate where the mass of an individual cover exceeds manual handling regulations or as stated in contract specific appendix num. ii the quantities of cover lifters required for compliance with manual handling regulations shall be as stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num frames for chamber covers gratings shall be set in cement mortar complying with clause num or a suitable proprietary quick setting mortar of equivalent strength .
num num the chamber shall contain a sump to allow water to collect and drain away such that no water shall collect in the bottom of the chamber .
the size of the sump and position shall not affect the integrity of the structure or be too large to prevent a person to be able to stand and work from the bottom of the chamber .
the sump shall feed to a soakaway or highway drainage system that shall allow water entering the chamber to collect and drain away .
the sump and soakaway capacity or sump and drainage system shall be based on the location of the site including its varying water table throughout the year .
the sump shall be of sufficient size to fit a pump and shall be as agreed with the telecommunication services provider and stated in contract specific appendix num .
details of the drainage system shall be shown in contract specific appendix num .
num num chambers shall be clearly identified by the legend highway communications on each cover .
where covers have a concrete infill a noncorrodible plate showing the above information shall be cast into the concrete flush with the concrete surface .
num num all chambers shall be referenced to their longitudinal position along the carriageway with an accuracy of num m. the measurement point for each chamber will be the centre of the chamber cover .
the longitudinal position of the chamber and where used the chamber reference number shall be clearly displayed on the chamber apron or on a concrete block placed immediately adjacent to the cover .
the longitudinal position shall be in the form of an address comprising the marker post reference offset to the marker post carriageway identification and chamber reference .
num where required in contract specific appendix num technology performance management services tpms barcode label mounting plates shall be provided .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num where detailed in contract specific appendix num stub ducts shall be incorporated into the chamber construction .
ducts shall be as described in clause num and are either to be plugged in accordance with sub clause num or proprietary inserts or other proprietary duct sealing system that can easily be removed excluding expanding foam .
details of sealing system shall be supplied by the contractor for acceptance of the telecommunications services provider as defined in the contractors programme of works .
num num where a chamber installed as part of a cross carriageway duct crossing does not lie on the line of the longitudinal network a second chamber shall be constructed on the line of the longitudinal network under and connected to the cross carriageway duct crossing chamber by means of a numway duct .
num num where the water table is within num m of the ground surface or the ground is poorly drained the chambers shall be surrounded by a minimum thickness of num mm stnum concrete to reduce the potential for water ingress detrimental deformity or movement .
specific requirements will be defined in contract specific appendix num .
num num to accommodate the form of construction used for the chamber the spacing between local ducts entering the chamber shall be within num mm of one another .
num num chambers shall be constructed so that their covers are raised num mm above the level of the adjacent ground and the insitu concrete hardstanding area surrounding chambers laid to falls to the adjacent ground level to prevent ponding of water over and adjacent to the chambers .
the fall shall be formed of a num mm minimum deep layer of stnum concrete to clause num with a unum surface finish .
in order to maintain long term stability reinforcement shall be applied .
the raised covers shall not cause a trip hazard .
num num where type a chambers are required for telecommunications cable joints cable joint bearer systems will be installed within the chamber .
the cable brackets shall be equipped with two cje cable bearers but shall be capable of supporting an additional bracket for a third cje if required .
where more than three cjes are required an additional type a chamber shall be provided .
where power cables enter a chamber equipped for cjes these cables shall be installed in such a way that the extraction of the cje from the chamber for maintenance is not impeded by the power cables .
specific requirements for cable bearers will be defined in contract specific appendix num .
num num all ducts shall enter the chamber wall perpendicularly such that the drawing of cables through the ducts shall not cause any damage to the cables and shall be sealed to prevent the ingress of water unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num type b chambers shall not be used for the housing of cjes where power cable reduction joints are required or where power cable size exceeds num mmnum .
num num for type a chambers longitudinal subduct ducts may be continuous through the chamber where no access to the cables within is required .
num num for type b chambers longitudinal ducts may be continuous through the chamber where no access to the cables within is required .
num num the maximum depth of type b chambers shall be num mm measured from the underside of the chamber cover and the base of the chamber .
where the depth of transverse ducts dictates a greater depth than num mm the use of a more suitable chamber such as a type a chamber shall be considered .
num num type c chambers shall not be used for the housing of cjes where power cable reduction joints are required where power cable size exceeds num mmnum or as an interface to equipment cabinets .
num num the chamber size shall be selected to ensure that cable minimum bend radii and maximum cable tension parameters during installation according to trh num or the cable manufacturers written specification are not exceeded .
num num the chamber shall have a design life of not less than num years unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num the chamber shall have an area of hardstanding around it to allow for safe working and lifting of covers .
it shall be flush with the finished ground level .
the hardstanding cover and frame shall be sufficient for the loading that might be placed on it including any vehicles and have life span of a minimum of num years unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num proving and testing of ducts num num longitudinal and cross carriageway cable ducts shall be proved by drawing a mandrel of num mm length through each as the ducts are laid .
local ducts from chambers to cabinets shall be proved by drawing through each completed length of duct a spherical mandrel .
the mandrel will have a diameter of num less than the internal bore of the duct .
on the successful completion of each mandrel test the contractor shall certify compliance of the duct and immediately seal the duct in accordance with subclause num .
num num longitudinal and cross carriageway cable ducts within a ducted nonarmoured cable network shall be tested in chambertochamber sections by means of the air test described in subclause num .
on the successful completion of each test the contractor shall certify compliance of the duct and immediately seal the duct in accordance with subclause num .
num num to undertake the test air shall be pumped in by suitable means until a stable pressure of num mm head of water is indicated in a utube connected to the system .
the air pressure shall not fall to less than num mm head of water during a period of five minutes without further pumping after an initial period to allow for stabilization .
num num continuous sections of ducts and subducts including subducts jointed as part of a modular inner and outer duct arrangement shall be tested and proven by blowing a close fitting foam plug or similar arrangement that tests the integrity of the duct in respect of diameter and airtightness in a single operation .
there is no requirement to additionally test the outer main duct that houses a subduct .
the design and dimension of the foam plug shall inhibit the progression of the foam plug within the duct where the diameter of the duct has suffered deformity or presents a discontinuity in size that is outside of the duct manufacturers written specifications .
num num no testing and proving of sacrificial ducts shall be required prior to the installation of armoured cables .
the contractor shall satisfy themselves that the sacrificial duct is fit for purpose and the telecommunications services provider where applicable will be able to correctly install the armoured cable .
num num the contractor shall comply with any additional or amended requirements in respect of the proving and testing of ducts as contained within contract specific appendix num .
num num a register of mandrel and air test certificates shall be maintained by the contractor as appropriate and handed to the overseeing organisation and telecommunications services provider on the successful completion of the ducting work .
num num closed circuit television num num unless specified otherwise in contract specific appendix num the camera and outstation equipment for closed circuit television cctv shall be provided by the contractor in accordance with specifications mcenum pan tilt zoom cameras mcenum fixed cameras and mcenum .
num num the provision of cabinets and ancillary items for cctv shall be as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall install and commission cctv equipment in accordance with the requirements detailed in contract specific appendix num .
num num the provision of masts shall be as scheduled in series num contract specific appendices .
num num provision of the telecommunications services num num in the case where the contractor provides the telecommunications services the requirements in respect of the telecommunications services shall be contained in contract specific appendix num .
num num in the case where the telecommunications services provider provides the communications infrastructure the requirements in respect of communications infrastructure to support the provision of the telecommunications services shall be contained in contract specific appendices num num and num .
amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications num num in the case where the telecommunications services provider provides the telecommunications services the contractor in addition to the requirements specified elsewhere in this num series shall comply with the telecommunications services providers requirements detailed in contract specific appendix num in respect of the following .
i designs for telecommunications services including authorised changes to designs and departures from the telecommunication services providers standards .
ii the confirmation of accommodation requirements for the installation of the telecommunications services providers equipment within the overseeing organisations cabinets including the allocation of space and power supply load allocation total power dissipation and power supply distribution arrangements within the overseeing organisations cabinets .
iii changes or additions to the telecommunications services contained in contract specific appendix num and the processes relating to any changes or additions to the telecommunications services including any associated change control design ordering and notification periods .
iv the provision and updating of service configuration information related to the telecommunications services including geographic ip url or other electronic address information as appropriate to the telecommunications service andor the roadside and central control system technologies .
v the telecommunications services providers process related to the activation and deactivation of telecommunications services including methods of notification offered by the telecommunications services provider and associated notification periods as part of any request for the activation and deactivation of telecommunications services .
vi the inspection witnessing and acceptance criteria with respect to the installation of communications infrastructure and cabinets provided by the contractor and associated preinstallation requirements of the telecommunications services provider .
vii the processes including notification reporting and periods for remedial actions associated with any defects and remedial works that result from the telecommunications services providers inspection witnessing and acceptance activities with respect to the installation of communications infrastructure and cabinets .
viii the provision of copies of electrical test certificates prior to the telecommunications services providers connection to the contractors or overseeing organisations power supplies .
num num electricity connections num num the type of electricity connection whether an exit point with standard distribution network operator dno single or a more secure dual feed i.e .
incoming feeds from two primary sub stations shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation and shall be as stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall record all equipment that is connected and disconnected from the roadside electricity supply during the works with a date and time of the connectiondisconnection .
they shall provide this information to the overseeing organisation within five working days of the connectiondisconnection or as agreed by the overseeing organisation .
num num the contractor shall provide infrastructure for the electricity dno for electricity connections to roadside technology and infrastructure .
num num the contractor shall provide the required total load requirements and equipment types to the dno .
the information shall be sufficient for the dno to provide the correct supply capacity and phase single and multiple at an exit point .
num num the contractor shall provide the dno the information required for both metered and unmetered exit points .
equipment to be connected to unmetered exit points must possess an unmetered supplies user group umsug charge code .
volume num series num specification for highway works highway communications amendment february num numf num num for any equipment without charge codes the contractor shall request one from umsug at elexon .
num num the contractor shall agree with the dno and overseeing organisation access requirements for meter reading and maintenance .
num num the electricity supplier shall fit the supply meter .
this shall remain in their ownership .
num num in the case of a dno offer for a three phase supply capacity at an exit point being slightly above the dno single phase limit then discussions shall be started with the dno to ascertain whether a single phase supply could be offered .
num num where the provision of three phase supply is the only viable means of obtaining an exit point the contractor shall i clarify the responsibility for balancing the load with the dno ii comply with any dno requirements for balancing the load across the three phases iii in the case of double span gantries that require equipment to be fed from separate phases the contractor shall ensure the risk of receiving shock at numv is eliminated iv in areas where equipment fed from separate phases are within reach of each other clear warning labelling shall be provided to bsnum section num v the contractor shall ensure a switch is available to isolate both sides of a double span gantry .
num num the contractor shall ensure electricity connections provided by the dno to be a protective multiple earthing pme termination tncs including the provision of a customer earth terminal .
in the case where the dno will not provide a pme terra terra tt termination the contractor shall ensure that additional protective equipment is installed .
if a pme tncs is not offered in the proposed location the dno may agree to a pme termination in the following circumstances i the num ei cab is installed in an enclosed area fenced off from public access ii installation a class ii num ei cabinet .
march num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works num series num piling and embedded retaining walls contents clause title page num general requirements for piling and embedded retaining walls num num precast reinforced and prestressed concrete piles and precast reinforced concrete segmental piles num num bored castinplace piles num num bored piles constructed using continuous flight augers and concrete or grout injection through hollow auger stems num num driven castinplace piles num num steel bearing piles num num reduction of friction on piles num num nondestructive methods for testing piles num num static load testing of piles num num diaphragm walls num num hardhard secant pile walls num num hardsoft secant pile walls num num contiguous bored pile walls num num king post walls num num steel sheet piles num num integrity testing of wall num elements num instrumentation of piles num and embedded walls num support fluid num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls piling and embedded retaining walls num general requirements for piling and embedded retaining walls definitions num allowable pile capacity a capacity which takes into account the piles bearing capacity the materials from which the pile is made the required load factor settlement pile spacing downdrag the overall bearing capacity of the ground beneath the piles and other relevant factors .
num commencing surface the level at which the piling equipment first enters the ground .
num compression pile a pile which is designed to resist an axial force such as would cause it to penetrate further into the ground .
num constant rate of penetration crp test a test in which the pile is made to penetrate the ground at a constant controlled speed while the force applied at the top of the pile to maintain the rate of penetration is continuously measured .
num constant rate of uplift cru test a test in which the pile is made to lift out of the ground at a constant controlled speed while the force applied at the top of the pile to maintain the rate of extraction is continuously measured .
num cutoff level the level to which the pile is trimmed .
num design verification load dvl a load which will be substituted for the specified working load for the purpose of a test .
num kentledge dead load used in a loading test .
num load factor the ratio between the piles ultimate bearing capacity and maximum safe bearing capacity .
num maintained load test a loading test in which each increment of load is held constant either for a defined period of time or until the rate of movement settlement or uplift falls to a specified value .
num preliminary pile a pile installed before the commencement of the main piling works or specific part of the works .
num proof load a load applied to a selected working pile to confirm that it is suitable for the load at the settlement specified .
num raking pile a pile installed at an inclination to the vertical .
num reaction system the arrangement of the kentledge piles anchorages or spread foundations that provide a resistance against which the pile is tested .
num pile settlement the axial movement at the top of the pile .
the value of pile settlement specified for a given load refers to the value reached at the end of the first cycle of loading .
where piles are to be loaded and unloaded through a number of cycles settlement shall be the cumulative vertical movement .
num specified working load swl the specified load on the head of the pile as stated in the relevant appendix .
num tension pile a pile which is designed to resist an axial force such as would tend to cause it to be extracted from the ground .
num test pile any pile to which a test load is or is to be applied .
num ultimate bearing capacity the maximum resistance offered by the pile when the strength of the soil is fully mobilised .
num working pile one of the piles forming the foundation of a structure .
num embedded retaining wall retaining wall with shuttering provided either by the surrounding ground ie .
cast against an excavated soil face or sheet piles inserted into the ground .
num embedded retaining wall element an individual component utilised in a particular embedded retaining walling system eg .
diaphragm wall panel or primary or secondary pile in a secant wall which can be constructed in isolation .
general num num piles and embedded retaining walls shall be constructed from one of the permitted options described in appendix num and in compliance with this series and appropriate clauses of series num num and num unless otherwise described in appendix num .
layout design and construction num where applicable appendices num and num in series num list structures and elements which the amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls contractor has to design in accordance with the specification and relevant appendices num to num .
where required in appendix num the contractor shall also submit design calculations details of materials to be used and a schedule of dimensions .
pile tolerances num piles shall be installed within the following maximum permitted tolerances position num mm in any direction at commencing level .
verticality num in num deviation from the vertical rake num in num deviation from the specified rake for piles raking up to num and num in num for piles raking more than num .
no method of forcible correction will be permitted unless it can be proved that the integrity durability and performance of the piles will not be adversely affected .
piling method num where required in appendix num the contractor shall supply all relevant details of the method of piling the plant and monitoring equipment he plans to adopt .
alternative piling methods may be used provided that they satisfy the requirements of the specification .
records num the contractor shall keep records as indicated by an asterisk in table num for the installation of each pile or for each element in embedded retaining walls or as listed in clause num for sheet pile walls .
the signed records will form a record of the work .
copies of these records shall be provided where required in appendix num .
any unexpected driving or boring conditions shall be noted in the records .
damage damage criteria for adjacent structures or services num damage criteria for adjacent structures or services are given in appendix num .
where required in appendix num the contractor shall submit his plans for making surveys and monitoring movements or vibration before the commencement of the piling works .
damage to piles or completed wall elements num the contractor shall ensure that during the course of the work displacement or damage which would impair either performance or durability does not occur to completed piles or wall elements .
where required in appendix num the contractor shall submit his planned sequence and timing for driving or boring piles or for installing wall elements having regard to the avoidance of damage to adjacent piles or wall elements .
temporary support num the contractor shall ensure that where required any permanently freestanding piles are temporarily braced or stayed immediately after driving to prevent loosening of the piles in the ground and to ensure that no damage resulting from oscillation vibration or movement can occur .
ordering of piles num the contractor shall ensure that the piles are available in time for incorporation in the works .
all piles and production facilities shall be made available for inspection at any time .
piles shall be examined by the contractor at the time of delivery and any faulty units replaced .
where required in appendix num the records of testing of the concrete and steel used in the piles shall be provided .
testing of materials shall be in accordance with appendix num .
for steel piles the contractor shall submit details of all preliminary test results at least num working days prior to ordering piles for the main works other than temporary works .
num precast reinforced and prestressed concrete piles and precast reinforced concrete segmental piles materials and components steel and iron components num num in the manufacture of precast concrete piles and jointed precast concrete segmental piles fabricated steel components shall comply with bs en num and bs en num grades snum or snum cast steel components with bs num grade a anum anum or anum and ductile iron components with bs en num material designation symbol engjsnum engjsnum engjsnum .
pile joints for segmental piles num the joints shall be closefitting face to face and the locking method shall be such as to hold the faces in intimate contact .
where required in appendix num details of the design manufacture and tests of the jointing system shall be submitted prior to the commencement of the piling works .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls a jointed pile shall be capable of withstanding the same driving stresses as a single unjointed pile of the same crosssectional dimensions and materials .
the welding of a joint to main reinforcement in lieu of a lapped connection with projecting bars affixed to the joint shall not be permitted .
each pile joint shall be square to the axis of the pile within a tolerance of num in num .
the centroid of the pile joint shall lie within num mm of the true axis of the pile element .
pile toes num pile toes shall be constructed so as to ensure that damage is not caused to the pile during installation .
pile head reinforcement num pile heads shall be so reinforced or banded as to prevent bursting of the pile under driving .
march num table num records to be kept indicated by an asterisk data driven driven driven bored continuous precast segmental castin castin flight concrete concrete place place auger and piles concrete concrete concrete or steel piles piles grout bearing piles piles contract pile reference number location pile type nominal crosssectional dimensions or diameter nominal diameter of underreambase length of preformed pile standing groundwater level from direct observation or given site investigation data date and time of driving redriving or boring date of concreting ground level at pile position at commencement of installation of pile commencing surface working level on which piling base machine stands depth from ground level at pile position to pile toe toe level pile head level as constructed pile cutoff level length of temporary casing length of permanent casing type weight drop and mechanical condition of hammer and equivalent information for other equipment number and type of packing used and type and conditions of dolly used during driving of the pile set of pile or pile tube in millimetres per num blows or number of blows per num mm of penetration temporary compression of ground and pile driving resistance taken at num m intervals soil samples taken and in situ tests carried out during pile formation or adjacent to pile position length and details of and cover to reinforcement concrete mix volume of concrete supplied to pile where this is practical all information regarding obstructions delays and other interruptions to the sequence of work pile forming equipment including rig no .
description of ground excavated depth from commencing surface to changes in strata and to standing ground water and any fluctuations num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls march num table num records to be kept contd data driven driven driven bored continuous precast segmental castin castin flight concrete concrete place place auger and piles concrete concrete concrete or steel piles piles grout bearing piles piles depth to average levels of concrete surface before and after withdrawing temporary lining type torque assessed efficiency of motor depth to concrete surface after every concrete load for raking piles angle of rake support fluid tests monitoring information referred to in clause num subclause num level of top of reinforcement cage as constructed contract element reference number location element type nominal crosssectional dimensions top and bottom of guidewall level as appropriate length of preformed element as appropriate groundwater level from direct observation date and time of excavation date of concreting details of material samples taken ground level at element position at commencement of element installation commencing surface working level on which base machine stands depth from ground level or guide wall as appropriate at element position to element toe toe level element head level as constructed element cutoff level stop end details length of temporary casing as appropriate length of permanent casing as appropriate soil samples taken and in situ tests carried out during element formation or adjacent to element position tests on support fluid as appropriate length and details of steel reinforcement as appropriate concrete mix or grout as appropriate volume of concrete supplied to element graph of top of concrete or grout level vs volume placed by batch as appropriate all information regarding obstructions delays and other interruptions to the sequence of work as constructed positional records vertical and horizontal as required movements of ground and structures and services as specified notes num .
all levels shall be relative to the datum specified in appendix num .
num .
all times shall be given in numhour format .
num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls tolerances in pile dimensions num the crosssectional dimensions of the pile shall be not less than those specified and shall not exceed them by more than num mm .
each face of a pile shall not deviate by more than num mm from any straight line num m long joining two points on that face nor shall the centre of area of the pile at any crosssection along its length deviate by more than num of the pile length from a line joining the centres of area at the ends of the pile .
where a pile is less than num m long the permitted deviation from straightness shall be reduced below num mm on a pro rata basis in accordance with actual length .
the head of a pile element or the end of the pile upon which the hammer acts shall be square to the pile axis within a tolerance of num in num .
reinforcement for precast reinforced and prestressed concrete piles num num steel reinforcement shall be as described in appendix num and in accordance with series num .
the main longitudinal reinforcing bars in piles not exceeding num m in length shall be in one continuous length .
in piles more than num m long joints will be permitted in main longitudinal bars so that the number of joints is minimised .
joints in reinforcement shall be such that the full strength of the bar is effective across the joint .
lap or splice joints shall be provided with link bars designed to resist eccentric forces .
reinforcement shall be incorporated for lifting and handling purposes .
spacers shall be designed and manufactured using durable materials which shall not lead to corrosion of the reinforcement or spalling of the concrete cover .
where required in appendix num details of the means by which the contractor plans to ensure the correct cover to and position of the reinforcement shall be submitted .
reinforcement for precast reinforced concrete segmental piles num num steel reinforcement shall be as described in appendix num and in accordance with series num .
the main longitudinal reinforcing bars shall be in one continuous length .
reinforcement shall be incorporated for lifting and handling purposes .
spacers shall be designed and manufactured using durable materials which shall not lead to corrosion of the reinforcement or spalling of the concrete cover .
where required in appendix num details of the means by which the contractor plans to ensure the correct cover to and position of the reinforcement shall be submitted .
formwork num if a pile is constructed with a shaped point or shoe then the end of the pile shall be symmetrical about the longitudinal axis of the pile .
holes for handling or pitching where provided in the pile shall be lined with steel tubes alternatively inserts may be cast in .
formwork shall be robust clean and so constructed as to prevent loss of grout or aggregate from the wet concrete and ensure the production of uniform pile sections free from defects .
the piles shall be removed from the formwork in such a manner that damage to the pile is prevented .
concrete general num cement materials aggregates admixtures and water shall be in accordance with series num .
the method of placing and compacting the concrete shall be such as to ensure that the concrete in its final position is dense and homogeneous .
protecting and curing concrete num immediately after compaction concrete shall be adequately protected from the harmful effects of the weather including wind rain rapid temperature changes and freezing .
curing and accelerated curing shall comply with clause num .
piles shall not be removed from formwork until a sufficient pile concrete strength has been achieved to allow the pile to be handled without damage .
prestressing general num prestressing operations shall be carried out only under the direction of an experienced and competent supervisor .
all personnel operating the stressing equipment shall have been trained in its use .
the extensions and total forces including allowance for losses shall be calculated before stressing commences .
stressing of tendons and transfer of prestress shall be carried out at a gradual and steady rate .
the force in the tendons shall be obtained from readings on a recently calibrated load cell or pressure gauge incorporated in the equipment .
the extension of the tendons under the total forces shall be within num of the calculated extension .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls concrete strength num the contractor shall cast sufficient cubes cured in the same manner as the piles to be able to demonstrate by testing two cubes at a time with appropriate intervals between pairs of cubes that the necessary in situ strength of the concrete has been reached .
concrete in the piles shall not be stressed until two test cubes attain the necessary strength .
records num the contractor shall keep detailed records of times of tensioning measured extensions pressure gauge readings or load cell readings and the amount of pullin at each anchorage .
the contractor shall also check the cover to reinforcement of each pile and shall ensure it is at least that specified .
copies of these records shall be provided where required in appendix num .
posttensioned piles num apart from the requirement for ducts and vents in posttensioned piles to be grouted after the transfer of prestress the requirements for prestressed piles apply .
grouting procedure num grout shall be mixed for a minimum of num minutes and until a uniform consistency is obtained .
ducts shall not be grouted when the air temperature in the shade is lower than numc .
before grouting is started all ducts shall be thoroughly cleaned by means of compressed air which shall be free of oils .
grout shall be injected near the lowest point in the duct in one continuous operation and allowed to flow from the outlet until the consistency is equivalent to that of the grout being injected .
vents in ducts shall be provided in accordance with clause num .
grout num grout for prestressing shall have the following properties a num the design and consistence of grout to be used in the formation of piles shall produce a mix which is suitable for pumping .
b num grout shall consist only of portland cement cem i to bs en num water and admixtures .
admixtures are only to be used in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and shall comply with clause num. c num grout shall have a watercement ratio as low as possible consistent with the necessary consistence and the water cement ratio shall not exceed num. d grout shall not bleed in excess of num after num hours or a maximum of num when measured at numc in a covered glass cylinder approximately num mm in diameter with a height of grout of approximately num mm and the water shall be reabsorbed after num hours .
testing works grout num num cube strength testing shall be carried out in accordance with bs en num .
a sample shall consist of a set of six num mm cubes .
three cubes shall be tested at seven days and the remaining three at num days after casting .
batching grout num the weighing and waterdispensing mechanisms shall be maintained at all times to within the limits of accuracy described in bs num .
the weights of each component of the mix shall be within num of the respective weights per batch .
mixing grout num cement grouts shall be mechanically mixed using a high speed colloidal mixer minimum speed num revsminute or b paddle mixer minimum speed num revsminute or other suitable mixer subject to satisfactory evidence of performance .
the grout shall be mixed on site until a homogenous grout is obtained and shall be kept in continuous movement until it is used .
it shall be used within num minutes from the start of mixing .
following mixing the grout shall be passed through a num mm aperture sieve and shall be remixed if lumps are retained .
transporting grout num grout shall be transported from the mixer to the position of the pile in such a manner that segregation of the mix does not occur .
placing grout in cold weather num grout shall have a minimum temperature of numc when placed .
no frozen material or material containing ice shall be used for making grout .
all plant and equipment used in the transporting and placing of grout shall be free of ice that could enter the grout .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls records num the contractor shall keep records of grouting including the date the proportions of the grout and any admixtures used the pressure details of interruption and topping up required .
copies of these records shall be provided where required in appendix num .
pile quality num a certificate of quality from the pile manufacturer shall be provided where required in appendix num stating that the requirements of this specification have been fulfilled during manufacture .
marking of piles num num each pile shall be marked in such a manner that it can be identified with the records of manufacture which shall state the date of casting the cement type concrete strength class element length the prestressing force where appropriate and any other relevant data .
on delivery the piles shall be accompanied by records of manufacture .
lifting positions shall be marked on each pile in accordance with the requirements of design .
handling transportation and storage of piles num the method and sequence of lifting handling transporting and storing piles shall be such as to avoid shock loading and to ensure that the piles are not damaged .
only designed lifting and support points shall be used .
during transport and storage piles shall be appropriately supported under the marked lifting points or fully supported along their length .
all piles within a stack shall be in groups of the same length .
packing of uniform thickness shall be provided between piles at the lifting points .
concrete shall at no time be subjected to loading including its own weight which will induce a compressive stress in it exceeding num of its strength at the time of loading or of the specified strength whichever is the lesser .
for this purpose an assessment of the strength of the concrete and of the stresses produced by the loads shall be carried out .
a pile shall be rejected when the width of any transverse crack exceeds the value given in table num of bs num part num .
the measurement shall be made with the pile in its working attitude .
driving piles strength of piles num piles shall not be driven until the concrete cubes have achieved the specified characteristic strength or the pile has attained the strength to resist driving stresses whichever is the greater .
leaders and trestles num at all stages during driving and until incorporation into the structure the pile shall be adequately supported and restrained by means of leaders trestles temporary supports or other guide arrangements to maintain position and alignment and to prevent damage to the pile .
performance of driving equipment num where required in appendix num the contractor shall provide information on the efficiency and energy of the driving equipment including when followers are used .
where required in appendix num or num as appropriate dynamic evaluation and analysis shall be provided .
where a drop hammer is used the mass of the hammer shall be at least half that of the pile or pile segment .
for other types of hammer the energy delivered to the pile per blow shall be at least equivalent to that of a drop hammer of the stated mass .
drop hammers shall not be used from floating craft in such a manner as to cause instability of the craft or damage to the pile .
length of piles num the length of pile to be driven in any position shall be as specified in appendix num .
during the execution of the works any amendments to the scheduled lengths shall be recorded by the contractor and a full statement of the reasons included in the pile record .
driving procedure and redrive checks num the driving procedure shall be such as to avoid damage to the piles .
the contractor shall comply with all the particular requirements of appendix num on driving resistances and characteristics .
the driving of each pile shall be continuous until the depth or set as required by the design has been reached .
in the event of unavoidable interruption to driving the pile may be redriven provided it can subsequently be driven to the designed depth andor resistance or set without damage .
a follower shall not be used unless the set is revised where applicable in order to take into account reduction in the effectiveness of the hammer blow .
driving records shall be made for every pile .
this record shall contain the weight and fall of the hammer or ram and the number of blows for each num m of penetration unless otherwise specified in appendix num or num or num as appropriate .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls any unexpected change in driving characteristics shall be included in the pile record .
set num the set and temporary compression shall be measured and recorded for each pile at the completion of driving unless otherwise stated in appendix num or num as appropriate .
when a set is being measured the following requirements shall be met .
a the exposed part of the pile shall be in good condition without damage or distortion .
b the helmet dolly and any packing shall be in sound condition .
c the hammer blow shall be in line with the pile axis and the impact surfaces shall be flat and at right angles to the pile and hammer axis .
d the hammer shall be in good condition delivering adequate energy per blow and operating correctly .
e the temporary compression of the pile shall be recorded if required in appendix num or num as appropriate .
the set shall be recorded either as the penetration in millimetres per num blows or as the number of blows required to produce a penetration of num mm .
driving sequence and risen piles num piles shall be driven in a sequence to minimise any detrimental effects of heave and lateral displacement of the ground .
the sequence and method of piling including preboring shall limit uplift and lateral movement so that the final position of each pile is within the specified tolerances .
at all times the deflections of each pile from its axis as driven shall not be such as to cause damage or impair durability of the piles or any structures or services .
the maximum permitted uplift of each pile due to any one pile driven within a pile centre to centre radius of eight pile diameters is num mm or such figure as shall be specified unless it can be demonstrated by static load testing that uplift exceeding this amount does not affect the ability of the pile to meet the requirements of this specification .
even if during the installation of preliminary piles uplift is shown to be within the permitted maximum and the preliminary piles tested meet the requirements of the specification checks of uplift on working piles shall be made by the contractor at least once a week throughout the period of the piling work and the results recorded .
if preliminary piles are not installed the contractor shall commence installation of working piles taking measures to reduce or eliminate uplift until it can be established by site measurements that such measures are no longer necessary .
thereafter checks on uplift shall be made by the contractor at least once a week and the results recorded .
if a static load test shows that a pile which uplifted more than the maximum permitted amount due to any pile driven within a radius of eight pile diameters does not comply with the requirements of the specification all such piles that may have been uplifted shall be redriven .
if records and measurements show that piles have been laterally displaced so as to be outside the permitted tolerance or damaged the measures the contractor plans to adopt to enable the piles to comply with the specification shall be provided in accordance with appendix num .
laterally displaced piles shall not be corrected by forcible correction at the heads .
preboring num if preboring is specified the diameter and depth of prebore shall be as stipulated in appendix num .
other means to ease pile drivability may be used provided the completed piles meet the requirements of the specification .
repair and lengthening of piles repair of damaged pile heads num if it is necessary to repair the head of a pile before it has been driven to its final level the contractor shall carry out such repair in a way which allows the pile driving to be completed without further damage .
if the driving of a pile has been completed but the level of sound concrete of the pile is below the required cutoff level the pile shall be made good to the cutoff level or the pile cap or substructure may be locally deepened so that the completed foundation will safely withstand the specified working load .
lengthening of precast reinforced and prestressed concrete piles num any provision for lengthening piles incorporated at the time of manufacture shall be designed by the contractor to resist all stresses to which it may be subjected .
march num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls if no provision for lengthening piles was incorporated at the time of manufacture any method for lengthening shall be such that the extended pile including any joints is capable of taking safely the stresses during driving and under load .
lengthening of segmental piles num where piles are driven to depths exceeding those expected leaving insufficient projection for penetration into the following works the piles shall be extended or replaced so that the completed piles are capable of meeting the requirements of the specification .
driving repaired or lengthened piles num repaired or lengthened piles shall not be driven until cubes for the added concrete have reached the specified characteristic strength of the concrete of the pile .
cutting off pile heads num when the driving of a pile has satisfied the specification requirements the concrete at the head of the pile shall be cut off to the level specified .
reinforcing bars projecting above this level shall be as specified .
care shall be taken to avoid shattering or otherwise damaging the rest of the pile .
any cracked or defective concrete shall be cut away and the pile repaired to provide a full and sound section to cutoff level .
num bored castinplace piles support fluid num where support fluid is used to maintain the stability of the excavation it shall be in accordance with clause num .
diameter of piles num the diameter of a pile shall be not less than the specified diameter .
the auger width shall be checked as necessary and recorded for each pile to ensure the specified diameter is achieved .
a tolerance of num num on the auger width is permissible .
boring boring near recently cast piles num piles shall be bored in an order and in such a manner that no damage is sustained by previously formed piles .
casings num num temporary casings shall be of quality of material length and thickness adequate for the purpose of preventing water and unstable soil from entering the pile excavations .
a short length of temporary casing shall be provided for all piles to provide an upstand of at least num m above surrounding ground level for safety and to prevent contamination of the concrete in the bore .
temporary casings shall maintain the excavations to their full dimensions and ensure that piles are completed to their full crosssectional dimensions .
the use of a vibrator to insert and withdraw temporary casings is subject to compliance with clause num control of noise and vibration and subclause num and to the method not causing disturbance of the ground which would adversely affect the construction or the capacity of piles .
temporary casings shall be free from significant distortion .
they shall be of uniform crosssection throughout each continuous length .
during concreting they shall be free from internal projections and encrusted concrete which might adversely affect the proper formation of piles .
where piles are bored under water or support fluid in an unlined state the insertion of a fulllength loosely fitting casing to the bottom of the bore prior to placing concrete will not be permitted .
if required permanent casings shall be specified in appendix num .
stability of pile bore num where boring takes place through unstable water bearing strata the process of excavation and the support fluid and depth of temporary casing where employed shall be such that soil from outside the area of the pile is not drawn into the pile section and cavities are not created outside the temporary casing as it is advanced .
where a support fluid is used for maintaining the stability of a bore an adequate temporary casing shall be used in conjunction with the support fluid so as to ensure stability of the strata near ground level until concrete has been placed .
during construction the level of drilling fluid in the pile excavation shall be maintained within the cased or stable bore so that it is not less than num m above the level of external standing groundwater at all times unless stated otherwise in appendix num .
pumping from pile bores num pumping from pile bores shall not be permitted unless the bore has been sealed against further water amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls entry by casing or unless the soil is stable and will allow pumping to take place without ground disturbance below or around the pile .
continuity of construction num the pile shall be bored and the concrete shall be placed without such delay as would lead to impairment of the performance of the pile .
the time period during which each pile is excavated and the concrete is placed shall not exceed num hours .
the time period shall start when excavation below the temporary lining tubes commences .
where the construction sequence is such that the time period of num hours will be exceeded even if no delays are taken into account a realistic time period during which the pile is excavated and concrete placed shall be stated in the contractors method statement .
the contractor shall advise on the likely effect of this extended pile construction period on the performance and capacity of the pile .
enlarged pile bases num a mechanically formed enlarged base shall be no smaller than the dimensions specified and shall be concentric with the pile shaft to within a tolerance of num of the shaft diameter .
the sloping surface of the frustum forming the enlargement shall make an angle to the axis of the pile of not more than num .
at the specified diameter of the underream at the perimeter of the base there shall be a minimum height of num mm .
inspection num each pile bore which does not contain standing water or support fluid shall be inspected from the ground surface prior to concrete being placed in it to ensure the base is clean .
adequate means of lighting measuring tapes and a means of measuring verticality shall be used .
for piles of num mm diameter or larger and where manned inspection of the pile base is specified in appendix num equipment shall be provided by the contractor to enable his representatives to descend into the bore for the purpose of inspection .
the contractor shall provide all necessary facilities to enable an inspection of any pile excavation to be made including facilities to check the depth verticality and position .
the full requirements of bs num shall be followed .
the contractor shall designate a supervisor to supervise each inspection .
the supervisor shall have a copy of bs num and shall ensure that every person involved in the descent of piles is familiar with its requirements .
cleanliness of pile bases num on completion of boring loose disturbed or softened soil shall be removed from the bore using appropriate methods which shall be designed to clean while at the same time minimizing ground disturbance below the pile bases .
water or support fluid shall be maintained at such levels throughout and following the cleaning operation that stability of the bore is preserved .
at all times when the pile head is unattended the bore shall be clearly marked and fenced off so as not to cause a safety hazard .
reinforcement num num steel reinforcement shall be as described in appendix num and in accordance with series num .
where steel sections are used for reinforcement they shall be in accordance with series num .
the number of joints in longitudinal steel bars shall be kept to a minimum .
joints in steel reinforcement shall be such that the full strength of each bar is effective across the joint and shall be made so that there is no detrimental displacement of the reinforcement during the construction of the pile .
reinforcement shall be maintained in its correct position during concreting of the pile to allow a vertical tolerance of num mm on the level of the reinforcement projecting above the final cut off level .
where reinforcement is made up into cages they shall be sufficiently rigid to enable them to be handled placed and concreted without damage .
if the cage is to be welded together welding shall be carried out to the requirements of bs num .
unless otherwise specified reinforcement shall extend to the base of the pile or to at least num m below the bottom of the temporary casing whichever is the lesser .
spacers shall be designed and manufactured using durable materials which shall not lead to corrosion of the reinforcement or spalling of the concrete cover .
where required in appendix num details of the means by which the contractor plans to ensure the correct cover to and position of the reinforcement shall be submitted .
concrete general num num cement materials aggregates admixtures and water shall be in accordance with series num .
the consistence and method of placing of the concrete shall be such that a continuous monolithic concrete or grout shaft of the full crosssection is formed .
concrete shall be transported from the mixer to the position of the pile in such a manner that segregation of the concrete constituents does not occur .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls placing concrete under water or support fluid num num before placing concrete measures shall be taken in accordance with subclause num to ensure there is no accumulation of silt or other material at the base of the boring and the contractor shall ensure that heavily contaminated support fluid which could impair the free flow of concrete from the tremie pipe has not accumulated in the bottom of the hole .
a sample of support fluid shall be taken from the top and bottom of the boring using an appropriate device .
the fluid shall be prepared sampled and tested as stated in the contractors submission .
if tests show the fluid does not comply with the limits stated by the contractor for the particular type of support fluid the fluid shall be wholly or partly replaced as appropriate before concrete is placed .
concrete to be placed under water or support fluid shall be placed by tremie in one continuous operation and shall not be discharged freely into the water or support fluid .
pumping of concrete may be used where appropriate .
the bottom end of the tremie must be square to the axis of the tremie and its circumference must be continuous .
the tremie must be fully charged with concrete before it is lifted off the base of the pile .
the concrete shall be of high consistence and cement content in accordance with series num and table num mix c. the concrete shall be placed in a manner that shall not cause segregation of the constituents of concrete mix .
the concrete shall be placed without such interruption as would allow the previously placed batch to have achieved a stiffness which prevents proper amalgamation of the two concrete batches .
the contractor shall take all precautions in the design of the concrete mix and placing of the concrete to avoid arching of the concrete .
no soil liquid or other foreign matter shall be permitted to contaminate the concrete .
num consistence of concrete num consistence measured at the time of discharge into the pile bore shall be in accordance with the limits shown in table num compaction num internal vibrators shall not be used to compact concrete .
placing concrete in dry borings num measures shall be taken to ensure that the structural strength of the concrete placed in all piles is not impaired through grout loss segregation or bleeding .
the method of placing shall be such as to ensure that the concrete or grout in its final position is dense and homogeneous .
concrete shall be introduced into the pile via a hopper and suitable length of rigid delivery tube to ensure that the concrete falls vertically and centrally down the shaft .
the tube shall be at least num m long .
amendment november num table num num piling mix consistence piling mix consistence typical conditions of use consistence the concrete and aggregate size must be compatible with the reinforcement spacing flow class range slump class mm range mm a not snumsnum placed into waterfree unlined or permanently lined bore of applicable num mm diameter or over or where casting level lies below temporary casing reinforcement spaced at num mm centres or greater leaving ample room for free movement of concrete between bars .
b fnumfnum snumsnumb where reinforcement is spaced at less than num mm centres where cutoff level of concrete is within temporary casing where pile bore is waterfree and the diameter is less than nummm .
c fnumfnum snum or more where concrete is to be placed by tremie under water or support fluid or by pumping or by continuous flight auger .
notes num .
num the slump test method is not suited to these very high consistence and the flow test is to be preferred .
num .
num the test method may lack sensitivity with this class .
num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls the depths to the surface of the concrete shall be measured and the length of the tremie tubes recorded at regular intervals corresponding to the placing of each batch of concrete .
the depths measured and volumes placed shall be plotted immediately on a graph and compared with the theoretical relationship of depth against volume .
the hopper and pipe of the tremie shall be clean and watertight throughout .
the pipe shall extend to the base of the bore and a sliding plug or barrier shall be placed in the pipe to prevent direct contact between the first charge of concrete in the tremie and the water or support fluid .
the pipe shall at all times penetrate the concrete which has previously been placed with a minimum embedment of num m and shall not be withdrawn from the concrete until completion of concreting .
a sufficient quantity of concrete shall be maintained within the pipe to ensure that the pressure from it exceeds that from the water or support fluid .
the internal diameter of the pipe of the tremie shall be not less than the greater of num mm or six times the maximum aggregate size .
it shall be so designed that external projections are minimized allowing the tremie to pass within reinforcing cages without causing damage .
the internal face of the pipe of the tremie shall be free from projections .
extraction of casing num consistence of concrete num num temporary casings shall be extracted while the concrete within them remains sufficient consistence to ensure that the concrete is not lifted .
during extraction the motion of the casing shall be maintained in an axial direction relative to the pile .
concrete level num when the casing is being extracted a sufficient quantity of concrete shall be maintained within it to ensure that pressure from external water support fluid or soil is exceeded and that the pile is neither reduced in section nor contaminated .
table num casting tolerance above cutoff level for piles cast in dry bores using temporary casing and without the use of permanent lining cutoff distance below casting tolerance above commencing surface h m cutoff level m num num num hnumcnum where c length of temporary casing below the commencing surface beyond h num m the casting tolerance applying to h num m shall apply .
if h is greater than c then this tolerance is no longer applicable and the tolerances in table num will apply .
table num casting tolerance above cutoff level for piles cast in dry bores within permanent lining tubes or permanent casings or where their cutoff levels are in stable ground below the base of any casing used cutoff distance below casting tolerance above commencing surface h m cutoff level m num num num hnum beyond h num m the casting tolerance applying to h num m shall apply .
table num casting tolerance above cutoff level for piles cast under water or support fluid cutoff distance below casting tolerance above commencing surface h m cutoff level m num num num hnum cnum where c length of temporary casing below the commencing surface beyond h num m the casting tolerance applying to h num m shall apply .
in cases where a pile is cast so that the cutoff is within a permanent lining tube the appropriate tolerance is given by deletion of the casing term cnum in the table .
the concrete level within a temporary casing in a dry bore may be topped up where necessary during the course of casing extraction so that the base of the casing is always below the concrete surface until the casting of the pile has been completed .
adequate precautions shall be taken in all cases where excess heads of water or support fluid could occur as the casing is withdrawn because of the displacement of water or fluid by the concrete as it flows into its final position against the walls of the pile bore .
where two or more discontinuous lengths of casing double casing are used in the construction the contractors method of working shall produce piles to their full designed cross sections .
the depth to the average levels of the concrete surface of the pile shall be measured before and after each temporary casing is removed .
these measurements shall be recorded on the pile record .
pile head casting level tolerances num for piles cast in dry bores using temporary casing and without the use of a permanent casing piles heads shall be cast to a level above the specified cutoff so that after trimming a sound concrete connection with the pile can be made .
the casting level shall be above the cutoff level and within the tolerance shown in table num but shall not be above the commencing surface level .
no pile shall be cast with its cutoff level below standing water level unless appropriate measures amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls are taken to prevent inflow of water causing segregation of the concrete as temporary casing is extracted .
for piles cast in dry bores within permanent lining tubes or permanent casings to where their cutoff levels are in stable ground below the base of any casing used pile heads shall be cast to a level above the specified cutoff so that after trimming a sound concrete connection with the pile can be made .
the casting level shall be above the cutoff level and within the tolerance shown in table num but shall not be above the commencing surface level .
for piles cast under water or support fluid the pile heads shall be cast to a level above the specified cutoff so that after trimming to remove all debris and contaminated concrete a sound concrete connection with the pile can be made .
the casting level shall be above the cutoff level and within the tolerance shown in table num but shall not be above the commencing surface level .
cutoff levels may be specified below the standing groundwater level and where this condition applies the borehole fluid level shall not be reduced below the standing groundwater level until the concrete has set .
where either support fluid or water is mixed in the ground by the drilling equipment to assist with the installation of temporary casings the casting level shall be coincident with the commencing surface .
temporary backfilling above pile casting level num after each pile has been cast any empty bore remaining shall be carefully backfilled as soon as possible with inert spoil .
cutting off pile heads num when cutting off and trimming piles to the specified cutoff level the contractor shall take care to avoid shattering or otherwise damaging the rest of the pile .
any cracked or defective concrete shall be cut away and the pile repaired in a manner to provide a full and sound section at the cutoff level .
grout num num the use of grout containing fine aggregate is permitted in place of concrete specified elsewhere in this clause .
the requirements of clause num sub clauses num to num shall apply .
the sand shall be in accordance with the limits of num cp or num mp of bs en num .
the moisture content of aggregates shall be measured immediately before mixing and as frequently thereafter as is necessary to maintain consistency of the mix .
allowance shall be made for the aggregate moisture when assessing batch weights .
where the word concrete is used elsewhere in this clause then grout shall be read in its place .
in particular subclauses num to num shall also apply to grout except the requirement for grout consistence shall be that in clause num subclause num .
pressure grouting grouting of piles num where bases or sides of piles are to be pressure grouted as detailed in appendix num the contractor shall construct the piles with grout tubes and any other necessary equipment preinstalled so that piles may subsequently be grouted .
method of grouting num the method of grouting shall be such that the completed pile meets the requirements of the specification for loadsettlement behaviour and that during grouting pile uplift is within the limits specified .
where required in appendix num the contractor shall submit full descriptions of the equipment materials and methods that he plans to use before commencing grouting .
the method statement shall comprise at least the following information i details of specialist contractor for grouting if applicable names of key personnel and their curricula vitae and previous experience on similar types of work .
ii details of grout pump mixer agitator and any other equipment used for mixing and injection of grout .
iii full details of grout to be used including admixtures .
iv method of quality control on grout including details of number of cubes taken and checks on density flow and bleed of the grout .
v num method of measuring grout take which shall be automatic and include a physical method of checking grout take at the end of injection of each circuit .
vi num method of measuring grout pressures which shall include a continuous record .
calibration certificates for pressure gauges .
vii typical record sheet for grouting which shall include records of grout take grout pressure residual pressure times of grouting and pile uplift for each grouting circuit .
typical continuous records of grout pressure and pile uplift shall also be included .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls viii target minimum maximum and residual grout pressures for each grout injection .
ix method of grout injection including full details of any packers .
target grout volumes for each injection .
x method of measuring friction losses in the tubespackers .
grout tubes num the grouting tubes shall be tested to determine any grout leakage in joints under pressure prior to installation into the piles .
the grout tubes must be capable of withstanding the pressures to which they will be subjected .
robust threaded caps shall be provided to protect the top of the grouting tubes during concreting and afterwards .
the grouting tubes shall be flushed with water after each grouting operation .
if the target volumes or grout pressures are not achieved or the specified uplift is not achieved then the pile shall be regrouted within num hours .
the contractor shall provide an engineer to monitor grout pressures and grout takes .
pile uplift num during base grouting the pile uplift shall be not less than num mm and shall not exceed num mm .
the contractor shall provide an engineer to monitor the uplift of the piles during grouting .
the pile uplift shall be monitored with an appropriate level reading off a graduated scale attached to the pile head and by a dial gauge attached to a reference frame .
a continuous record of pile uplift shall be made using a displacement transducer also attached to the reference frame .
the accuracy of measurement shall be a minimum of num mm for each monitoring device .
the design of the reference frame shall be made available on request .
grout testing num close control of the mixing of the grout shall be carried out .
the contractor shall provide and maintain on site all test facilities required to test and control the grout mixes .
records num in accordance with appendix num the contractor shall provide duplicate copies of all grouting records for each pile within num hours of the completion of grouting that pile .
the records shall comprise the following information a pile number .
b date .
c leakage test on grout pipes .
d grout mix .
e continuous records of grout pressure and pile uplift to the same timescale .
the records shall be annotated at regular intervals with physical measurements from pressure gauges and dial gauges including times of such measurements .
circuit number and pile number are also to be included .
f for each circuit the peak and residual grout pressures including times and sequence of grouting .
g the total pile uplift and the uplift after each circuit is grouted .
h for each circuit the physical and automatic measurements for grout volume injected and derived injected volumes .
the total grout volume .
i all tests made on grout .
num bored piles constructed using continuous flight augers and concrete or grout injection through hollow auger stems diameter of piles num the diameter of a pile shall be not less than the specified diameter .
the cutting head width shall be checked as necessary and recorded for each pile to ensure the specified diameter is achieved and that the width is greater than the diameter of the following flight .
a tolerance of num num on the cutting head width is permissible .
boring boring near recently cast piles num piles shall be formed in an order and in such a manner that no damage is sustained by previously formed piles .
removal of augers from the ground num the auger shall not be extracted from the ground during the boring or construction of a pile in such a way that an open unsupported bore or inflow of water into march num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls the pile section would result .
as the auger is withdrawn from the ground it shall be cleaned of all rising .
suitability of boring equipment num the piles shall be bored using equipment capable of penetrating the ground without drawing surrounding soils laterally into the pile bore .
the contractor shall record the fact if flighting of soil up the auger is excessive .
the verticality of the auger shall be checked at the commencement of boring .
should it deviate during boring so that the pile verticality is outside the specified tolerance the fact shall be recorded on the pile record .
sealing the base of the auger num the base of the auger stem shall be fitted with a suitable means of sealing it against ingress of water and soil during boring .
depth of piles num any failure of a pile to reach the required depth as given in appendix num shall be recorded by the contractor and a full statement of the reasons included in the pile record .
placing of concrete or grout num mix design and consistence concrete num num where not otherwise stated in this section the concrete shall comply with series num .
the design and consistence of concrete to be used in the formation of a pile shall produce a concrete mix which is suitable for pumping .
it shall have a slump classs snum or greater or flow classes fnum to fnum and a minimum cement content of num kgm .
the concrete shall be designed so that segregation does not occur during the placing process and bleeding of the concrete shall be minimized .
the consistence of concrete mixes shall be measured by the method described in appendix num .
equipment for supply of concrete or grout to piles num grout or concrete shall be supplied to the pile through suitable concrete pump tubing and the hollow auger stem .
all pipe fitments and connections shall be so constructed that grout does not leak during the injection process .
commencement of concrete or grout supply to each pile num at the beginning of concrete or grout placing the sealing device at the base of the auger stem shall be removed by the application of concrete or grout pressure .
care shall be taken to ensure that the auger is lifted only the minimum distance necessary to initiate the flow of concrete or grout and that water inflow and soil movement at the base of the auger are minimized .
the technique and equipment used to initiate and maintain the concrete or grout flow shall be such that a pile of the full specified crosssection is obtained from the maximum depth of boring to the final pile cutoff level .
rate of supply of concrete or grout num the concrete or grout shall be supplied to the pile at a sufficient rate during auger withdrawal to ensure that a continuous monolithic shaft of at least the full specified crosssection is formed free from debris or any segregated concrete or grout .
completion of concreting or grouting of piles num if the concrete or grout placing in any pile can not be completed in the normal manner then the pile shall be rebored to a safe level below the position of interruption in supply before the concrete or grout has achieved initial set and before further concrete or grout is injected .
the method statement shall set out the procedure .
casting level of pile head num concrete or grout shall be cast to the commencing surface level in all cases .
the pile position shall be clearly marked and fenced off so as not to cause a safety hazard .
num mix design and consistence grout num num where not otherwise stated in this section the grout shall comply with clause num subclauses num to num with the exception that sand may be used .
the sand shall be in accordance with the limits of num cp or num mp of bs en num .
the moisture content of aggregates shall be measured immediately before mixing and as frequently thereafter as is necessary to maintain consistency of the mix .
allowance shall be made for the aggregate moisture content when assessing batch weights .
the procedure for monitoring the suitability of grout throughout the works shall be established prior to commencement of the works .
reinforcement num num steel reinforcement shall be as described in appendix num and in accordance with series num .
where steel sections are used for reinforcement they shall be in accordance with series num .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls all reinforcement shall be placed with the minimum delay after the completion of the concreting or grouting operation .
it shall be fabricated in cages or bundles of bars fixed securely to permit it to be placed in the correct position and to the depth specified through the concrete or grout of the pile .
suitable spacers shall be provided to maintain the specified concrete or grout cover to steel .
the transverse reinforcement of any reinforcing cage shall meet the design requirements and shall maintain the longitudinal bars in position when the cage is inserted into the wet concrete or grout .
longitudinal main steel reinforcement shall be continuous over the specified length .
where joints are necessary no more than one joint shall be used and then only if the reinforcement cage length exceeds num m. joints in steel reinforcement shall be such that the full strength of each bar is effective across the joint and shall be made so that there is no detrimental displacement of the reinforcement during placing in the pile .
at the joint bars shall be welded to the requirement of bs num or joined together in a suitable manner .
reinforcement shall be placed and maintained in position to provide the specified projection of reinforcement above the final cutoff level .
a vertical tolerance of num mm on the level of reinforcement projecting above the final cutoff level shall be met .
the contractor shall provide such additional reinforcement as he may require to suit his method of placing the reinforcing steel cage .
monitoring system for pile construction num an automated system shall be provided for monitoring the construction of the piles .
it shall provide the operator with information on the depth of the auger tip flow of concrete and relative pressure of concrete as a minimum .
in addition the automatic monitoring equipment shall monitor continuously with depth the following parameters .
a during boring i auger penetration rate b during concreting i rate of extraction of the auger ii relative injection pressure of concrete or grout iii rate of supply of concrete or grout equipment used for monitoring shall be calibrated at the start of the piling works and calibration certificates issued before commencing piling .
after the commencement of works the monitoring equipment shall be calibrated at the frequency specified below or at any time where there is reason to suspect malfunction .
depth shall be calibrated once a week .
at full auger length the tolerance is num m. concrete flow rate shall be calibrated once during the progress of the works by passing a known volume of concrete through the flow meter .
the tolerance on flow is num .
the pressure transducer shall have a calibration certificate .
the tolerance on pressure shall be stated in bars .
the automated monitoring system must be operational at the start of every pile .
the following information shall be recorded during the construction of each pile i the incremental time of auger penetration during boring ii final depth of the bore iii time for each num m increment of auger extraction during concreting iv the volume of concrete or grout pumped for each num m increment of auger extraction during concreting v total volume of concrete or grout for completion of the pile vi the time at the start and end of boring concreting and insertion of the reinforcement cage and any time intervals for delays or stoppages vii relative concrete pressure during concreting viii the direction of rotation of the auger during concreting if the number of auger revolutions relative to auger penetration becomes abnormally high at any stage during boring the fact shall be recorded as shall the occurrence of excessive flighting .
the rig operator shall be competent and experienced in the construction of continuous flight auger piles and a full time supervisor shall be devoted to pile construction .
where required in appendix num details of their relevant experience shall be submitted prior to work commencing .
in accordance with appendix num the contractor shall submit proposals on how he shall complete a pile in the event of failure of all or part of the rig instrumentation system prior to work commencing .
this proposal shall include the recording of the depth at which failure occurred the time for auger extraction during concreting and the total volume of concrete or grout march num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls delivered .
any pile which was subject to an instrumentation failure during construction shall be integrity tested in accordance with clause num .
the monitoring results must be available immediately on completion of every pile .
cutting off pile heads num when cutting off and trimming piles to the specified cutoff level the contractor shall take care to avoid shattering or otherwise damaging the rest of the pile .
any laitence or contaminated cracked or defective concrete shall be cut away and the pile made good in a manner to provide a full and sound section up to the cutoff level .
num driven castinplace piles materials permanent casings num permanent casings shall be as specified in appendix num .
where a permanent casing is to be made from a series of short sections it shall be watertight .
the dimensions and quality of the casing shall be adequate to withstand the stresses caused by handling and driving without damage or distortion .
pile shoes num pile shoes shall be manufactured from durable material capable of withstanding the stresses caused by driving without damage and shall be designed to give a watertight joint during construction .
diameter of piles num the diameter of a pile shall be not less than the specified diameter .
temporary casings num temporary casings shall be free from significant distortion .
they shall be of uniform external cross section throughout each continuous length and shall be of sufficient strength to withstand driving and ground forces without deformation .
during concreting they shall be free from internal projections and encrusted concrete which might prevent the proper formation of piles .
enlarged pile bases num where the contractor wishes to form a pile with an enlarged base or where such a base is specified in appendix num details of the method of forming the base and the materials to be used shall be included in the contractors method statement .
driving piles piling near recently cast piles num casings shall not be driven or piles formed so close to other piles which have recently been cast and which contain workable or unset concrete that a flow of concrete could be induced from or damage caused to any of the piles .
performance of driving equipment num where required in appendix num the contractor shall provide information on the efficiency and energy of the driving equipment including when followers are used .
where required in appendix num dynamic evaluation and analysis shall be provided .
drop hammers shall not be used from floating craft in such a manner as to cause instability of the craft or damage to the pile .
length of piles num the length of pile to be driven in any position shall be as specified in appendix num .
during the execution of the works any amendments to the scheduled lengths shall be recorded by the contractor and a full statement of the reasons included in the pile record .
driving procedure and redrive checks num driving procedure and redrive checks shall be in accordance with subclause num .
set num the set shall be measured and recorded for each pile at the completion of driving unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
when a set is being measured the following requirements shall be met .
a the exposed part of the pile casing shall be in good condition without damage or distortion .
b the dolly helmet and packing if any shall be in sound condition .
c the hammer blow shall be in line with the pile axis and the impact surfaces shall be flat and at right angles to the pile and hammer axis .
d the hammer shall be in good condition delivering adequate energy per blow and operating correctly .
march num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls the set shall be recorded either as the penetration in millimetres per num blows or as the number of blows required to produce a penetration of num mm .
driving sequence and risen piles num requirements for the driving sequence and risen piles shall be in accordance with subclause num .
laterally displaced piles shall not be corrected by forceable correction at the heads .
preboring num if preboring is specified the pile casing shall be pitched after preboring to the depth and diameter stipulated in appendix num .
other means to ease pile driveability may be used provided the completed piles meet their specified requirements .
internal drop hammer num num where a casing for a pile without an enlarged base is to be driven by an internal drop hammer a plug consisting of concrete strength class cnum with a watercement ratio not exceeding num shall be placed in the pile .
this plug shall have a compacted height of not less than num times the diameter of the pile .
fresh concrete shall be added to ensure that this height of driving plug is maintained in the casing throughout the period of driving and in any event a plug of fresh concrete shall be added after num hours of normal driving or after num minutes of hard driving or should the piledriving be interrupted for num minutes or longer fresh concrete shall be added prior to driving being resumed .
repair of damaged pile heads and extending of piles to the cutoff level num num when repairing or extending the head of a pile the head shall be cut off square at sound concrete and all loose particles shall be removed by wire brushing followed by washing with water .
if the level of sound concrete of the pile is below the cutoff level the pile shall be extended to the cutoff level with concrete of a strength class not inferior to that of the concrete of the pile so that it will safely withstand the specified working load .
lengthening of permanent pile casings during construction num the lengthening of permanent steel pile casings by adding an additional length of steel casing during construction shall be carried out in accordance with clause num .
inspection and remedial work num prior to placing concrete in a pile casing the contractor shall check that the casing is undamaged and free from water or other foreign matter .
in the event of water or foreign matter having entered the pile casing the casing shall be withdrawn repaired if necessary and redriven or other action taken to continue the construction of the pile to meet the requirements of the specification .
reinforcement num num steel reinforcement shall be as described in appendix num and in accordance with series num .
the number of joints in longitudinal steel bars shall be kept to a minimum .
the full strength of each bar shall be effective across each joint which shall be made so that there is no detrimental displacement of the reinforcement during the construction of the pile .
reinforcement shall be maintained in its correct position during concreting of the pile to allow a vertical tolerance of num mm on the level of the reinforcement projecting above the final cutoff level to be met .
where reinforcement is made up into cages they shall be sufficiently rigid to enable them to be placed handled and concreted without damage .
if the cage is to be welded together welding shall be carried out to the requirements of bs num .
spacers shall be designed and manufactured using durable materials which shall not lead to corrosion of the reinforcement or spalling of the concrete cover .
where required in appendix num details of the means by which the contractor plans to ensure the correct cover to and position of the reinforcement shall be submitted .
concrete general num num cement materials aggregates admixtures and water shall be in accordance with series num .
the consistence and method of placing of the concrete shall be such that a continuous monolithic concrete shaft of the full crosssection is formed .
concrete shall be transported from the mixer to the position of the pile in such a manner that segregation of the constituents of concrete mix does not occur .
the concrete shall be placed without such interruption as would allow the previously placed batch to have hardened .
the contractor shall take all precautions in the design of the concrete mix and placing of the concrete to avoid arching of the concrete in the casing .
no spoil liquid or amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls other foreign matter shall be permitted to contaminate the concrete .
num consistence of concrete num num consistence measured at the time of discharge into the pile casing shall be in accordance with the requirement shown in table num except that these standards shall not apply to piling systems which use semidry concrete and employ special means for its compaction .
the concrete shall be of the consistence specified when in its final position and until all construction procedures in forming the pile have been completed .
compaction num internal vibrators shall not be used to compact concrete castinplace .
placing concrete num num measures shall be taken as necessary in all piles to ensure that the structural strength of the placed concrete is not impaired through grout loss segregation or bleeding .
extraction of casing num consistence of concrete num num temporary casings shall be extracted while the concrete within them remains sufficiently workable to ensure that the concrete is not lifted .
should a semi dry concrete mix have been used the contractor shall ensure the concrete shall not lift during extraction of the casing .
concrete level num when the casing is being extracted a sufficient quantity of concrete shall be maintained within it to ensure that pressure from external water or soil is exceeded and that the pile is neither reduced in section nor contaminated .
concrete shall be topped up as necessary while the casing is extracted until the required head of concrete to complete the pile in a sound and proper manner has been provided .
no concrete is to be placed once the bottom of the casing has been lifted above the top of the concrete .
vibrating extractors num the use of vibrating casing extractors will be permitted subject to clause num and clause num sub clause num .
concrete casting tolerances num for piles constructed without the use of a rigid permanent lining pile concrete shall be cast to the commencing surface level .
where piles are constructed inside rigid permanent lining tubes or permanent casings pile heads shall be cast to a level above the specified cutoff so that after trimming a sound concrete connection with the pile can be made .
in this case the tolerance of casting above the cutoff level shall be determined according to table num .
temporary backfilling above pile casting level num after each pile has been cast any hole remaining shall be protected and shall be carefully backfilled as soon as possible with appropriate materials .
cutting off pile heads num when cutting off and trimming piles to the specified cutoff level the contractor shall take care to avoid shattering or otherwise damaging the rest of the pile .
any cracked or defective concrete shall be cut away and the pile repaired to provide a full and sound section to the cutoff level .
num steel bearing piles materials num num steel for bearing piles shall be in accordance with series num .
cast steel shoes shall be of steel to bs en num grade anum .
strengthening of piles num num the strengthening to the toe of a pile in lieu of a shoe or the strengthening of the head of a pile shall be made using material of the same strength class as the pile .
manufacturing tolerances num all piles shall be of the type and crosssectional dimensions as designed .
for standard rolled sections the dimensional tolerances and weight shall comply with the relevant standard .
length tolerance of hsection steel bearing piles shall be num mm in accordance with bs en num .
the tolerance on length of other steel bearing piles shall be num and num mm unless otherwise specified .
for proprietary sections the dimensional tolerances shall comply with the manufacturers standards .
the rolling or manufacturing tolerances for proprietary sections shall be such that the actual weight amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls of section does not differ from the theoretical weight by more than num or num .
the rolling or manufacturing tolerances for steel tubular piles shall be such that the actual weight of section does not differ from the theoretical weight by more than num .
the rolling or proprietary tolerances for hsection steel bearing piles shall be such that the actual weight of the section does not differ from the theoretical weight by more than num .
straightness of sections num for standard rolled sections the deviation from straightness shall be within the compliance provisions of bs en num .
when two or more rolled sections are joined by buttjointing the deviation from straightness shall not exceed num of the overall length of the pile .
for proprietary sections made up from rolled sections and for tubular piles the deviation from straightness on any longitudinal face shall not exceed num of the length of the pile nor num mm in any num m length .
fabrication of piles num for tubular piles where the load will be carried by the wall of the pile and if the pile will be subject to loads that induce reversal of stress during or after construction the external diameter at any section as measured by using a steel tape on the circumference shall not differ from the theoretical diameter by more than num .
the ends of all tubular piles as manufactured shall be within a tolerance on ovality of num as measured by a ring gauge for a distance of num mm at each end of the pile length .
the root edges or root faces of lengths of piles that are to be shop buttwelded shall not differ by more than num of the thickness of pile walls not exceeding num mm thick or by more than num mm for piles where the wall is thicker than num mm .
when piles of unequal wall thickness are to be buttwelded the thickness of the thinner material shall be the criterion .
pile lengths shall be set up so that the differences in dimensions are matched as evenly as possible .
matching of pile lengths num longitudinal seam welds and spiral seam welds of lengths of tubular piles forming a complete pile shall whenever possible be evenly staggered at the butt but if in order to obtain a satisfactory match of the ends of piles or the specified straightness the longitudinal seams or spiral seams are brought closely to one alignment at the joint then they shall be staggered by at least num mm .
welding num num all welding shall be to bs en num and bs en num and when appropriate shall be in accordance with clause num .
for a tubular pile where the load will be compressive and nonreversible and will be carried by the wall of the pile or by a concrete core the welding shall be to bs en num and bs en num or bs num .
welders qualifications num num only welders who are qualified to bs en num or who have attained a similar standard shall be employed on the works .
proof of welders proficiency shall be made available on request .
welding procedures num num all welding procedures shall have been qualified to bs en iso num bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num and the contractor shall make available full details of the welding procedures and electrodes with drawings and schedules as may be necessary .
tests shall be undertaken as may be required by the relevant british standard or as may be required in appendix num .
manufacturing processes welded tube piles num where required in appendix num the contractor shall submit details of the manufacturing and welding procedures before commencement of manufacture .
welded box piles and proprietary sections num welded box piles or proprietary sections made up from two or more hotrolled sections shall be welded in accordance with the manufacturers standards .
nondestructive testing of welds num during production of welded tube piles one radiograph or ultrasonic test of a length of approximately num mm shall be made at each end of a length as manufactured at the mill to provide a spot check on weld quality .
in addition on a spirally welded tube pile a further check shall be made on welded joints between strip lengths .
all the circumferential welds shall be fully radiographed or ultrasonically tested by the method specified in appendix num .
results shall be made available within num days of completion of the tests .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls if the results of any weld test do not conform to the specified requirements two additional specimens from the same length of pile shall be tested .
in the case of failure of one or both of these additional tests the length of pile covered by the tests shall be rejected .
standards for welds num longitudinal welds in tubular piles .
for piles of longitudinal or spiral weld manufacture where the load will be carried by the wall of the pile and if the pile will be subject to loads which induce reversal of stress during or after construction other than driving stresses the standard for interpretation of nondestructive testing shall be the american petroleum institute specification numl .
the maximum permissible height of weld reinforcement shall not exceed num mm for wall thicknesses not exceeding num mm and num mm for wall thicknesses greater than num mm .
longitudinal welds in proprietary box piles and proprietary sections .
longitudinal welds joining the constituent parts of the box or proprietary section shall be in accordance with the manufacturers specification .
circumferential welds .
for circumferential welds in tubular piles the same maximum height of weld reinforcement as specified above for longitudinal welds in tubular piles shall apply the standard for interpretation of nondestructive testing shall be the american petroleum institute specification numl .
sitewelded butt splices support and alignment num when lengths of pile are to be buttspliced on site adequate facilities shall be provided for supporting and aligning them prior to welding such that the specified straightness criterion can be achieved .
weld tests num weld tests shall be performed by radiographic or ultrasonic methods as specified .
provided that satisfactory results are being obtained one test of a length of num mm shall be made for num or more of the number of welded splices in the case where the load will be carried by the wall or section of the pile .
where the load will be carried by the concrete core of a pile the number of tests will be as specified in appendix num but will not normally exceed num of the number of butt splices .
results shall be made available within num days of completion of the tests .
any defective weld shall be cut out replaced and reinspected .
standards for site butt welds num welds shall comply with the requirements of the weld quality standards for site butt welds given in series num .
protection during welding num all work associated with welding shall be protected from the weather so that the quality of work meets the requirements of the specification .
coating piles for protection against corrosion durability of coatings num where coatings are specified they shall be provided in accordance with appendix num .
definition num the term coating shall include the primer and the coats specified .
specialist labour num the preparation of surfaces and the application of the coats to form the coating shall be carried out by specialist labour having experience in the preparation of the surface and the application of the coating specified .
protection during coating num all work associated with surface preparation and coating shall be undertaken inside a waterproof structure .
surface preparation num all surfaces to be coated shall be clean and dry and prepared as follows degreasing with detergent wash compatible with the coating shall be carried out where necessary .
all surfaces shall be blast cleaned to sa num of bs num part anum .
blastcleaning shall be done after fabrication .
unless an instantaneousrecovery blasting machine is used the cleaned steel surface shall be airblasted with clean dry air and vacuumcleaned or otherwise freed from abrasive residues and dust immediately after cleaning .
application and type of primer num within num hours after surface preparation before visible deterioration takes place the surface shall be coated with an appropriate primer or the specified coating .
no coating shall be applied to a metal surface which is not thoroughly dry .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls the primer shall be compatible with the specified coating and shall be such that if subsequent welding or cutting is to be carried out it shall not emit noxious fumes or be detrimental to the welding .
control of humidity during coating num no coating shall be applied when the surface metal temperature is less than numc above the dewpoint temperature or when the humidity could have an adverse effect on the coat .
when heating or ventilation is used to secure suitable conditions to allow coating to proceed care shall be taken to ensure the heating or ventilation of a local surface does not have an adverse effect on adjacent surfaces or work already done .
parts to be welded num the coating within num mm of a weld shall be applied after welding .
the method of application shall comply with the manufacturers recommendations .
thickness number and colour of coats num the nominal thickness of the finished coating and if necessary of each coat shall be as specified .
the average coat or finished coating thickness shall be equal to or greater than the specified nominal thickness .
in no case shall any coat or finished coating be less than num of the nominal thickness .
each coat shall be applied after an interval that ensures the proper hardening or curing of the previous coat .
where more than one coat is applied to a surface each coat shall if possible be of a different colour from the previous coat .
the colour sequence and final coating colour shall be established prior to application of coatings .
inspection of coatings num num the finished coating shall be generally smooth of dense and uniform texture and free from sharp protuberances or pinholes .
excessive sags dimpling or curtaining shall be retreated .
any coat damaged by subsequent processes or which has deteriorated to an extent such that proper adhesion of the coating is in doubt shall be removed and the surface shall be cleaned to the original standard and recoated to provide the specified number of coats .
the completed coating shall be checked for thickness by a magnetic thickness gauge .
areas where the thickness is less than that specified shall receive additional treatment .
when specified the completed coating shall be checked for adhesion by means of an adhesion test to bs en iso num bs numenum carried out on num of the piles .
the adhesion of any completed coating shall not be worse than classification num .
if adhesion tests on the initial batch are satisfactory then on further batches num of the piles shall be tested .
adhesion tests shall not be carried out until seven days after coating .
on completion of testing the test area shall be made good to the standard specified in appendix num .
areas where the adhesion is defective shall be repaired and reinspected .
marking handling and storage of piles marking of piles num each pile shall be clearly numbered and its length shown near the pile head using white paint .
in addition before being driven each pile shall be graduated along its length at intervals of num mm .
handling and storage of piles num all piles within a stack shall be in groups of the same length and on appropriate supports .
all operations such as handling transporting and pitching of piles shall be carried out in a manner such that no damage occurs to piles and their coatings .
driving of piles leaders and trestles num at all stages during driving and until incorporation in the structure the free length of the pile shall be adequately supported and restrained by means of leaders trestles temporary supports or other guide arrangements to maintain position and alignment and to prevent buckling .
in marine works lengths which remain unsupported after driving shall be adequately restrained until incorporated into the permanent works .
these constraint arrangements shall be such that no damage occurs to piles or their coatings .
performance of driving equipment num performance of driving equipment shall be in accordance with subclause num of this specification .
length of piles num the length of pile to be driven and any additional lengths of pile to be added during driving shall be as specified in appendix num .
during the execution of the works any amendments to the scheduled lengths shall be recorded by the contractor and a full statement of the reasons included in the pile record .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls driving procedure and redrive checks num driving procedure and redrive checks shall be in accordance with subclause num .
set num requirements for set shall be in accordance with subclause num .
driving sequence and risen piles num requirements for driving sequence and risen piles shall be in accordance with subclause num .
laterally displaced piles shall not be corrected by forceable correction at the heads unless the contractor can demonstrate that the integrity durability and performance of the piles has not been adversely affected .
preboring num if preboring is specified the pile shall be pitched after preboring to the depth and diameter stipulated in appendix num .
other means to ease pile drivability may be used provided the completed piles meet the requirements of the specification .
preparation of pile heads num if a steel structure is to be welded to piles the piles shall be cut square and to within num mm of the levels specified .
if pile heads are to be encased in concrete they shall be cut to within num mm of the levels specified and protective coatings shall be removed from the surfaces of the pile heads down to a level num mm above the soffit of the concrete .
num reduction of friction on piles general num where the particular method of reducing friction is not specified the contractor shall provide full details of the method which he plans to employ .
the contractor shall ensure that any product used will be compatible with the ground conditions into which it will be installed .
particular requirements are detailed in appendix num .
preapplied bituminous or other frictionreducing coating materials general num where a proprietary product is used the process of cleaning pile surfaces and the conditions and methods of application shall conform with the manufacturers current instructions .
all materials shall conform with the manufacturers specification which shall be made available before any coating is applied .
protection from damage num where a frictionreducing material has been applied to a preformed pile prior to installation it shall be protected from damage during handling and transportation .
in the event of damage to the coating it shall be made good on site to the same specification as the original coating prior to the pile being driven .
where bituminous materials are involved precautions shall be taken as necessary in hot weather to prevent excessive flow or displacement of the coating .
the coated piles shall be adequately protected against direct sunlight and if stacked they shall be separated to prevent their coatings sticking together .
pile driving num in the case of applied coatings the piles shall not be driven when the air temperature is such that the coating will crack flake or otherwise be damaged prior to entry into the ground .
where bituminous materials are involved driving shall be carried out while the temperature is at or above numc or as called for in the manufacturers instructions .
preapplied lowfriction sleeving num where required in appendix num detailed design of the preapplied lowfriction sleeving shall be submitted prior to driving the piles .
all materials shall conform with the manufacturers specification which shall be made available before the material is used .
formedinplace lowfriction surround num where required in appendix num detailed design of the formedinplace lowfriction surround shall be submitted prior to driving or forming the piles .
all materials shall conform with the manufacturers specification which shall be made available before the material is used .
preinstalled lowfriction sleeving num where required in appendix num detailed design of the preinstalled lowfriction sleeving shall be march num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls submitted prior to driving or forming the piles .
all materials shall conform with the manufacturers specification which shall be made available before the material is used .
inspection num where required in appendix num piles shall be partially exposed or extracted .
where significant damage to the coating is found to have occurred the contractor shall prepare a method statement for the repair or replacement of the coating prior to carrying out the work .
num nondestructive methods for testing piles integrity testing of piles method of testing num where integrity testing is called for the method to be adopted shall be one of the following as specified a impulse method b sonic echo frequency response or transient dynamic steady state vibration method c sonic logging method .
other methods may be considered subject to satisfactory evidence of performance .
particular requirements are detailed in appendix num .
age of piles at time of testing num in the case of castinplace concrete piles integrity tests shall not be carried out until the number of days specified in appendix num have elapsed since pile casting .
preparation of pile heads num where the method of testing requires the positioning of sensing equipment on the pile head the head shall be broken down to expose sound concrete and shall be clean free from water laitence loose concrete overspilled concrete and blinding concrete and shall be readily accessible for the purpose of testing .
specialist subcontractor num the testing shall be carried out by a specialist firm subject to demonstration of satisfactory performance on other similar contracts before the commencement of testing .
where required in appendix num the contractor shall submit the name of the specialist integrity testing firm a description of the test equipment a test method statement and a programme for executing the specified tests prior to commencement of the works .
interpretation of tests num the interpretation of tests shall be carried out by competent and experienced persons .
the contractor shall give all available details of the ground conditions pile dimensions and construction method to the specialist firm before the commencement of integrity testing in order to facilitate interpretation of the tests .
report num preliminary results of the tests shall be made available within num hours of carrying out the tests .
the test results and findings shall be recorded and made available within num days of the completion of each phase of testing .
the report shall contain a summary of the method of interpretation including all assumptions calibrations corrections algorithms and derivations used in the analyses .
if the results are presented in a graphical form the same scales shall be used consistently throughout the report .
the units on all scales shall be clearly marked .
anomalous results num in the event that any anomaly in the acoustic signal is found in the results indicating a possible defect in the pile the contractor shall demonstrate that the pile is satisfactory for its intended use or shall carry out remedial works to make it so .
sonic logging tubes shall be grouted up after the contractor has demonstrated that the pile is satisfactory .
dynamic piletesting general num particular requirements are detailed in appendix num .
measuring instruments num current calibration certificates shall be made available for all instruments and monitoring equipment before testing commences .
march num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls hammer num the hammer and all other equipment used shall be capable of delivering an impact force sufficient to mobilize the equivalent specified dynamic test load without damaging the pile .
preparation of the pile head num the preparation of the pile head for the application of the dynamic test load shall involve trimming the head cleaning and building up the pile using materials which will at the time of testing safely withstand the impact stresses .
the impact surface shall be flat and at right angles to the pile axis .
where pile preparation requires drilling holes or welding this preparation shall not adversely affect the performance of the pile when in service .
interpretation of tests num the interpretation of the tests shall be carried out by competent and experienced persons .
the contractor shall give all available details of the ground conditions pile dimensions and construction method to the specialist firm carrying out the testing in order to facilitate interpretation of tests .
time of testing num the time between the completion of installation and testing for a preformed pile shall be more than num hours and in the case of a castinplace pile shall be such that the pile is not damaged under the impact stresses .
measurement of set num if specified the permanent penetration per blow and temporary compression of the pile and soil system shall be measured independently of the instruments being used to record the dynamic test data from a fixed reference point unaffected by the piling operations .
results num initial results shall be made available within num hours of the completion of a test .
these shall include a the maximum force applied to the pile head b the maximum pile head velocity c the maximum energy imparted to the pile .
subsequently a full report shall be made available within num days of the completion of testing including a date of pile installation b date of test c pile identification number and location d length of pile below commencing surface e total pile length including projection above commencing surface at time of test f length of pile from instrumentation position to toe g hammer type drop and other relevant details h blow selected for analysis i test load achieved ie .
total mobilised deduced static load j pile head movement at equivalent design verification load k pile head movement at equivalent design verification load plus num of specified working load l pile head movement at maximum applied test load m permanent residual movement of pile head after each blow n temporary compression .
for all piles tested the following information shall be provided for typical blows a date of pile installation b date of test c pile identification number and location d length of pile below commencing surface e total pile length including projection above commencing surface at time of test f length of pile from instrumentation position to toe g hammer type drop and other relevant details h permanent set per blow i maximum force at pile head j maximum velocity at pile head k maximum downward energy imparted to the pile l dynamic soil resistance mobilised during the blow m static soil resistance mobilised during the blow assuming that soil damping is proportional to pile velocity n magnitude and location of possible pile damage .
march num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls where required in appendix num an analysis of measurements from selected blows shall be carried out using a numerical model of the pile and soil to provide the following information .
a magnitude and distribution of mobilised static soil resistance b magnitude and distribution of soil stiffness and damping c deduced static load deflection behaviour of the pile at the head and toe d assumptions made in the analysis e limitations of the method .
num static load testing of piles general num the design and construction of the load application system shall be satisfactory for the required test .
these details shall be made available prior to the commencement of testing .
particular requirements are detailed in appendix num .
construction of a pile to be tested notice of construction num the contractor shall give at least num hours notice of the commencement of construction of any preliminary pile which is to be testloaded .
method of construction num each preliminary test pile shall be constructed in a manner similar to that to be used for the construction of the working piles and by the use of similar equipment and materials .
extra reinforcement and concrete of increased strength will be permitted in the shafts of preliminary piles where necessary for carrying out the testing .
boring or driving record num for each preliminary pile which is to be tested a detailed record of the conditions experienced during boring or of the progress during driving shall be made available daily not later than noon on the next working day .
where soil samples are required to be taken or in situ tests to be made the contractor shall present the results without delay .
concrete test cubes num num four test cubes shall be made from the concrete used in the preliminary test pile and from the concrete used for building up a working pile .
if a concrete pile is extended or capped for the purpose of testing a further four cubes shall be made from the corresponding batch of concrete .
the cubes shall be made and tested in accordance with bs en iso num .
the pile test shall not be started until the strength of the cubes taken from the pile exceeds twice the average direct stress in any pile section under the maximum required test load and the strength of the cubes taken from the cap exceeds twice the average stress at any point in the cap under the same load .
preparation of working pile to be tested num if a test is required on a working pile the contractor shall cut down or otherwise prepare the pile for testing in accordance with appendix num and sub clauses num and num .
cutoff level num the cutoff level for a preliminary test pile shall be as specified in appendix num .
where the cutoff level of working piles is below the ground level at the time of pile installation and where it is required to carry out a proof test from that installation level either allowance shall be made in the determination of the design verification load for friction which may be developed between the cutoff level and the existing ground level or the pile may be sleeved appropriately or otherwise protected to eliminate friction which develops over the extended length .
supervision num the settingup of pile testing equipment shall be carried out under competent supervision and the equipment shall be checked to ensure that the settingup is satisfactory before the commencement of load application .
all tests shall be carried out only under the direction of an experienced and competent supervisor conversant with the test equipment and test procedure .
all personnel operating the test equipment shall have been trained in its use .
safety precautions general num design erection and dismantling of the pile test reaction system and the application of load shall be carried out according to the requirements of the various applicable statutory regulations concerned with lifting and handling heavy equipment and shall safeguard operatives and others who may from time to time be in the vicinity of a test from all avoidable hazards .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls kentledge num where kentledge is used the contractor shall construct the foundations for the kentledge and any cribwork beams or other supporting structure in such a manner that there will not be differential settlement bending or deflection of an amount that constitutes a hazard to safety or impairs the efficiency of the operation .
the kentledge shall be adequately bonded tied or otherwise held together to prevent it becoming unstable because of deflection of the supports or for any other reason .
the weight of kentledge for each test shall be greater than the maximum test load for that test and if the weight is estimated from the density and volume of the constituent materials an adequate factor of safety against error shall be allowed .
additional kentledge required shall be determined taking into account the accuracy of positioning of the centre of gravity of the stack .
tension piles reaction piles and ground anchorages num where tension piles reaction piles or ground anchorages are used to provide the necessary load reaction they shall be so designed that they will resist the forces applied to them safely and without excessive deformation which could cause a safety hazard during the work .
such piles or anchorages shall be placed in the specified positions and bars tendons or links shall be aligned to give a stable reaction in the direction required .
any welding employed to extend or to fix anchorages to a reaction frame shall be carried out so that the full strength of the system is adequate and unimpaired .
testing equipment num num in all cases the contractor shall ensure that when the hydraulic jack and loadmeasuring device are mounted on the pile head the whole system will be stable up to the maximum load to be applied .
if in the course of carrying out a test any unforeseen occurrence should take place further loading shall not be applied until a proper engineering assessment of the condition has been made and steps have been taken to rectify any fault .
reading of gauges shall however be continued where possible and if it is safe to do so .
where an inadequacy in any part of the system might constitute a hazard means shall be provided to enable the test to be controlled from a position clear of the kentledge stack or test frame .
the hydraulic jack pump hoses pipes couplings and other apparatus to be operated under hydraulic pressure shall be capable of withstanding a pressure of num times the maximum pressure used in the test without leaking .
the maximum test load expressed as a reading on the gauge in use shall be displayed and all operators shall be made aware of this limit .
pile head for compression test num for a pile that is tested in compression the pile head or cap shall be formed to give a plane surface which is normal to the axis of the pile sufficiently large to accommodate the loading and settlement measuring equipment and adequately reinforced or protected to prevent damage from the concentrated application of load from the loading equipment .
any pile cap shall be concentric with the test pile the joint between the cap and the pile shall have a strength equivalent to that of the pile .
sufficient clear space shall be made under and around any part of the cap projecting beyond the section of the pile so that at the maximum expected settlement load is not transmitted to the ground by the cap .
pile connection for tension test num for a pile that is tested in tension means shall be provided for transmitting the test load axially without inducing moments in the pile .
the connection between the pile and the loading equipment shall be constructed in such a manner as to provide a strength equal to the maximum load which is to be applied to the pile during the test with an appropriate factor of safety on the structural design .
reaction systems compression tests num compression tests shall be carried out using kentledge tension piles or specially constructed anchorages .
kentledge shall not be used for tests on raking piles .
where kentledge is to be used it shall be supported on cribwork and positioned so that the centre of gravity of the load is as close as possible to the axis of the pile .
the bearing pressure under supporting cribs shall be such as to ensure stability of the kentledge stack .
tension tests num tension tests may be carried out using compression piles rafts or grillages constructed on the ground to provide the necessary reaction .
in all cases the resultant force of the reaction system shall be coaxial with the test pile .
where inclined piles or reactions are specified or their use is planned by the contractor full details shall be made available prior to the commencement of testing .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls working piles num if the contractor plans to use working piles as reaction piles he shall notify his intention prior to commencement of work .
working reaction piles shall not uplift by more than half their specified permissable settlement at working load .
the integrity of all working piles used as reaction piles shall be checked on completion of static load testing .
where working piles are used as reaction piles their movement shall be measured and recorded to within an accuracy of num mm .
spacing num where kentledge is used for loading vertical piles in compression the distance from the edge of the test pile to the nearest part of the crib supporting the kentledge stack in contact with the ground shall be not less than num m. the centretocentre spacing of vertical reaction piles including working piles used as reaction piles from a test pile shall be not less than three times the diameter of the test pile or the reaction piles or num m whichever is the greatest .
where a pile to be tested has an enlarged base the same criterion shall apply with regard to the pile shaft with the additional requirement that no surface of a reaction pile shall be closer to the base of the test pile than one half of the enlarged base diameter .
where vertical reaction piles penetrate deeper than the test pile the centretocentre spacing of the reaction piles from the test pile shall be not less than five times the diameter of the test pile or the reaction piles whichever is the greatest unless the base capacity of the test pile is less than num of the total ultimate capacity .
where ground anchorages are used to provide a test reaction for loading in compression no section of fixed anchor length transferring load to the ground shall be closer to the test pile than three times the diameter of the test pile .
where the pile to be tested has an enlarged base the same criterion shall apply with regard to the pile shaft with the additional requirement that no section of the fixed anchor transferring load to the ground shall be closer to the pile base than a distance equal to the base diameter .
adequate reaction num the reaction frame support system shall be adequate to transmit the maximum test load in a safe manner without excessive movement or influence on the test pile .
calculations shall be provided when required to justify the design of the reaction system .
care of piles num the method employed in the installation of the reaction system shall be such as to prevent damage to any test pile or working pile .
equipment for applying load num the equipment used for applying load shall consist of a hydraulic ram or jack .
the jacking system shall be arranged in conjunction with the reaction system to deliver an axial load to the test pile and maintain it constant when required .
the complete system shall be capable of safely transferring the maximum load required for the test .
the length of stroke of a ram shall be sufficient to cater for deflection of the reaction system under load plus a deflection of the pile head up to num of the pile shaft diameter unless otherwise specified in appendix num .
measurement of load num the test load shall be measured by a single load cell or proving ring calibrated in divisions not exceeding num of the maximum load to be applied .
if an electronic transducer is used each reading shall be immediately stored magnetically so that in case of power failure the readings are not lost .
the load cell or proving ring shall be calibrated immediately prior to the test and a certificate of calibration shall be made available .
all increments of load shall be maintained to within num of the specified load .
a spherical seating of appropriate size shall be used to avoid eccentric loading .
care shall be taken to avoid any risk of buckling of the load application and measuring system .
load measuring and application devices shall be short in axial length in order to secure stability .
the contractor shall ensure that axial loading is maintained .
control of loading num the loading equipment shall enable the load to be increased or decreased smoothly or to be held constant at any required value .
measuring pile head movement maintained load test num in a maintained load test movement of the pile head shall be measured by the method in subclause num and by one of the methods in subclauses num num and num in the case of vertical piles or by one of the methods in subclauses num num and num in the case of the raking piles as required .
march num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls crp and cru test num in a constant rate of penetration crp or a constant rate of uplift cru test the method in sub clause num shall be used .
checklevelling of the reference frame or the pile head shall not be required .
the dial gauge shall be graduated in divisions of num mm or less .
optical levelling method num an optical levelling method by reference to a remote datum may be used .
where a level and staff are used the level and scale of the staff shall be chosen to enable readings to be made to within an accuracy of num mm .
a scale attached to the pile or pile cap may be used instead of a levelling staff .
at least two reliable independent datum points shall be established .
each datum point shall be so situated as to permit a single settingup position of the level for all readings .
no datum point shall be located where it can be affected by the test loading or other operations on or off the site .
reference beams and dial gauges num an independent reference beam or beams shall be set up to enable measurement of the movement of the pile to be made to the required accuracy .
the supports for a beam shall be founded in such a manner and at such a distance from the test pile and reaction system that movements of the ground do not cause movement of the reference beam or beams which will affect the accuracy of the test .
the supports of the beam or beams shall be at least three test pile diameters or num m from the centre of the test pile whichever distance is the greater .
the beam must be free to move horizontally at one end .
check observations of any movements of the reference beam or beams shall be made and a check shall be made of the movement of the pile head relative to a remote reference datum at the start and end and at maximum load for each loading cycle .
the measurement of pile movement shall be made by four dial gauges rigidly mounted on the reference beam or beams bearing on prepared flat surfaces fixed to the pile cap or head and normal to the pile axis .
alternatively the gauges may be fixed to the pile and bear on prepared surfaces on the reference beam or beams .
the dial gauges shall be placed equidistant from the pile axis and from each other .
the dial gauges shall enable readings to be made to an accuracy of at least num mm and have a stem travel of at least num mm .
machined spacer blocks may be used to extend the range of reading .
equivalent electrical displacement measuring devices may be substituted .
reference wires and scales num two parallel reference wires one on either side of the pile shall be held under constant tension at right angles to the test pile axis between supports formed as in the method in subclause num .
the wires shall be positioned against scales fixed to the test pile head in an axial direction and the movements of the scales relative to the wires shall be determined .
check observations of any movements of the supports of the wires shall be made and a check shall be made on the movement of the pile head at appropriate time intervals .
readings shall be taken to within an accuracy of num mm .
other methods num where appropriate the contractor may use an alternative method of measuring the movement of the test pile head .
the method shall be accurate to within num mm of the pile head movement .
protection of testing equipment protection from weather num throughout the test period all equipment for measuring load and movement and beams shall be protected from adverse effects of sun wind and precipitation .
temperature reading shall be taken at the start end and at the maximum load of each loading cycle .
prevention of disturbance num construction activity and persons who are not involved in the testing process shall be kept at a sufficient distance from the test to avoid disturbance to the measuring apparatus .
full records shall be kept of any unavoidable activity and its effects .
notice of test num the contractor shall give at least num hours notice of the commencement of the test .
no load shall be applied to the test pile before the commencement of the specified test procedure .
test procedure proof load test procedure working compression piles num the maximum load which shall be applied in a proof test shall normally be the sum of the design verification load dvl plus num of the specified working load swl .
the loading and unloading shall march num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls table num minimum loading times for pile test load minimum time of holding load num dvl num minutes num dvl num minutes num dvl num minutes num dvl num hours num dvl num minutes num dvl num minutes num dvl num minutes num num hour num dvl num hour num dvl num swl num hour num dvl num swl num hours num dvl num swl num minutes num dvl num minutes num dvl num minutes num dvl num minutes num dvl num minutes num num hour swl denotes specified working load dvl denotes design verification load.be carried out in stages as shown in table num .
any particular requirements given in appendix num shall be complied with .
following each application of an increment of load the load shall be maintained at the specified value for not less than the period shown in table num and until the measured rate of settlement in a period of num minutes is less than num of the current cumulative settlement which has occurred subject to a minimum settlement rate of num mm in num minutes .
the rate of settlement shall be calculated from the slope of the line obtained by plotting values of settlement versus time and drawing a smooth curve through the points .
each stage of unloading shall proceed after the expiry of the period shown in table num .
for any period when the load is constant time and settlement shall be recorded immediately on reaching the load at not more than five minute intervals up to num minutes at approximately num minutes intervals up to one hour at num minute intervals between one hour and four hours and num hour intervals between four hours and num hours after the application of the increment of load .
where the methods of measuring pile head movement given in subclauses num num and num are used the periods of time for which loads must be held constant to achieve the specified rates of settlement shall be extended as necessary to take into account the lower levels of accuracy available from these methods and to allow correct assessment of the settlement rate .
test procedure for preliminary compression piles num the procedure to be adopted for carrying out preliminary load tests on compression piles shall be in accordance with the requirements specified in appendix num and either the extended proof load test procedure or the constant rate of penetration testing procedure given below .
a normal proof load test will constitute the first stage of such a preliminary test unless otherwise specified .
extended proof load test procedure where verification of the required minimum load factor is called for the loading procedure may be carried out as a continuation of the proof load testing procedure given in subclause num .
following the completion of the proof load test the load shall be restored in two stages dvl dvl num swl and shall subsequently be increased by stages of num of the specified working load or other specified amount until the maximum specified load for the test is reached .
following each application of an increment of load the load shall be maintained at the specified value for not less than num minutes and until the additional measured settlement in a period of num minutes is less than num of the current cumulative settlement which has occurred since the start of the current load increment subject to a minimum settlement rate of num mm in num minutes .
the rate of settlement shall be calculated from the slope of the line obtained by plotting values of settlement versus time and drawing a smooth curve through the points .
reduction of load at the end of the test shall be gradual as required by sub clause num and the final recovery of the pile head shall be recorded .
permissible settlement at the load corresponding to the required minimum factor of safety called for in the design will not normally be specified .
the mobilization of ultimate load for compression piles normally involves settlements of at least num of the pile base diameter in clay and more in granular soils .
the settlement of piles bearing on rock requires special consideration and failure of pile materials may precede failure of the rock .
constant rate of penetration crp testing procedure the rate of movement of the pile head shall be maintained constant in so far as is practicable and shall be approximately num mms for piles in predominantly cohesive soils and num mms for piles in predominantly cohesionless soils .
readings of loads penetration and time shall be made simultaneously at regular intervals the interval chosen shall be such that a curve of load versus penetration can be plotted without ambiguity .
march num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls loading shall be continued until one of the following results is obtained a the maximum required test load as specified in accordance with appendix num is reached b a constant or reducing load has been recorded for an interval of penetration of num mm c a total movement of the pile base equal to num of the base diameter or any other greater value of movement specified in appendix num has been reached .
the load shall then be reduced in five approximately equal stages to zero load penetration and load at each stage and at zero load being recorded .
testing of piles designed to carry load in tension num the testing of piles designed to carry load in tension shall follow the same procedure as specified in subclauses num and num .
the rate of movement of the pile head shall be maintained at approximately num mms in so far as is practicable .
presentation of results results to be submitted num during the progress of a test all records taken shall be available for inspection .
results shall be made available as follows a a preliminary copy of the test records unless otherwise directed within num hours of the completion of the test which shall show i for a test by maintained load for each stage of loading the period for which the load was held the load and the maximum pile movement at the end of the stage ii for a crp or cru test the maximum load reached and a graph of load against penetration or load against uplift b the completed schedule of recorded data as prescribed in subclause num within num days of the completion of the test .
schedule of recorded data num the contractor shall provide information about the test pile in accordance with the following schedule where applicable .
a num general site location contract identification proposed structure main contractor piling contractor clientoverseeing organisation date and time of test b num pile details all types of pile identification number and location specified working load swl design verification load dvl commencing surface level at pile position head level at which test load was applied type of pile vertical or raking compression or tension shape and size of crosssection of pile and position of any change in crosssection shoe or base details head details length in ground level of toe dimensions of any permanent casing concrete piles concrete mixstrength class aggregate type and source cement type and cement replacement and type where used admixtures slump class cube test results for pile and cap date of casting of precast pile reinforcement steel piles steel quality coating filling or core materials type and quality c installation details all piles dates and times of boring driving and concreting of test pile difficulties and delays encountered date and time of casting concrete pile cap bored piles type of equipment used and method of boring temporary casing diameter type and length full log of pile borehole method of placing concrete volume of concrete placed amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls driven preformed and driven castinplace piles method of support of hammer and pile driven length of pile or temporary casing at final set hammer type and size or weight dolly and packing type and condition driving log depth hammer drop blows per num mm interruptions or breaks in driving final set in number of blows to produce penetration of num mm redrive check time interval and set in number of blows to produce penetration of num mm at final set and at redrive set for a drophammer or for a single acting hammer the length of the drop or stroke for a diesel hammer the length of the stroke and the blows per minute for a double acting hammer the operating pressure and the number of blows per minute .
condition of pile head or temporary casing after driving use of a follower use of preboring use of jetting lengthening method of placing concrete d test procedure mass of kentledge tension pile ground anchorage or compression pile details plan of test arrangement showing position and distances of kentledge supports rafts tension or compression pile or ground anchorages and supports to pile movement reference system jack capacity method of load measurement methods of penetration or uplift measurement calibration certificates temperature readings e test results in tabular form in graphical form load plotted against pile head movement load plotted against time ambient temperature records during test completion of a test removal of test equipment num on completion of a test all measuring equipment and load application devices shall be dismantled and checked .
all other test equipment including kentledge beams and supporting structures shall be removed from the test pile location .
measuring and other demountable equipment shall be stored in a safe manner so that it is available for further tests if required or removed from site .
temporary tension piles and ground anchorages shall be cut off below ground level and offcut materials removed from the site .
the ground shall be made good to the original commencing surface level .
preliminary test pile head num unless otherwise specified the head of each preliminary test pile shall be cut off below ground level offcut material shall be removed from the site and the ground made good to the original commencing surface level .
proof test pile head num on completion of a test on a proof pile the test pile head shall be prepared as specified and left in a state ready for incorporation into the permanent works .
num diaphragm walls guide walls num the design and construction of the guide walls shall be the responsibility of the contractor and shall take into account the actual site and ground conditions and the equipment to be used on site to ensure stability and avoid undercutting .
guide walls shall be constructed in reinforced concrete or other suitable materials .
the minimum depth of guide wall shall be num m. materials concrete supply mixing and testing num cement materials aggregates admixtures and water shall be in accordance with series num .
steel reinforcement supply fixing and welding num num steel reinforcement shall be as described in appendix num and in accordance with series num .
where steel sections are used for reinforcement they shall be in accordance with series num .
support fluid num bentonite andor alternative fluid support materials admixtures mixing and testing and clean water shall be in accordance with clause num .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls dimensions of panels num the thickness of a panel shall be not less than the specified thickness .
the length of panel may be varied to suit an individual contractors equipment but any upper limits on length because of geological or other external factors shall be specified in appendix num .
within these constraints the contractor shall be responsible for selecting panel dimensions which ensure stability and that movements remain within the criteria set in appendices num and num .
excavation excavation near recently cast panel num panels shall not be excavated so close to other panels which have recently been cast and which contain workable or unset concrete that a flow of concrete or instability could be induced from or damage caused to any panel .
the contractors sequence of construction shall be submitted prior to work commencing in accordance with clause num .
stability of the excavation num support fluid for maintaining the stability of an excavation shall be in accordance with clause num of this specification .
a suitable guide wall shall be used in conjunction with the method to ensure stability of the strata near ground level until concrete has been placed .
during construction the level of support fluid in the excavation shall be maintained within the guide wall or stable ground so that it is not less than num m above the level of external standing groundwater at all times .
in the event of a loss of support fluid from an excavation the contractor shall include a full statement of the reasons in the pile record .
cleanliness of base num prior to placing steel or concrete the contractor shall clean the base of the excavation of as much loose disturbed and remoulded materials as practical and in accordance with the method of construction and shall wholly or partly remove and replace support fluid while maintaining the fluid head if it does not comply with the contractors stated limits for support fluid prior to concreting .
steel reinforcement num the number of joints in longitudinal steel bars shall be kept to a minimum .
joints in steel reinforcement shall be such that the full strength of each bar is effective across the joint and shall be made so that there is no detrimental displacement of the reinforcement during the construction of the panel .
reinforcement shall be maintained in its correct position during concreting of the panel .
where it is made up into cages they shall be sufficiently rigid to enable them to be handled placed and concreted without damage .
if the cage is to be welded together welding shall be carried out to the requirements of bs num .
spacers shall be designed and manufactured using durable materials which shall not lead to corrosion of the reinforcement or spalling of the concrete cover .
where required in appendix num details of the means by which the contractor plans to ensure the correct cover to and position of the reinforcement shall be submitted .
the minimum projecting bond lengths required by appendix num shall be observed .
the contractor shall prepare reinforcement detail construction drawings for each panel and these shall be made available .
placing concrete general num num the consistence and method of placing of the concrete shall be such that a continuous monolithic concrete panel of the full crosssection is formed and that the concrete in its final position is dense and homogenous .
concrete shall be transported from the mixer to the position of the wall in such a manner that segregation of the concrete mix does not occur .
before commencement of concreting of a panel the contractor shall satisfy himself that the supplier will have available sufficient quantity of concrete to construct the panel in one continuous operation .
the concrete shall be placed without such interruption as would allow the previously placed batch to have achieved a stiffness which prevents proper amalgamation of the two concrete batches .
no spoil liquid or other foreign matter shall be allowed to contaminate the concrete .
num consistence of concrete num num the concrete consistence shall be determined using the slump or flow classes in accordance with bs en num and bs en num respectively .
the slump or flow classes for concrete placed through support fluid using a tremie pipe shall be class snum or greater or classes fnum to fnum respectively or as specified in appendix num .
compaction num internal vibrators shall not be used to compact concrete within a cast in place panel .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls placing concrete num the concrete shall be placed through a tremie pipe in one continuous operation .
where two or more pipes are used in the same panel simultaneously care shall be taken to ensure that the concrete level at each pipe position is maintained nearly equal .
the hopper and pipe of the tremie shall be clean and watertight throughout .
the pipe shall extend to the base of the panel and a sliding plug or barrier shall be placed in the pipe to prevent direct contact between the first charge of concrete in the tremie and the support fluid .
the pipe shall at all times penetrate the concrete which has previously been placed with a minimum embedment of num m and shall not be withdrawn from the concrete until completion of concreting .
at all times a sufficient quantity of concrete shall be maintained within the pipe to ensure that the pressure from it exceeds that from the support fluid and workable concrete above the tremie base .
the internal diameter of the pipe of the tremie shall be not less than the greater of num mm or six times the maximum aggregate size .
it shall be so designed that external projections are minimised allowing the tremie to pass within reinforcing cages without causing damage .
the internal face of the pipe of the tremie shall be free from projections .
the depth of the surface of the concrete shall be measured and the embedded length of the tremie pipe recorded at regular intervals corresponding to each batch of concrete .
the depths measured and volumes placed shall be plotted immediately on a graph and compared with the theoretical relationship of depth against volume .
tolerances guide wall num the finished face of the guide wall towards the excavation and on the side of the excavation nearest to any subsequent main excavation shall be vertical to within a tolerance of num in num and the top edge of the wall shall represent the reference line .
there shall be no ridges or abrupt changes on the face and its variation from its specified position shall not exceed num mm in num m. the minimum clear distance between the guide walls shall be the specified diaphragm wall thickness plus num mm and the maximum distance shall be the specified diaphragm wall thickness plus num mm .
diaphragm wall num at cutoff level the maximum deviation of the centre line of each panel from the specified position shall be num mm and an additional tolerance of num mm for each num m that the cutoff level is below the top of the guide wall shall be permitted unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
the exposed wall face and the ends of panels shall be vertical within a tolerance of num for walls constructed using grabs .
a tolerance of num may be specified if there is a special need and an expectation of reverse circulation cutters being used .
an additional tolerance of num mm will be allowed for concrete protrusions resulting from cavities formed by overbreak in the ground .
where very soft clay layers or peat layers are anticipated or obstructions are to be removed during trench excavation an additional overbreak tolerance shall be stated in appendix num .
recesses num where recesses are to be formed by inserts in the wall the vertical tolerance shall be that of subclause num and the horizontal tolerance shall be that of sub clause num plus the horizontal tolerance resulting from subclause num .
steel reinforcement num the longitudinal tolerance of the cage head at the top of the guide wall measured along the excavation shall be num mm .
the vertical tolerance of the cage head measured relative to the guide wall shall be num mm .
the reinforcement shall be maintained in position during concreting of a panel .
temporary stopends in diaphragm panels num temporary stopends shall be of the length thickness and quality of material adequate for the purpose of preventing water and soil from entering the panel excavations .
each temporary stopend shall be straight and true throughout .
the external surface shall be clean and free from distortions that may affect panel integrity during removal of the temporary stopend .
stopends shall be rigid and adequately restrained to prevent horizontal movement during concreting .
concrete level num if the cut off level for the panel is less than num m below the top level of the guide walls uncontaminated concrete shall be brought to the top of the guide walls .
if the cut off level is greater than numm below the top level of the guide walls concrete shall be brought to num m above the cut off level specified with a tolerance of num mm .
an additional tolerance of num mm over the above tolerances shall be permitted for each num m march num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls of depth by which the cut off level is below the top of the guide wall .
where more than one tremie pipe is used the concrete shall be brought up to num mm above the cut off level specified with a tolerance of num mm .
temporary backfilling above panel casting level num after each panel has been cast it shall be protected and shall be carefully backfilled as soon as possible with material in accordance with appendix num .
all panels shall be clearly marked and fenced off so as not to cause a safety hazard .
water retention num the complete retaining wall shall be considered to have satisfactory water retaining properties if overall the leakage of water per square metre of exposed wall does not exceed the volume stated in appendix num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the repair of any joint defect or panel where on exposure of the wall visible water leaks are found .
any leak which results in water flow emanating from the surface of the retaining wall shall be sealed .
instrumentation num movement of the wall the surrounding ground and existing structures shall be monitored in accordance with appendix num and clause num .
preparation of wall surfaces num all surfaces buried or constructed as buried during execution of the works but which subsequently are to be partially or totally uncovered as part of the construction shall be cleaned trimmed of all detritus and obstructions to the appropriate line and level as described in appendix num or num num num as appropriate .
num hardhard secant pile walls guide walls num the design and construction of guide walls if the use of guide walls is specified in appendix num or is required by the contractor shall be the responsibility of the contractor and shall take into account the actual site and ground conditions and the equipment to be used on site to ensure stability and avoid undercutting as appropriate .
guide walls shall be constructed in reinforced concrete or other suitable materials .
the minimum depth of guide wall shall be num m and the minimum shoulder width shall be num m for walls in reinforced concrete .
materials concrete supply mixing and testing num cement materials aggregates admixtures and water shall be in accordance with series num .
steel reinforcement supply fixing and welding num num steel reinforcement shall be as described in appendix num and in accordance with series num .
where steel sections are used for reinforcement they shall be in accordance with series num .
support fluid num where support fluid is used to maintain the stability of the pile bore it shall be in accordance with clause num .
boring boring near recently cast piles num piles shall not be bored so close to other piles which have recently been cast and which contain workable or partially set concrete that a flow of concrete or instability could be induced or damage caused to any installed piles .
the contractors sequence of construction shall be submitted prior to work commencing in accordance with clause num .
stability of bore num temporary casing shall be used in unstable ground with or without support fluid to maintain the stability of the bore unless continuous flight augers are used .
the casing shall extend to the full depth of each bore or to the depth to which the minimum overlap has to be provided .
the process of advancing the bore and the temporary casing shall be such that soil is not drawn into the bore from outside the area of the pile and cavities are not created outside the temporary casing .
cleanliness of pile base num prior to placing steel or concrete the contractor shall remove from the base of the pile as much loose disturbed and remoulded materials as practical and in accordance with the method of construction .
cleaning of support fluid num prior to placing steel or concrete any support fluid including water shall be wholly or partly removed and replaced while maintaining the fluid head if it does not comply with the contractors stated limits for support fluid prior to concreting .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls steel reinforcement num the number of joints in longitudinal steel bars shall be kept to a minimum .
joints in steel reinforcement shall be such that the full strength of each bar is effective across the joint and shall be made so that there is no detrimental displacement during the construction of the pile .
reinforcement shall be maintained in its correct position during concreting of the pile or wall element .
where reinforcement is made up into cages they shall be sufficiently rigid to enable them to be handled placed and concreted without damage .
if the cage is to be welded together welding shall be carried out to the requirements of bs num .
spacers shall be designed and manufactured using durable materials which shall not lead to corrosion of the reinforcement or spalling of the concrete cover .
where required in appendix num details of the means by which the contractor plans to ensure the correct cover to and position of the reinforcement shall be submitted .
the minimum projecting bond lengths required by appendix num and num num or num as appropriate shall be maintained .
for continuous flight auger piles steel reinforcement cages shall be inserted into the pile shaft immediately after completion of concreting .
the method of insertion of reinforcement cages shall avoid distortion or damage to the steel reinforcement and ensure accurate positioning of the cage within the pile shaft .
placing and compacting concrete general num num the consistence and method of placing of the concrete shall be such that a continuous monolithic concrete shaft of the full cross section is formed and that the concrete in its final position is dense and homogenous .
concrete shall be transported from the mixer to the position of the pile in such a manner that it does not cause segregation of the constituents of the concrete mix .
before commencement of concreting of a pile the contractor shall satisfy himself that the supplier will have available a sufficient quantity of concrete to construct the pile in one continuous operation .
each batch of concrete in a pile shall be placed before the previous batch has achieved a stiffness which prevents proper amalgamation of the two concrete batches .
removal of temporary casings when used shall be completed before the concrete within the casing loses its consistence .
for continuous flight auger piles injection of concrete shall continue up to the commencing surface or above so that free discharge from the delivery pipe can be observed to be taking place and reinforcement placed after concreting .
no spoil liquid or other foreign matter shall be allowed to contaminate the concrete .
num consistence of concrete num num the concrete consistence shall be determined using the slump or flow classes in accordance with bs en num and bs en num respectively .
the slump or flow shall be measured at the time of discharge into the pile boring and shall be in accordance with the limits shown in table num or as specified in appendix num and num num or num as appropriate .
compaction num internal vibrators shall not be used to compact concrete .
placing concrete in dry boreholes num num the concrete shall be placed through a hopper attached to a length of tremie pipe and in such a way that the flow is directed and does not hit reinforcing bars or the side of the bore .
the tremie pipe shall be at least num m long .
placing concrete under water or support fluid num concrete to be placed under water or support fluid shall be placed through a tremie pipe in one continuous operation .
the hopper and pipe of the tremie shall be clean and watertight throughout .
the pipe shall extend to the base of the boring and a sliding plug or barrier shall be placed in the pipe to prevent direct contact between the first charge of concrete in the pipe of the tremie and the water or support fluid .
the pipe shall at all times penetrate the concrete which has previously been placed with a minimum penetration of num m and shall not be withdrawn from the concrete until completion of concreting .
at all times a sufficient quantity of concrete shall be maintained within the tremie pipe to ensure that the pressure from it exceeds that from the water or support fluid and workable concrete above the tremie base .
the internal diameter of the pipe of the tremie shall be not less than the greater of num mm or six times the maximum aggregate size .
it shall be so designed that external projections are minimised allowing the tremie to pass through reinforcing cages without causing amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls damage .
the internal face of the pipe of the tremie shall be free from projections .
the depths to the surface of the concrete shall be measured and the embedded length of the tremie pipe recorded at regular intervals corresponding to the placing of each load of concrete .
the depth measured and volumes of concrete placed shall be plotted immediately on a graph and compared with the theoretical relationship of depth against volume .
the foregoing is not applicable to piles constructed using continuous flight augers .
for such piles the full monitoring requirements of clause num shall be met .
time period for excavation and placing concrete num the time period after a pile is excavated and before the concrete is placed shall not exceed num hours unless otherwise specified in appendix num and num num or num as appropriate .
if temporary casing is used this period shall start when excavation below the temporary casing commences .
tolerances guide wall num the finished face of each guide wall towards the excavation shall be vertical to a tolerance of num in num and shall represent the reference line .
there shall be no ridges on the face and the centre line of the guide wall shall not deviate from its specified position by more than num mm in num m. the minimum clear distance between the guide walls shall be the pile diameter plus num mm and the maximum distance shall be the pile diameter plus num mm .
secant piles num at cutoff level the maximum permitted deviation of the pile centre from the centre point shown on the setting out drawings shall be num mm in any direction except that an additional tolerance of num mm shall be permitted for each num m that the cutoff level is below the top of the guide wall unless otherwise specified in appendix num .
in the case of construction by continuous flight augers the additional tolerance shall be num mm for each num m below top of guide wall .
the exposed face of the pile shall be vertical within a tolerance of num for secant walls constructed with temporary casings and num for secant walls constructed with continuous flight augers in any direction .
an additional tolerance of num mm will be allowed for concrete protrusions resulting from cavities formed by overbreak in the ground .
where very soft clay layers or peat layers are anticipated or obstructions are to be removed prior to or during boring an additional overbreak tolerance shall be stated in appendix num .
recesses num if recesses in the form of box outs are to be formed within a pile shaft the vertical tolerance shall be in accordance with subclause num and rotational tolerance shall be num degrees .
steel reinforcement num a vertical tolerance of num mmnum mm shall generally be permitted on the level of steel projecting from a pile cut off except where a pile is constructed to a higher level for reasons associated with ground conditions or technique continuous flight auger where additional steel projection may be necessary .
concrete level num no pile shall be cast with its final cut off level below standing water level unless the contractors method of construction includes measures to prevent inflow of water that may cause segregation of the concrete as temporary casing is withdrawn .
the standing water level will be treated as the cut off level for the purpose of calculating casting level .
for piles cast in dry bores using temporary casing and for piles cast under water the casting level shall be above the cut off level and within the tolerances shown in table num except for continuous flight auger piles which shall be cast to ground level .
backfilling of empty bore num where concrete is not brought to the top of the guide wall the empty pile bore shall be backfilled as soon as possible with material in accordance with appendix num and num or num as appropriate .
prior to backfilling the bore shall be clearly marked and fenced off so as not to cause a safety hazard .
water retention num the completed retaining wall shall be considered to have satisfactory water retaining properties if the leakage of water per square metre of exposed wall does not exceed the volume specified in appendix num or num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the repair of any joint defect or pile where on exposure of the wall visible water leaks are found .
any leak which results in water flow emanating from the surface of the retaining wall shall be sealed .
march num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls trial concrete mixes shall be prepared for each mix unless there are existing data showing that the concrete mix proportions and method of manufacture will produce hardened material of the strength permeability shrinkage properties and durability required having adequate consistence for compaction by the method to be used in placing .
the performance requirements are set out in appendix num .
limits on consistence and time for placement are included .
the requirements for testing will be set out in appendix num .
where a trial concrete mix is required after commencement of the works the above procedure shall be adopted .
the consistence of each batch of a trial concrete mix shall be determined by the method as specified in appendix num .
trial concrete mix proportions shall be regarded as satisfactory if the compliance requirements set out in appendix num are met .
no variations outside the limits set out in the proportions shall be made nor in the original source of the materials without demonstrating compliance with this specification .
self hardening concrete mixes shall be checked for compliance with the mix proportions .
cylindrical samples shall be made at the rate of four samples for each num mnum of self hardening slurry or part thereof in each days work .
testing will be made in accordance with the requirements of appendix num .
the results shall comply with appendix num .
the contractor shall keep a detailed record of the results of all tests on self hardening mixes and their ingredients .
each test shall be clearly identified with the pile to which it relates and the date it was carried out .
boring general num boring near recently cast piles cleanliness of pile base and cleaning of support fluid shall be in accordance with subclauses num num and num .
stability of bore num temporary casing shall be used in unstable ground with or without support fluid to maintain the stability of the bore unless continuous flight augers are used .
the process of advancing the bore and the temporary casing shall be such that soil is not drawn into the bore from outside the area of the pile and cavities are not created outside the temporary casing .
table num casting tolerance above cut off levels for specified conditions cut off level below casting tolerance condition commencing above cut off surface h m level m num to any depth num hnum permanent casing and dry bore num num num hnum cnum piles cast in dry bore using temporary casing num num num hnum cnum pile cast under water or where c length support fluid of temporary casing below the commencing surface beyond h num m the casting tolerance applying to h num m shall apply .
instrumentation num movement of the wall the surrounding ground and existing structures shall be monitored in accordance with appendix num and num or num as appropriate and clause num .
preparation of wall surfaces num preparation of wall surfaces shall be in accordance with subclause num .
num hardsoft secant pile walls guide walls num the design and construction of guide walls shall be in accordance with appendix num and subclause num .
materials general num num concrete steel reinforcement and support fluid shall be in accordance with subclauses num num and num and as described in appendix num .
self hardening slurry mixes num num the contractor shall submit details for the self hardening slurry mix soft pile proportions to be used as required by clause num .
cement materials aggregates if used admixtures and water shall be in accordance with series num .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls steel reinforcement num num steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with subclause num and as described in appendix num .
placing and compacting concrete num placing and compacting concrete shall be in accordance with subclauses num to num inclusive .
placing and compacting self hardening slurry mixes general num the method of placing and the workability of a self hardening slurry mix shall be such that a continuous monolithic shaft of the full cross section is formed and that it shall be homogeneous in its final position .
before commencing the filling of the pile the contractor shall plan and reasonably demonstrate that a sufficient quantity of self hardening mix is available to construct the pile in one continuous operation .
removal of temporary casing when used shall be completed before the self hardening mix within the casing loses its workability .
for continuous flight auger piles injection of self hardening mix shall continue up to the commencing surface or above so that free discharge from the delivery pipe can be observed to be taking place .
no spoil liquid or other foreign matter shall be allowed to contaminate the mix .
num consistence of self hardening concrete mix num num self hardening concretes shall be coherent and of a consistence such that when in its final position and after all constructional procedures in forming the pile have been completed it shall remain sufficient consistence .
num placing self hardening concrete num num the self hardening concrete mix shall be placed using methods appropriate to the composition of the concrete mix .
these may include placing through a hopper attached to a length of tremie pipe and tremie methods in which case placement shall be in accordance with subclauses num and num .
other self hardening concrete mixes use proprietary methods which shall be set out by the contractor in his method of construction .
continuous flight auger piles shall use an appropriate pump which shall be kept charged continuously throughout pile construction .
time period for excavation and placing self hardening mix num num the time period after a pile is excavated and before the self hardening concrete mix is placed shall not exceed num hours unless otherwise specified in appendix num .
if temporary casing is used this period shall start when excavation below the temporary casing commences .
tolerances general num guide wall recesses and steel reinforcement tolerances shall be in accordance with subclauses num num and num .
secant piles num at cutoff level the maximum permitted deviation of the pile centre from the centre point shown on the setting out drawings shall be num mm in any direction except that an additional tolerance of num mm shall be permitted for each num m that the cutoff level is below the top of the guide wall unless otherwise specified in appendix num .
the exposed face of the pile shall be vertical within a tolerance of num in any direction .
an additional tolerance of num mm will be allowed for concrete protrusions resulting from cavities formed by overbreak in the ground .
where very soft clay layers or peat layers are anticipated or obstructions are to be removed prior to or during boring an additional overbreak tolerance will be stated in appendix num .
general num concrete level backfilling of empty bore water retention instrumentation and preparation of wall surfaces shall be in accordance with subclauses num num num num and num .
num contiguous bored pile walls guide walls num the design and construction of guide walls shall be in accordance with appendix num and subclause num .
materials num num concrete steel reinforcement and support fluid shall be in accordance with subclauses num num num and num and as described in appendix num .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls boring general num boring near recently cast piles cleanliness of pile base and cleaning of support fluid shall be in accordance with subclauses num num and num .
stability of bore num temporary casings shall be used in unstable ground with or without support fluid to maintain the stability of the bore unless continuous flight augers are used .
the process of advancing the bore and the temporary casing shall be such that soil is not drawn into the bore from outside the area of the pile and cavities are not created outside the temporary casing .
temporary casings shall be extracted immediately on completion of concreting .
steel reinforcement num steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with subclause num .
placing and compacting concrete num placing and compacting concrete shall be in accordance with subclauses num to num inclusive .
tolerances general num guide wall recesses and steel reinforcement tolerances shall be in accordance with subclauses num num and num .
contiguous piles num at cutoff level the maximum permitted deviation of the pile centre from the centre point shown on the setting out drawings shall be num mm in any direction except that an additional tolerance of num mm shall be permitted for each num m that the cutoff level is below working level or top of the guide wall unless otherwise specified in appendix num .
the exposed face of the pile shall be vertical within a tolerance of num in any direction for contiguous walls .
an additional tolerance of num mm will be allowed for concrete protrusions resulting from cavities formed by overbreak in the ground .
where very soft clay layers or peat layers are anticipated or obstructions are to be removed prior to or during boring an additional overbreak tolerance shall be stated in appendix num .
general num concrete level backfilling of empty bore instrumentation and preparation of wall surfaces shall be in accordance with subclauses num num num and num .
num king post walls materials general num num concrete steel reinforcement and support fluid shall be in accordance with subclauses num num and num and as described in appendix num .
structural steelwork num structural steelwork shall be in accordance with series num .
boring general num boring near recently cast piles cleanliness of pile base and cleaning of support fluid shall be in accordance with subclauses num num and num .
stability of bore num temporary casings shall be used in unstable soils with or without support fluid to maintain the stability of the bore unless continuous flight augers are used .
care shall be taken not to undermine or destabilise ground by boring too far ahead of the temporary casing .
temporary casings shall be extracted immediately on completion of concreting .
the method of construction shall be submitted in accordance with clause num .
placement of king post members num the method of handling and placing king post members shall be set out in the contractors method of construction submitted in accordance with clause num .
in appropriate conditions the member may be plunged into concrete already placed in the pile bore immediately after the concrete placement and before the concrete has achieved its initial set .
guides or hole spacers shall be used so that the specified tolerances of the king post member are achieved .
where the king post member is installed prior to concreting the contractor shall ensure that it is not disturbed displaced or disoriented during concreting .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls steel reinforcement num num steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with subclause num and as described in appendix num .
placing and compacting concrete general num placing and compacting concrete shall be in accordance with subclauses num to num inclusive .
the method of placing concrete shall avoid disturbance of king post members .
tolerances num the required tolerances depend on the application and are set out in appendix num .
concrete level num no pile shall be cast with its final concreted level below standing water level unless the contractors method of construction includes measures to prevent inflow of water that may cause segregation of the concrete as the temporary casing is withdrawn .
the standing water level will be treated as the cut off level for the purpose of calculating tolerance .
for piles cast in dry bores using temporary casing and for piles cast under water or support fluid the casting level above cut off level shall be within the casing tolerance above the cut off level shown in table num .
backfilling num the concrete will usually be below the working level and the pile bore containing the king post member shall be backfilled once the concrete has sufficient strength or after such time as specified in appendix num .
the backfill material in accordance with appendix num shall be evenly placed on either side of the king post member to avoid uneven loading .
prior to backfilling bores shall be clearly marked and fenced off so as not to cause a safety hazard .
instrumentation num movement of the wall the surrounding ground and existing structures shall be monitored in accordance with appendix num and clause num .
num steel sheet piles general num only new piles shall be used for permanent works .
piles shall be carefully examined by the contractor at the time of delivery and damaged piles repaired or replaced .
the records of testing of the steel used in the piles shall be made available .
materials standard sheet piles num unless specified otherwise all steel for sheet piles shall be manufactured to bs en num grade snumgp or snumgp .
fabricated sheet piles num all fabricated piles eg .
corners junctions box sections high modulus sections shall be fabricated and supplied to the sheet pile manufacturers recommendations .
storage num if sheet piles of different grade steel are stored on site each pile shall be clearly marked as to its grade and piles of different grade shall be stored separately .
clutch sealant num if specified in appendix num the contractor shall apply a clutch sealant to the piles prior to pitching in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
pile handling and driving pile handling num when assembling piles before pitching the contractor shall ensure that the interlocks are clean and free from distortion .
all storage handling transporting and pitching of piles shall be carried out in such a way that no significant damage occurs to piles and their coatings .
pile installation and extraction num num in the event of a contractors design he shall demonstrate that the sheet piles can be installed adequately to the correct depths through the reported or anticipated soil conditions .
the contractor shall give at least num hours notice before the commencement of driving .
the piles shall be guided and held in position by temporary gates with each pile properly interlocked amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls with its neighbour .
piles shall not bypass one another in place of interlocking .
where sheet piles are driven in panels the end piles to each panel shall be driven in advance of the general run of piles .
after allowing for initial penetration no pile in the panel shall be driven to an excessive lead in comparison with the toe level of the panel in general and where hard driving is encountered this lead shall not exceed num m. at all stages during driving the free length of the sheet pile shall be adequately supported and restrained .
the contractor shall ensure that the sheet panels are driven without significant damage or declutching where possible .
the selection of driving and extracting plant shall be made having due regard to the ground conditions and pile type .
the sheet piles shall be driven to the specified level andor resistance or if hard driving is experienced to practical refusal which shall be defined as when the rate of penetration is below num mm per minute when hammering continuously or num blows per num mm movement when using the appropriate equipment or when visible damage to the pile occurs .
practical refusal for pile extraction shall be defined generally as when the rate of extraction of a pile is below num mm per minute when backhammering or pulling with equipment normally capable of withdrawing a pile continuously after an initial effort of num minutes or when damage to the pile head occurs .
if the piles have not penetrated to the levels specified in appendix num or have encountered obstructions a full statement of the reasons shall be recorded by the contractor and included in the pile record .
if required in appendix num the contractor shall install the sheet piles using a vibrationless jacking system .
pile driving hammers shall be correctly positioned on the pile so that the hammer will be aligned as near to the axis of the pile as is practically possible .
freely suspended piling hammers shall be equipped with correctly adjusted leg guides and inserts .
where a hammer is mounted in a rigid leader the leader shall be stable .
the anvil block or driving plate shall be of sufficient size to cover as much as possible of the cross section of the pile .
piles previously driven shall not be used until the contractor can demonstrate that they can meet all the requirements of the specification .
the contractor may provide each pile in more than one length .
spliced joints shall be designed to cater for the combined effects of bearing shear and bending stresses imposed upon the sheet piles .
splices shall be located to avoid maximum stress positions .
if splices are to be welded then these shall be designed in accordance with the guidelines given in bs en num and bs en num and the manufacturers recommendations .
weld metal shall not encroach within the interlock areas so as to interfere with the interlocking of the piles .
piling records num the following records shall be kept where appropriate a pile reference number or location b pile type and grade of steel c pile length d type of hammer e date of driving f commencing surface level g depth driven h length of offcuts i length of pile extensions j if required the measurement of driving resistance at appropriate depths .
k all information regarding interruptions unexpected changes in driving characteristics obstructions and times taken in overcoming them .
positional and alignment tolerance num unless deflected by obstructions sheet piles shall be installed within the following tolerances in plan num mm of the given sheet pile line at commencing surface .
vertical num in num level num mm of required top level pile line dimensions shall be based on the nominal size of piles .
creep or shrinkage of the pile lines shall not exceed the manufacturers rolling tolerances .
welding welders qualification num num only welders who are qualified to bs en num or who have attained a similar standard shall be employed on the works .
proof of welders proficiency shall be made available on request .
welding standard num num for manual metal arc and semiautomatic welding of carbon and carbon manganese steels amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls welding of piles and steel framework shall be carried out in accordance with bs en num and bs en num .
defective welds shall be cut out and replaced .
where steel piles are to be spliced by butt welding the interlocks shall not be welded unless a sealing weld is required .
durability and protection num protective coating shall be applied if specified following the procedures set out in clause num .
preparation of pile heads num if a steel structure is to be welded to piles the piles shall be cut square and to within num mm of the levels specified .
if pile heads are to be encased in concrete they shall be cut to within num mm of the levels specified and protective coatings shall be removed from the surfaces of the pile heads down to a level num mm above the soffit of the concrete .
num integrity testing of wall elements method of testing num where integritytesting of wall elements is specified the sonic logging method normally shall be used .
other methods may be considered subject to satisfactory evidence of performance .
age of wall elements at time of testing num integrity tests shall not be carried out until the number of days specified in appendix num have elapsed since casting of the wall element .
preparation of heads or tops of wall elements num where the method of testing requires the positioning of sensing equipment on the wall element head or top it shall be broken down to expose sound concrete and shall be clean free from water laitence loose concrete overspilled concrete and blinding concrete and shall be readily accessible for the purpose of testing .
specialist subcontractor num the requirements of subclause num shall apply .
interpretation of tests num the interpretation of tests shall be carried out by competent and experienced persons .
the contractor shall give all available details of the ground conditions element dimensions and construction method to the specialist firm before the commencement of testing in order to facilitate interpretation of the tests .
report num the requirements of subclause num shall apply .
anomalous results num in the event that any anomaly in the acoustic signal is found in the results indicating a possible defect in the wall element the contractor shall demonstrate that the wall element is satisfactory for its intended use or shall carry out remedial works to make it so .
sonic logging tubes shall be grouted up after the contractor has demonstrated that the wall element is satisfactory .
num instrumentation for piles and embedded walls general num all materials and work shall be in accordance with this clause and appendix num .
type of instrumentation num where the installation of instrumentation is called for the type of instrumentation shall be one of the following as specified in appendix num. a extensometer rod or magnetic b inclinometer c load cell d pressure cell e strain gauge to be attached to steel or precast concrete or embedded in cast in situ concrete .
other methods may be considered subject to satisfactory evidence of performance .
all equipment used shall be suitable for its specified purpose .
the instrumentation shall be robust and shall be a proprietary system supplied by a reputable supplier .
where required in appendix num the contractor shall submit details of the supplier the instrumentation and curricula vitae for the staff who will install the instrumentation on site monitor it and analyse the readings .
the contractor shall also submit details of projects where the specialist instrumentation contractor has successfully installed and monitored the specified type of instrumentation .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls extensometers num the instrumentation shall be securely attached to the reinforcement cage so that no component is displaced during placing of the reinforcement cage or concreting .
during concreting the tubing shall be adequately covered at both ends to prevent the ingress of concrete .
compression or extension couplings shall be installed as necessary for the movement range specified in appendix num .
the system will be such that the anchor and reference blocks shall be securely cast into the pile concrete .
the rod shall be made of fibreglass or similar material so that it will not corrode or distort nor change its length due to heat or water changes .
the top of the rod shall incorporate a range adjuster with a travel of num mm .
if direct measurements are specified the displacement measuring device shall consist of a rechargeable digital dial gauge with num v. mains battery charger or analogue dial gauge .
the orientation of the dial gauge relative to the top of the tube shall be constant for every reading .
if remote reading is specified the readings shall be made by a linear potentiometer or other suitable device securely held in place .
inclinometers num num the access tubing shall be securely attached to the reinforcement cage so that no component is displaced during placing of the reinforcement cage or concreting .
during concreting the tubing shall be adequately covered at both ends to prevent the ingress of concrete .
alternatively a nominal num mm steel duct sealed at the lower end and fitted with a removable screw cap at the upper end shall be attached to the reinforcement cage .
the inclinometer access tube can then be installed afterwards using a cementitious grout containing a nonshrink admixture .
the system shall consist of num mm nominal diameter corrosionproof access tubing which shall have four longitudinal internal keyways on two orthogonal axes .
the keyways shall be continuous over the length of the access tubing so that the wheels of the torpedoes can pass freely along it .
for embedded walls the keyways shall be oriented so that one set are parallel to the face of the wall .
the coupling between sections of the access tube shall ensure that the correct alignment of keyways is maintained through a joint .
jointing rivets to connect the tube sections shall be located midway between keyways .
sealing mastic shall be applied to each rivet head and to the points where the tubing enters a coupling .
all joints shall be sealed by liberally wrapping with a fabric tape impregnated with a waterproofing compound .
this procedure shall also be carried out for the endcaps .
the inclinometer readout equipment shall comprise a uniaxial or biaxial torpedo complete with operating cable cable reel grip carrying case cartridge readout unit and battery charger .
the torpedo shall be fully waterproof stainless steel and incorporate two robust force servo accelerators aligned at right angles to each other .
the torpedo shall be fitted with two orthogonal pairs of centre sprung wheels and shall have a gauge length of num m and be capable of negotiating a tube curvature of num m. the cable shall be of an appropriate length .
the readout unit shall have an alphanumeric lcd and rechargeable battery with sufficient power for num hours continuous use .
the contractor shall supply a calibration frame for checking the readout equipment .
alternatively a string of electrolevels may be used .
sufficient electrolevels shall be incorporated to provide an accurate deformation profile .
the azimuth deviation shall be recorded for each inclinometer access tube and shall be taken into account when processing the data .
where azimuth correction is necessary the contractor shall make available details of the method used .
readings shall be taken for the full length of each inclinometer access tube for faces a b c and d. the top wheel of the torpedo will travel up face a first followed by faces b c and d when using a uniaxial torpedo .
with a biaxial torpedo only faces a and b are travelled .
if a full set of readings can not be obtained due to accumulation of debris in the access tubes the contractor shall flush the tubes with water to remove the debris until readings can be taken .
the readings shall be taken in increments of num m starting from the base of the access tube .
all readings shall be recorded and reported to the nearest num mm .
the readings are considered to be sufficiently accurate only if the face errors in the ab plane and the cd plane are less than num mm .
the datum readings to be used in the calculations for each inclinometer shall be made available .
the data shall be processed assuming a fixed base .
the surveyed cumulative horizontal movement of the top of the access tube shall be reported to an accuracy of num mm .
when required the data shall also be processed assuming a specified offset at the top of the access tube .
the processed data for faces a b c and d shall be tabulated to show the following a deviations and face errors b mean deviation c change in mean deviation amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls d cumulative mean deviation e displacement profiles .
items c and e shall also be presented graphically to show the deviation or displacement plotted against depth .
load cells num num the loads to be measured may be either compressive or tensile as specified in appendix num .
the load cells shall have a response time of two seconds or less in response to monotonically increasing or decreasing loading .
the monitoring system shall provide a stable signal and any temperature or cable length or other effects on the load signal shall be included in the permissible tolerance .
if a hydraulic or pneumatic system is used it shall be rated for and have been tested to twice the anticipated maximum pressure .
the load cells and cabling shall be compatible with their intended position within a pile and shall be unaffected by the presence of water or fluid concrete .
they shall be sufficiently strong to withstand additional loading due to placing of the reinforcement cage and concreting .
as the cell will give a direct reading of load it shall be positioned so that all the load passes through it without any eccentricity .
the loading system shall be safe and stable .
pressure cells num the pressure cells shall have a response time of num seconds or less in response to monotonically increasing or decreasing loading .
the monitoring system shall provide a stable signal and any temperature or cable length or other effects on the pressure signal shall be included in the permissible tolerance .
if a hydraulic oil pneumatic or mercury based system is used it shall be rated for and have been tested to twice the anticipated maximum pressure .
the pressure cells and cabling shall be compatible with their intended position within a pile and shall be unaffected by the presence of water or fluid concrete .
they shall be sufficiently strong to withstand additional loading due to placing of the reinforcement cage and concreting .
if the pressure cell is to be placed against concrete on one or both sides it shall be provided with a mercury filled repressurising tube to ensure that no gap occurs between the hardened concrete and the pressure cell .
strain gauges general num the strain gauges shall have a response time of num seconds or less .
the monitoring systems shall provide a stable signal and any temperature or cable length or other effects on the signal shall be included in the permissible tolerance .
the strain gauges and cabling shall be compatible with their intended position within a pile and shall be unaffected by the presence of water or fluid concrete .
they shall be sufficiently strong to withstand additional loading due to placing of the reinforcing cage and concreting or pile driving .
strain gauges attached to steel or precast concrete piles num the strain gauges shall be securely attached to a mounting plate welded to the steel for steel piles or securely attached to the reinforced concrete for precast concrete piles .
the welding procedures of clause num shall be followed .
the method of attachment shall be sufficiently strong so the gauge is not displaced nor the wires or cables damaged by driving .
strain gauges embedded in concrete num strain gauges for cast in situ piles shall be either the embedment variety or shall be securely attached to reinforcement bars or to sister bars which shall be attached to the reinforcement cage .
the methods of attachment shall be such that the gauge is not displaced nor the wires or cables damaged by placing of the reinforcement concreting driving or other processes .
readings general num readings shall be reported in terms of the basic property measured eg .
volts hertz mm of mercury and shall be converted to si or derivative units by means of a calibration constant .
the calibration constant and the range over which it is applicable shall be clearly stated .
readings shall be taken at the times or time intervals specified in appendix num .
calibration and data checking num the instrumentation shall be calibrated prior to incorporation into the works and a certificate of calibration shall be made available .
for strain gauges a calibration constant can be provided if evidence is available showing that the variation in calibration constant will not vary maximum readings outside the specified tolerance .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls the instrumentation shall be calibrated so that its behaviour has been monitored over the range specified in appendix num .
the contractor shall demonstrate that the type of instrumentation can provide a stable reproducible and repeatable calibration .
all data shall be checked by the contractor for errors prior to submission .
if erroneous data are discovered eg .
face errors for inclinometer readings greater than num mm the contractor shall take a second set of readings immediately .
if the errors are repeated the contractor shall determine the cause of the error .
both sets of readings shall be processed and submitted together with the reasons for the errors and details of remedial works .
the contractor shall rectify any faults found in the instrumentation system for the duration of the specified monitoring period .
all computer data files and calculation sheets used in processing the data shall be preserved until the end of the contract .
they shall be made available for inspection on request .
tolerances num for load or pressure a tolerance of num of the range specified in appendix num is permissible .
for strain a tolerance of num x num is permissible .
for displacement a tolerance of num mm is permissible .
except where explicitly specified in appendix num no instrumentation device tubing or cable shall be placed in the concrete cover zone .
report num the results shall be made available within five working days of the completion of each phase of testing .
the report shall contain the following a the date and time of each reading b the weather c the name of the person who made the reading on site and the name of the person who analysed the readings together with their company affiliations d the pile or wall element reference number and the depth and identity number of the instrumentation e any damage to the instrumentation or difficulties in reading f the condition of the pile eg .
if the reading is being made during a load test the stage of the test if a wall is being excavated alongside the depth of the excavation etc g the calibration constants or equations that are being applied and the dates they were determined h a table comparing the specified results with any previous readings and with the base readings i num a graph showing variation of load or pressure or vertical movement or strain with time or horizontal movement with depth .
key dates shall be marked with a brief explanation of their significance .
columns of numbers shall be clearly labelled together with units .
numbers shall not be reported to a greater accuracy than is appropriate .
graph axes shall be linear and clearly labelled together with units .
specialist instrumentation contractor num the installation monitoring and analysis shall be carried out by a specialist contractor subject to demonstration of satisfactory performance before the commencement of monitoring .
the staff carrying out the monitoring and interpretation of the results shall be competent and experienced with the type of instrumentation used .
monitoring equipment num num the monitoring equipment shall become the property of the overseeing organisation if so specified in appendix num .
monitoring shall be carried out either directly at the pile head or remotely from a monitoring cabin as specified in appendix num .
the monitoring equipment shall be appropriate for the situation in which it is to be used .
the manufacturers guidelines for its use shall be followed .
where it has not been possible to follow the manufacturers guidelines the fact shall be reported together with the reason and details of the alternative procedure .
the monitoring equipment shall remain on site for the duration of the monitoring programme except when necessary for it to be calibrated after which it shall be returned to site .
the same monitoring equipment shall be used at each position .
where this is not possible the fact shall be reported together with the reason .
protection num terminal boxes at the head of the pile shall be protected by a lockable robust steel cap .
the pile head shall then be fenced off with clearly visible barriers which shall be maintained for the duration of the monitoring programme .
any cable running along the ground shall be clearly marked and adequately protected to prevent the cable posing a safety hazard or becoming damaged .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls surveying num the pile or element head terminal top of access tubing or as specified in appendix num shall be surveyed if specified in appendix num .
the level will be determined to an accuracy of num mm relative to the datum specified in appendix num .
the grid coordinates will be determined to an accuracy of num mm relative to the grid specified in appendix num .
other measurements shall be to the specified accuracy .
num support fluid general requirements num where a support fluid is used for maintaining the stability of an excavation the properties and use of the fluid shall be such that the following requirements are achieved i continuous support of the excavation ii solid particles are kept in suspension iii the fluid can be easily displaced during concreting iv the fluid does not coat the reinforcement to such an extent that the bond between the concrete and reinforcement is impaired v the fluid shall not cause pollution of the ground and groundwater before during or after use .
where required in appendix num details of the type of support fluid manufacturers certificates for the constituents and mix proportions shall be submitted .
support fluids shall be in accordance with appendix num and this clause except where there may be a conflict of requirements in which case those in appendix num shall take precedence .
evidence of suitability of support fluid num the contractor shall make available details of the properties and use of the support fluid to demonstrate it will meet the specified requirements .
these details shall be prepared at least num days prior to the commencement of work and shall include i num evidence from previous work with this support fluid and justification for its suitability for these ground conditions and method of construction .
particular issues which shall be addressed are the types and sources of the support fluid constituents time of construction of the piles ambient temperature soil and groundwater chemistry .
ii results of representative laboratory or field mixing trials with the support fluid to demonstrate compliance with the specification .
iii details of the tests to be used for monitoring the support fluid during the works and the compliance values for these tests presented in the form of table num .
materials water num num if water for the works is not available from a water companys supply the contractor shall ensure that the water complies with the guidance given in bs en num .
water from the sea or tidal rivers shall not be used .
when required in appendix num the contractor shall arrange for tests of the water for the works to be carried out in accordance with the specified schedule before and during the progress of the work .
the frequency of testing shall be as stated in appendix num .
additives to the water num all solid additives shall be stored in separate waterproof stores with a raised floor or in waterproof silos which shall not allow the material to become contaminated .
additives shall generally be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations unless demonstrated otherwise .
bentonite shall be of a quality that shall accord with publication num drilling fluid materials of the engineering equipment and material users association .
mixing of support fluid num the constituents of the fluid shall be mixed thoroughly to produce a homogeneous mix .
the temperature of the water used in mixing and of the support fluid at the time of commencing concrete placement shall not be less than numc .
compliance testing of support fluid num the contractor shall carry out testing of the support fluid in accordance with his regime and this specification to demonstrate compliance with his limits for each test .
the contractor shall establish a suitably equipped and properly maintained site laboratory for this sole purpose and provide skilled staff and all necessary apparatus to undertake the sampling and testing .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num piling and embedded retaining walls each batch of freshly prepared or reconditioned slurry shall be proven by sampling and testing to be within the compliance values before the batch is used in excavations .
details of the method frequency and locations for sampling and testing slurry from the excavations shall be prepared at least num days prior to the commencement of work .
at least one sample immediately prior to placing steel and concrete shall be taken and tested from the base of the excavation and one from the top .
if tests show the support fluid does not comply with the specification it shall be replaced .
spillage and disposal of support fluid num all reasonable steps shall be taken to prevent the spillage of support fluid on the site in areas outside the immediate vicinity of boring .
discarded fluid shall be removed from the site without undue delay .
any disposal of fluid shall comply with the requirements of current legislation and all relevant authorities .
numf march num table num test and compliance values for support fluid compliance values measured at numc property to be test method and specification for test freshly mixed fluid sample from bore measured apparatus prior to placing steel and concrete density mud balance rheological properties over appropriate range of shear rates and temperature aplastic viscosity fann viscometer byield stress fann viscometer cconsistency index k fann viscometer dflow index n fann viscometer emarsh cone viscosity marsh cone f gel strength for fann viscometer appropriate range of times sand content sand screen set fluid loss for fluid loss test appropriate range of temperatures times and pressures filtercake thickness fluid loss test ph electrical ph meter to bs num range ph num to num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendment december num num series num structural concrete contents clause title page num num concrete general num num num concrete constituent materials num num num concrete exposure classes num num num concrete general requirements num num num concrete requirements for designed concrete num num num concrete production num num num concrete conformity and identity testing num num num concrete surface finish num num num not used num num num concrete construction general num num num concrete grouting and duct systems for posttensioned tendons num num num reinforcement materials num num num carbon steel reinforcement and stainless steel reinforcement bar schedule dimensions cutting and bending num num num reinforcement fixing num num num reinforcement surface condition num num num reinforcement laps and joints num num num reinforcement welding num num num prestressing tendons materials num num num prestressing tendons handling and storage num num num prestressing tendons surface condition num num num prestressing tendons straightness num num num prestressing tendons cutting num num num prestressing tendons positioning of tendons sheaths and duct formers num num num prestressing tendons tensioning num num num prestressing tendons protection and bond num num num stainless steel dowels materials num num num inspection and testing of structures and components num num num geometrical tolerances num volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num structural concrete num num concrete general num specification of concrete num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num num concrete shall conform to the requirements of bs num parts num and num .
unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num concrete shall be specified as designed concrete .
the contract specific requirements for the structural concrete in the permanent works are given in contract specific appendix num .
num designed concrete num num the specification for designed concrete defined in bs num shall be as described in this specification and contract specific appendix num and shall contain a the basic requirements given in num of bs num b the additional requirements given in num of bs num where described in this specification and contract specific appendix num .
num implementation of bs en num num .
num the execution of concrete structures shall be in accordance with bs en num as complemented by this specification .
the provisions of this specification apply to both in situ and precast concrete unless noted otherwise .
num execution class num .
num the works shall be built in accordance with execution class num as defined in bs en num unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
num inspection requirements num .
num inspection for materials and products and inspection for execution of works as well as documentation of inspection shall be in accordance with bs en num as complemented by this specification .
requirements for the inspection and testing of structures are given in contract specific appendix num .
where described in appendix num inspection of concrete works shall be executed by an organisation independent of the contractor .
num num concrete constituent materials num cement and combinations num num cement types as defined in bs num see table a.num of bs num or table num of bs num shall comprise one of the following unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num cem i cem iias cem iial cem iiall cem iiad cem iibs cem iiav cem iibv cem iiia cem iiib cem ivb and sulfateresisting portland cements cem isr num and cem isr num conforming to bs en num .
combinations as defined in bs num shall comprise one of the following unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num ciias ciibs ciial ciiall ciiav ciibv ciiia ciiib and civbv .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num cements shall conform to bs en num .
evidence of compliance with the harmonised part of bs en num with respect to product performance shall be demonstrated by ce marking and a declaration of performance where the declared performance for the essential characteristics given in annex za of that standard is equal or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the cement .
ground granulated blastfurnace slag fly ash and silica fume shall conform to bs en num bs en num and bs en num respectively .
evidence of compliance with the harmonised part of those standards with respect to product performance shall be demonstrated by ce marking and a declaration of performance where the declared performance for the essential characteristics given in annex za of those standards is equal or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the constituent .
limestone fines shall conform to bs num .
num aggregates num num unless otherwise specified in contract specific appendix num aggregates shall conform to bs en num for normal and heavy weight aggregates and bs en num for lightweight aggregates and to the requirements of num of bs num except that recycled concrete aggregate rca and recycled aggregate ra shall not be used .
where the use of rca or ra is proposed it shall be subject to the approval of the overseeing organisation through its departure from standard processes .
evidence of compliance with the harmonised part of bs en num and bs en num with respect to product performance shall be demonstrated by ce marking and a declaration of performance where the declared performance for the essential characteristics given in annex za of that standard is equal or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the aggregate with the system of assessment and verification of consistency of performance avcp as defined in pd num and pd num for aggregates conforming to bs en num and bs en num respectively .
the flakiness index of the coarse aggregate when determined by the method described in bs en num shall not exceed finum except when natural uncrushed aggregates are used for concrete of strength classes lower than cnum when the flakiness index shall not exceed finum .
no flakiness index limit is required for strength class cnum concrete or below .
when required the resistance to fragmentation of the coarse aggregate determined in terms of the los angeles coefficient as specified in bs en num and declared in accordance with the relevant category specified in table num of bs en num shall meet the requirements for lanum .
aggregates with la coefficient values above num may also perform satisfactorily in normal concrete but their strength performance shall be established in concrete trials before use .
chloride levels of aggregate shall be established from testing using the volhard reference method in bs en num or other method calibrated against this reference method .
where the aggregate chloride level has been established as minimal that is less than the detection level of num typical for land based materials then this value may be used .
where there is a significant chloride level the value shall be established as set out in num of bs en num .
aggregates shall be selected as to satisfy the requirements in subclause num for the control of alkalisilica reaction .
num admixtures and pigments num num admixtures shall conform to bs en num and shall comply with num of bs num and the requirements of clause num of bs en num unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
evidence of compliance with the harmonised part of bs en num with respect to product performance shall be demonstrated by ce marking and a declaration of performance where the declared performance for the essential characteristics given in annex za of that standard is equal or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the admixture .
where a specified coloured concrete requires a pigment the pigment shall conform to bs en num .
in all cases the contractor shall record the following information which shall be subsequently supplied to the overseeing organisation in accordance with the requirements of bd num as built operational and maintenance records for highway structures dmrb num volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num a the detrimental effects caused by adding a greater or lesser quantity of admixture or pigment b the chemical names of the main active ingredients c whether or not the admixture leads to the entrainment of air .
num fibres for concrete num num the use of fibres for concrete is not covered by this specification .
where their use is proposed it shall be subject to the approval of the overseeing organisation through its departure from standard processes .
num num concrete exposure classes num selection of exposure classes num num the exposure classes shall be as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num concrete general requirements num compressive strength class of concrete num num the compressive strength classes of concrete shall be as described in contract specific appendix num .
num minimum cement content and maximum watercement ratio num num the cement content shall be not less than and the watercement ratio shall be not greater than the values described in contract specific appendix num .
num maximum cement content num num the cement content shall not exceed num kgmnum unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
num maximum chloride content num num the chloride content class shall conform to the following requirements table num num chloride content classes type or use of concrete chloride content class maximum total chloride content expressed as of chloride ion by mass of cement inclusive of ggbs or fly ash when these are used as cement prestressed concrete heatcured concrete containing embedded metal cl num num concrete containing embedded metal and made with sulfateresisting portland cements cem isr num and cem isr num conforming to bs en num cl num num concrete containing embedded metal and made with other permitted cements cl num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num num control of alkalisilica reaction num num the provisions given in num of bs num shall be applied to minimize damaging alkalisilica reaction .
extremely reactive aggregates comprising those aggregates containing detectable quantities of opal glass and calcined flint shall not be used alone or in combination with other aggregates .
the definition of rock types shall be as in bs en num .
num buried concrete exposed to sulfates num num choice of concrete and additional protective measures apms shall comply with the requirements of bs num for the design chemical dc class described in contract specific appendix num .
num early thermal cracking num num the execution of concrete structures shall conform to the assumptions made in the design to control early thermal cracking and described in contract specific appendix num unless otherwise agreed with the overseeing organisation .
num cover to reinforcement num num the contractor shall provide certificates of compliance with respect to cover to reinforcement and detailed records of measured covers to the overseeing organisation before concrete is placed .
num num concrete requirements for designed concrete num conformity criteria num num the conformity criteria for a concrete shall be in accordance with bs en num and bs num .
num suitability of proposed constituent material proportions num num the contractor shall record prior to the supply of any designed concrete the following information which shall be subsequently supplied to the overseeing organisation in accordance with the requirements of bd num i the nature and source of each material ii either a appropriate existing data as evidence of satisfactory previous performance for target mean strength current margin consistence and watercement ratio or b full details of initial tests carried out in accordance with annex a of bs en num iii the quantities of each constituent material per cubic metre of fully compacted concrete .
assessment of the concrete in accordance with this subclause shall be carried out for each different source of material and for any change in the quantities of each constituent material except for changes in cement content of not more than num kgmnum and prorata changes in aggregate contents where a single assessment is required .
num num concrete production num production control num num all concrete produced shall be subject to production control as specified in clause num of bs en num and clause num of bs num and in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num num consistence at delivery num num in general water or admixtures shall not be added to concrete delivered to site following initial mixing in accordance with the mix design .
water or admixtures may only be added in special circumstances under the direction of the concrete producer and used to bring the consistence to the specified value provided that the limiting values permitted by the specification are not exceeded .
the quantity of any additional water or admixture added to the mix shall be recorded on the delivery ticket in all cases along with name of the organisation and person authorising the additions and the record of subclause num shall be amended accordingly .
num selfcompacting concrete scc num num the use of scc is not covered by this specification .
where the use of scc is proposed it shall be subject to the approval of the overseeing organisation through its departure from standards processes .
num num concrete conformity and identity testing num general num num sampling and testing of fresh and of hardened concrete shall comply with bs en num unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num and shall be as scheduled in contract specific appendices num andor num as appropriate in accordance with clause num .
num identity testing num num where identity testing for compressive strength is required as described in contract specific appendix num it shall be in accordance with the requirements given in annex b of bs en num and annex b of bs num .
where identity testing for slump flow air content and density on individual batches of concrete is required as described in contract specific appendix num it shall be in accordance with annex b of bs num .
identity testing shall be as scheduled in contract specific appendix num andor num .
num num concrete surface finish num trial panels num num when required in contract specific appendix num and before commencing concrete works the contractor shall prepare a trial panel of a suitable size that will demonstrate that the required surface finish can be achieved by the methods proposed .
the panel of concrete shall contain reinforcement representative of the reinforcement sizes and spacings in the sections of the permanent works the panel represents and shall be filled with the concrete proposed for the works the trial panel relates to compacted by the method to be used in the works .
as soon as practicable after compaction the formwork shall be removed to check that the required surface finish and compaction has been achieved .
reference panels have also been produced showing typical class fnum and fnum surface finishes made with local materials in each region of the uk and they can be viewed at various sites throughout the uk .
num control of colour num num when stated in contract specific appendix num each constituent material shall be obtained from a single consistent source .
the aggregates shall be free of any impurities that may cause staining .
the mix proportions and the grading particularly of the sand i.e .
fine aggregate shall be maintained constant .
the same type of formwork facing material surface finish and surface treatments shall be used in formwork throughout similar exposed areas .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num num release agents num num release agents for the formwork shall enable the formwork to be removed without damage to the concrete surface .
where a concrete surface is to be permanently exposed only one agent shall be used throughout the entire area .
release agents shall be applied evenly and shall not be permitted to come into contact with reinforcement prestressing tendons and anchorages contamination from release agents shall be removed from such areas .
where the concrete is to receive an applied finish or surface impregnation release agents shall be compatible with the particular material and any associated process .
num surface finishes for concrete num i num formed surfaces classes of finish formwork as described in subclause num shall be capable of producing the following finishes where required in the works class fnum .
a dense finish with no grout or mortar loss with the specified cover to embedded metal and achieving the specified dimensional tolerances .
class fnum .
as the requirements of fnum and the irregularities in the finish shall be no greater than those obtained from the use of wrought thicknessed square edged boards arranged in a uniform pattern .
the finish is intended to be left as struck but imperfections such as fins and surface discolouration shall be made good .
class fnum .
as the requirements of fnum and the resulting finish shall be smooth and of uniform texture and appearance .
the formwork lining shall leave no stain on the concrete and shall be so joined and fixed to its backing that it imparts no blemishes .
it shall be of the same type and obtained from only one source throughout any one structure .
the contractor shall make good any imperfections in the finish .
internal ties and embedded metal parts shall not be used .
class fnum .
the requirements for class fnum are as for class fnum except that internal ties and embedded metal parts shall be permitted .
the ties shall be positioned only in rebates or in other positions as described in contract specific appendix num .
class fnum .
the resulting finish shall be smooth and of uniform texture .
any blemishes and imperfections such as discolouration and fins shall be made good .
provision for the embedment of metal parts in the permanent works on a regular spacing shall be allowed .
other classes .
the finishes shall comply with the specific requirements described in contract specific appendix num .
permanently exposed concrete surfaces to all classes of finish other than fnum shall be protected from rust marks and stains of all kinds .
unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num all formwork joints for all classes of finish other than fnum shall form a regular pattern with horizontal and vertical lines continuous throughout each structure and all construction joints shall coincide with these horizontal or vertical lines .
ii num unformed surfaces classes of finish class unum finish .
the concrete shall be levelled and screeded to produce a uniform surface to the profile shown on the drawings .
no further work shall be applied to the surface unless it is used as a first stage for another class of finish .
class unum finish .
after the concrete has hardened sufficiently the class unum finish shall be floated by hand or machine sufficiently only to produce a uniform surface free from screed marks .
class unum finish .
when the moisture has disappeared and the concrete has hardened sufficiently to prevent laitance from being worked to the surface a class unum finish shall be steeltrowelled under firm pressure to produce a dense smooth uniform surface free from trowel marks .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num class unum finish .
the concrete shall be levelled and screeded to produce a uniform surface .
when the concrete has sufficiently hardened and the bleed water evaporated the surface shall be trowelled to produce a hard dense surface free from screed marks and exposed aggregate .
finally the surface shall be lightly textured with a wooden float or equivalent .
alternatively the concrete shall be levelled screeded and floated to produce a uniform surface and immediately before the waterproofing operation this surface shall receive surface preparation by water jetting or grit blasting to provide a lightly textured finish .
the finished surface shall not deviate from the required profile by more than num mm over a num m gauge length or have any abrupt irregularities more than num mm .
class unum finish .
the concrete shall be levelled and screeded to produce a uniform finish .
when the concrete has sufficiently hardened to prevent laitance being worked to the surface it shall be floated to produce a surface free from screed marks and exposed aggregate .
finally the surface shall be textured to suit the requirements of the particular waterproofing and surfacing system .
the accuracy of the finished surface shall be such that it does not deviate from the required profile by more than num mm over a num m gauge length or have any abrupt irregularities .
other classes .
the finishes shall comply with the specific requirements described in contract specific appendix num .
num num not used num num concrete construction general num construction joints num num the position of construction joints shall be as shown on the drawings and at additional positions determined by the contractor in accordance with the requirements of contract specific appendix num .
when concrete is placed in vertical members walls columns and the like the lifts of concrete shall finish level or in sloping members at right angles to the axis of the members and the joint lines shall match features of the finished work if possible or be formed by grout checks .
kickers shall be constructed integrally with the lift of concrete below .
concreting shall be carried out continuously up to construction joints .
unless interface shear calculations in accordance with bs en num clause num of bs en num show that a nonprepared surface between concrete cast at different times is sufficient for structural purposes construction joints shall be prepared in either of the following ways i when the concrete is selfsupporting but still sufficiently green the formwork shall be removed as necessary to expose the construction joint subject to the requirements of subclause num of this clause .
the concrete surface shall be sprayed with a fine spray of water or brushed with a stiff brush just sufficiently to remove the outer mortar skin and expose the larger aggregate without disturbing it .
alternatively where this preparation proves impracticable the hardened surface skin and laitance shall be removed by grit blasting or a needle gun .
hardened surfaces shall not be hacked .
ii by the use of proprietary steel openmesh permanent formwork intended for use in construction joints .
retarding agents shall not be used unless permitted in contract specific appendix num .
the joint surface shall be clean and damp but free of standing water immediately before any fresh concrete is placed against it .
num falsework and formwork num i num design and construction .
the formwork shall be sufficiently rigid and tight to prevent loss of grout or mortar from the concrete at all stages and for the appropriate method of placing and compacting .
the falsework and formwork shall be so arranged as to be readily dismantled and removed from the cast concrete without shock disturbance or damage .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num where necessary the falsework and formwork shall be so arranged that the soffit form properly supported on props only can be retained in position for such period as may be required by maturing conditions as described in subclause numii .
if the component is to be prestressed whilst still resting on the soffit form provision shall be made to allow for elastic deformation and any variation in weight distribution .
where it is intended to reuse formwork it shall be thoroughly cleaned and made good .
internal metal ties which require being withdrawn through hardened concrete shall not be used where either face is permanently exposed .
where internal ties are left in they shall be provided with a mortar cover of at least num mm .
the jointing faces of the pocket shall be prepared with an exposed aggregate finish and dampened immediately prior to mortar filling .
ii num cleaning and treatment of forms .
the faces of the forms in contact with the concrete shall be clean and treated with a suitable release agent where applicable as described in subclause num .
immediately before concreting all forms shall be thoroughly cleaned out .
the source of any compressed air used for the clearing of foreign matter from formwork shall be free from oil and other contaminant .
iii num projecting reinforcement and fixing devices .
where holes are needed in forms to accommodate projecting reinforcement or fixing devices care shall be taken to prevent loss of grout when concreting or damage when striking forms .
iv num permanent formwork or special formwork shall comply with contract specific appendix num .
num transporting placing and compacting num num concrete shall be transported and placed so that contamination segregation or loss of the constituent materials does not occur in accordance with clause num of bs num .
concrete when deposited shall have a temperature of not less than numc .
where the concrete is made using cem i or a cem iia cement the concrete temperature shall not be more than numc .
where the concrete is made using a cem iib or a cem iii cement or equivalent combination the concrete temperature shall not be more than numc .
the temperature of fresh concrete shall be measured in accordance with bs num .
fresh concrete shall not be placed against in situ concrete that has been in position for more than num minutes unless a construction joint is formed as described in subclause num of this clause .
where lightweight aggregate concrete is to be pumped the contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the overseeing organisation that pumping will have no significant effect on the strength of the hardened concrete .
no concrete shall be placed in flowing water .
underwater concrete shall be placed in position by tremies or by pipelines using methods to ensure the requirements of this specification are met .
when concreting bridge decks of substantial thickness to avoid layering of concrete the whole thickness shall be placed in one pass .
in deck slabs where void formers are used adequate means to prevent flotation shall be employed and care taken to ensure adequate compaction of the concrete placed beneath the void formers .
where the minimum dimension of a concrete section to be placed at a single time is greater than num mm measures shall be taken to reduce the adverse affects of high temperatures in the concrete or to reduce the temperature of concrete to prevent high temperatures having an adverse effect on the finished concrete .
concreting operations shall not displace reinforcement tendon ducts tendon anchorages or formwork or damage the faces of formwork .
concrete shall be thoroughly compacted by vibration during the operation of placing and thoroughly worked around the reinforcement tendons or duct formers around embedded fixtures and into corners of the formwork to form a solid mass free from voids .
when vibrators are used to compact the concrete vibration shall be applied continuously during the placing of each batch of concrete until the expulsion of air has practically ceased .
a sufficient number of vibrators in serviceable condition shall be on site to ensure that spare equipment is always available in the event of breakdowns .
vibration shall not be applied by way of the reinforcement .
where vibrators of the immersion type are used contact with reinforcement and inserts shall be avoided as far as is practicable .
the use of selfcompacting concrete is not covered by this specification .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num concrete shall not be subjected to disturbance between num hours and num hours after compaction except that re compaction of the upper layers of deep lifts to prevent or anneal settlement cracking may be carried out .
whenever vibration has to be applied externally the design of formwork and disposition and operation of vibrators shall ensure efficient compaction and the avoidance of surface blemishes .
there shall be no excess water on the top surface on completion of compaction .
slipforming shall be performed with appropriate equipment using methods to ensure that the requirements of this specification are met .
num removal of formwork and falsework num i num general .
falsework and formwork shall be removed in a manner that does not damage the concrete and at times to suit the requirements for its curing and to prevent restraint that may arise from elastic shortening shrinkage or creep .
ii num timing of removal for cast in situ concrete .
where the concrete compressive strength is confirmed by tests on concrete cubes stored under conditions that simulate the field conditions formwork supporting concrete in bending may be removed when the cylindercube strength is num nmmnum or the strength needed by the design whichever is the greater .
for ordinary structural concrete made with portland cement cem i or sulfateresisting portland cements cem isr num or cem isr num of strength class num or above in the absence of control cubes the period before removal shall be in accordance with the minimum periods given in table num .
table num num minimum period before removing falsework and formwork cem i or srpc concrete minimum period before removal surface temperature of concrete numc numc tc any temperature between numc and numc vertical formwork to columns walls and large beams num hours num hours numtnum hours soffit formwork to slabs num days num days numtnum days props to slabs num days num days numtnum days soffit formwork to beams num days num days numtnum days props to beams num days num days numtnum days where surface temperatures of concrete fall outside or are likely to fall outside the above temperature ranges agreement shall be reached between the contractor and overseeing organisation on appropriate removal times .
num curing of concrete num i num general .
curing class num in accordance with clause num of bs en num shall be used unless otherwise specified in contract specific appendix num .
additional special curing requirements may be given in contract specific appendix num .
immediately after compaction and thereafter for the duration of applied curing except where elevated temperature curing is used concrete shall be protected against harmful effects of weather including rain rapid temperature changes frost and from drying out .
the method of curing shall provide a suitable environment for the concrete to mature and prevent loss of moisture harmful to the quality of the concrete .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num where the contractor proposes to use a curing liquid compound or membrane on surfaces on which a waterproofing system is to be laid it shall be completely removable .
the contractor shall keep records of all curing liquids compounds and membranes and the areas of subsequent removal such records shall be subsequently supplied to the overseeing organisation in accordance with the requirements of bd num. ii num accelerated curing .
elevatedtemperature curing as described below may be used only for concrete made with portland cement cem i or sulfateresisting portland cements cem isr num or cem isr num. a the formwork may be generally heated to no more than numc prior to the placing of concrete .
b once placing is complete the concrete shall be left for num hours without additional heating .
the concrete temperature can then be raised at a maximum rate of numc per hour .
c the concrete temperature shall at no time exceed numc .
d the rate of subsequent cooling shall not exceed the rate of heating .
e cubes shall be manufactured and cured under identical conditions to those to which the concrete is subjected .
the use of accelerated curing methods for concrete containing other types of cement or any admixture shall not be used .
num cold weather work num num when concrete is placed at air temperatures below numc the following requirements shall be met i the aggregates and water used in the mix shall be free from snow ice and frost .
ii the surface temperature of the concrete at the time of placing shall be at least numc .
where the concrete is made using cem i or a cem iia cement the concrete temperature shall not be more than numc .
where the concrete is made using a cem iib or a cem iii cement or equivalent combination the concrete temperature shall not be more than numc .
iii the surface temperature of the concrete shall be maintained at not less than numc until the concrete reaches a strength of num nmm as determined by tests on cubes that were cured under identical conditions to the structural concrete .
iv before placing concrete the formwork reinforcement prestressing steel and any surface with which the fresh concrete will be in contact shall be free from snow ice and frost .
v cement shall not be allowed to come into contact with water at a temperature greater than numc .
num hot weather work num num during hot weather the contractor shall ensure that the constituent materials of the concrete are sufficiently cool to prevent the concrete from stiffening in the interval between its discharge from the mixer and compaction in its final position .
cement shall not be allowed to come into contact with water at a temperature greater than numc .
num precast concrete construction num i num general precast concrete elements to be used in the works shall comply with the following product standards as appropriate which are relevant for highway structures a bridge deck elements shall comply with bs en num. b foundation piles shall comply with bs en num. c box culverts shall comply with bs en num. d retaining wall elements shall comply with bs en num. e masts and poles shall comply with bs en num .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num all precast concrete elements to be used in the works that fall within the scope of a product standard shall be supplied in accordance with that standard .
precast elements that are outside the scope of a product standard shall conform to bs en num common rules for precast concrete products unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
where minor site manufactured precast elements do not conform to any product standard or bs en num manufacture and construction operations shall comply with the provisions of bs en num and with this specification .
for precast products the manufacturing requirements as detailed in their relevant product standard or in bs en num shall be complied with the construction operations from the reception at the site or if site manufactured from removal from the forms shall comply with the provisions of bs en num and with this specification .
where precast products are manufactured in temporary plants on site the production shall be protected against adverse weather conditions and production control shall satisfy the requirements of clause num of bs en num. ii num manufacture of precast products precast products shall be suitable for their intended use and place of installation in the works .
the relevant product standard for each precast product to be used shall be as identified in contract specific appendix num .
where there is no relevant product standard reference to manufacture in accordance with bs en num shall be as quoted in contract specific appendix num .
where a precast product is to be manufactured in accordance with a product standard evidence of compliance with the harmonised part of the product standard with respect to product performance shall be demonstrated by ce marking and a declaration of performance where the declared performance for the essential characteristics given in annex za of that standard is equal to or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the precast product .
the minimum set of information to be included with the ce marking and labelling in accordance with annex za of the product standard shall be as required in contract specific appendix num. iii num manufacture of precast concrete elements not conforming to any product standard or to bs en num the contractor shall give reasonable notice to the overseeing organisation in advance of the date of commencement of manufacture and casting of each type of element .
a copy of all numday cube test results relating to the work as scheduled in contract specific appendix num shall be made available by the contractor to the overseeing organisation in accordance with clause num .
for all prestressed elements the contractor shall provide to the overseeing organisation not more than num days after the transfer of stress a certificate showing the force and extension in the tendons after they were anchored the strength and age of test cubes cast as described in subclauses num and num and the minimum age in hours of the concrete at the time the stress was applied to the element .
for all prestressed pretensioned elements the length crosssection dimensions and straightness of precast concrete shall be measured as far as practicable at num num days after casting .
if earlier measurement is required the manufacturer should allow for further shrinkage and creep between the time of measurement and num days based on recorded experience .
all elements shall be indelibly marked to show the element mark as shown on the drawings the weight of the element the production line on which they were manufactured the date on which the concrete was cast and if they are of symmetrical section the face that will be uppermost when the element is in its correct position in the works .
the markings shall be so located that they are not exposed to view when the element is in its permanent position .
iv num requirements for all precast elements including precast products a general .
where tests are to be carried out no elements to which the tests relate shall be dispatched to the site until the tests have been satisfactorily completed .
in the case where elements are manufactured in temporary plants on site they shall not leave the designated production area until the tests have been satisfactorily completed .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num unless interface shear calculations in accordance with bs en num clause num of bs en num show that a nonprepared surface between concrete cast at different times is sufficient for structural purposes the vibrated top surface of precast concrete elements which will subsequently receive in situ concrete shall be further prepared using one of the following methods and therefore considered as rough in accordance to clause num of bs en num class num surface preparation .
the surface finish shall be in accordance with subclause num .
class num surface preparation .
the hardened surface shall be jetted with air or water to remove laitance and all loose material and no further roughening shall then be carried out rough as cast .
the surface classification and the method of preparation shall be shown on the drawings .
b handling .
elements shall be lifted or supported at points described in contract specific appendix num and shall be handled and placed without impact .
additional constraints on the support restraint and dynamic loading during handling or transport are described in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall incorporate in the erection specification in accordance with bs en num the requirements of the lifting scheme for the precast concrete elements .
c storage .
when elements are stored they shall be firmly supported only at the points described in contract specific appendix num .
where elements are stacked several units high packings shall be vertically above each other to prevent additional bending stresses in the elements and the maximum height of the stack and any provision required to maintain stability shall be as described in contract specific appendix num .
the accumulation of trapped water and deleterious matter in the units shall be prevented .
care shall be taken to avoid rust staining and efflorescence .
where disfigurement would be detrimental packing pieces shall not discolour or otherwise permanently damage the elements .
d protection .
at all stages of construction precast concrete elements and other concrete associated therewith shall be properly protected to prevent damage to permanently exposed concrete surfaces especially arrises and decorative features .
e placing and adjustment .
an erection specification shall be prepared by the contractor in accordance with bs en num and it shall be submitted for acceptance of the overseeing organisation at least num weeks prior to the delivery of the elements .
the method of assembly and erection shall comply with any particular requirements in contract specific appendix num and form part of the erection specification .
f requirements for placing and adjustment of composite slab bridges .
in a composite slab bridge where precast beams are laid side by side with minimal gaps to form a deck the difference in soffit level between adjacent units before the in situ concrete is placed shall nowhere exceed num mm for units up to num m in length or num mm for longer units and the width of the deck soffit shall be within num mm of that shown on the drawings furthermore the width of the gap between individual beams shall not exceed twice the nominal gap shown on the drawings .
the alignment of transverse holes shall permit the reinforcement or prestressing tendons to be placed without distortion .
in adjacent spans the continuity of line of the outside beams shall be maintained .
the in situ concrete in composite slab bridges shall be placed in such a sequence that the advancing edge of the freshly deposited concrete over the full width of the deck between longitudinal construction joints is approximately parallel to the deck supports .
precast beams shall be prevented from moving laterally during the placing of the in situ concrete .
g jointing and completion works .
the composition and watercement ratio of the in situ concrete or mortar used in any connection and in the packing of joints shall be in accordance with the erection specification .
levelling devices shall only be released or removed in accordance with the erection specification when the structural connection is complete and has achieved sufficient strength .
care shall be taken to ensure that the in situ material is thoroughly compacted .
when using proprietary jointing materials the manufacturers recommendations and any particular requirement in contract specific appendix num for the application and methods shall be strictly followed to ensure full compatibility between the joint type and size and the sealing method .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num num num concrete grouting and duct systems for posttensioned tendons num planning trials and basic requirements num num site operations including duct installation stressing and grouting shall be carried out by organisations certificated in accordance with the requirements of the cares product acceptance scheme for the supply and installation of posttensioning systems in concrete structures ptnum or an equivalent scheme .
posttensioning systems shall be in accordance with clause num of bs en num .
the system shall have the intended use category and shall meet any performance requirement stated in contract specific appendix num .
the performance characteristics of the posttensioning system shall be demonstrated by ce marking and a declaration of performance where the declared performance for the product characteristics is equal or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the product .
precast segmental construction using internal grouted tendon system is not permitted .
grouts for protection of prestressing tendons shall be as required in contract specific appendix num and defined in subclause num .
grease and wax for posttensioned unbonded tendons shall be as required in clause num .
unless otherwise agreed with the overseeing organisation the contractor shall undertake fullscale trials of the grouting operations as required in the contract for duct installation testing concreting grouting and any other associated requirements in accordance with the details described in contract specific appendix num .
the trials are required to demonstrate that the grouting methods and procedures proposed by the contractor shall ensure that grout fills the ducts and surrounds the prestressing steel .
the contractor shall submit for acceptance of the overseeing organisation a detailed method statement at least num weeks prior to use in any trials or in the works covering proposed materials ducts anchorage and vent arrangements personnel equipment grouting procedures and quality control .
the method statement shall also describe arrangements for storage and protection of materials tendons etc .
on site in the time between delivery and grouting .
where full scale trials are required these shall be carried out at least num days before the planned commencement of fixing ducts for prestressing for the permanent works unless specified otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
the trials shall incorporate all relevant details of ducts vents duct supports prestressing anchorages and couplers prestressing strands grout inlets and outlets .
the tendons shall be sufficiently tensioned such that the strands within the duct take up a representative alignment .
all systems methods and materials are to be those proposed for the permanent works and shall have been submitted to the overseeing organisation as part of the detailed method statement required .
after three days the contractor shall carefully cut or core the trial section to expose cross sections and longitudinal sections of the duct anchorages and any other locations where required or as further directed by the overseeing organisation to demonstrate that the duct is satisfactorily grouted .
a report shall be prepared by the contractor giving full details of the trial testing results and photographs of the exposed sections and submitted to the overseeing organisation .
grouting of the ducts shall be shown to leave no void which has either a dimension greater than num of the duct diameter measured in the radial direction of the duct or which poses a risk to the protective system .
the location of any voids with respect to grout vents and their adequate grouting and subsequent sealing and the disposition of the steel tendons within the body of the grout shall be reported in writing by the contractor to the overseeing organisation within num days .
prestressing for the permanent works shall not be permitted without the prior written acceptance of the grouting procedures by the overseeing organisation and formal acceptance of the results of the grouting trial .
irrespective of whether the contract requires fullscale grouting trials the contractor shall carry out a materials suitability assessment in accordance with subclause num .
inspection and conformity of grouting works including requirements prior during and after grouting shall be in accordance with section num of bs en num for execution class num .
num grout materials batching and mixing num num grouts shall comply with bs en num and with the requirements in this subclause and subclause num .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num the properties of the grout made with the materials and using the plant and personnel proposed for use on site shall be assessed for suitability for the intended purpose by the contractor in accordance with num of bs en num .
this assessment shall be carried out sufficiently in advance of grouting operations to enable adjustments to be made in use of materials or plant or personnel .
the assessment shall consist of the preparation of the grout made with the materials and using the plant and personnel proposed for use on site and the testing of it in accordance with subclause num .
the preparation shall be carried out under representative conditions of temperature expected on site .
if grouting operations are likely to cover different seasons the assessment shall be carried out for the expected range of temperatures .
no departures from the sources of the materials and procedures approved as a result of satisfactory trials will be permitted without the written approval of the overseeing organisation .
when prebagged grouts are used they shall be obtained from companies holding a valid cares product acceptance scheme certificate for the production of prebagged grouts complying with the requirements of bs en num bs en num and bs en num ptnum or an equivalent scheme .
all bagged materials shall be weighed before use unless clearly weight marked with stated tolerance .
num admixtures num admixtures shall be used where required to achieve a low watercement ratio and impart good fluidity minimum bleed and volume stability or expansion to the grout to comply with subclause num .
for site batched grout admixtures shall be added on site during the mixing process and used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
for prebagged grout the admixtures shall form a preblended component .
admixtures are divided into two types expanding and nonexpanding and they may be used to obtain the required grout performance .
admixtures used in combination shall be checked for compatibility by the contractor and reported to the overseeing organisation for acceptance .
admixtures shall not contain substances in quantities that will adversely affect the grout or cause the grout to promote corrosion of the prestressing steel by rusting pitting stress corrosion or hydrogen embrittlement .
the admixture shall not segregate shall be uniform in colour and the composition shall not change .
admixtures shall comply with bs en num evidence of compliance with the harmonised part of bs en num with respect to product performance shall be demonstrated by ce marking and a declaration of performance where the declared performance for the essential characteristics given in annex za of that standard is equal or greater than the performance level required for the intended use of the admixture .
the optimum dosage of any admixture shall be determined by trial mixes with the cement to be used in the grout .
this dosage shall be expressed as percent by mass of the cement .
it shall be within the range recommended by the supplier and shall not exceed num by mass of the cement .
the method of measuring dosage and checking weights shall comply with this subclause or as otherwise agreed with the overseeing organisation .
num batching and mixing num all materials shall be batched by mass except the mixing water and liquid admixtures which may be batched by mass or by volume .
bagged materials shall be weighed before use unless clearly weight marked with stated tolerance .
the accuracy of batching shall be or have been in case of prebagged materials num for dry materials cement and admixtures num for mixing water of the quantities specified .
the total amount of mixing water shall include the water content of liquid admixtures .
where proprietary prebagged grouts are used they shall be mixed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
depending upon environmental or material influence e.g .
temperature configuration of the tendon and properties of the materials used the watercement ratio shall be kept as low as possible having regard to the required plastic properties of the grout see subclause num .
actual watercement ratios shall be recorded .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num the material shall be mixed to produce a homogeneous grout and kept in slow continuous agitation until pumped into the duct .
unless manufacturers specify otherwise water shall be added to the mixer first followed by the dry materials which may be added as a whole or in part in sequence until the total quantities are added .
the minimum mixing time determined from grouting trials shall be adhered to .
the temperature of freshly mixed grout shall be between numc and numc .
the maximum temperature may be increased provided trials demonstrate that the grout meets the requirements of subclause num .
num properties performance and testing of grout num num the properties and performance requirements for grout shall be in accordance with section num of bs en num .
the requirements for suitability testing shall be in accordance with section num of bs en num .
test methods are described in bs en num .
test requirements for grout during grouting shall be in accordance with section num of bs en num for execution class num .
num duct systems num num the system of ducts duct connectors grouting connections vents vent connections drains transitions to anchorages and caps for anchors shall form a complete encapsulation for the tendons which is resistant to the ingress of air and water .
ducts shall be of plastic and shall not degrade during the expected life of the structure .
the system shall be fully compatible with the prestressing anchorages couplers and other details .
where ducts are nonconductive metal parts of anchorages shall be electrically bonded to the adjacent reinforcement at each end of the tendon and electrical continuity of the structure over the length of the tendon shall be confirmed by testing .
all ducts shall be kept free from standing water at all times and be thoroughly clean before grouting .
the following air pressure tests shall be carried out on site unless specified otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
num duct assembly verification tests each complete duct system including vents anchorages anchorage caps and where appropriate couplers and their connections shall be airpressure tested before concreting .
testing to a pressure of num nmmnum unless otherwise specified in contract specific appendix num shall demonstrate that the system is undamaged and has been correctly assembled .
the testing shall demonstrate that a loss of pressure no greater than num occurs after num minutes .
the minimum manufactured wall thickness of ducting for internal tendons shall be num mm .
the duct rigidity and type and spacing of fixings and supports shall be such as to maintain line position and cross section shape during concreting .
local deformation of the duct at supports shall be avoided .
for external tendons the minimum wall thickness shall be num mm for durability or such thicker wall as required to withstand grouting pressures of the particular duct configuration .
the contractor shall provide evidence of testing to demonstrate the following requirements i wall thickness of ducts for tendons after tensioning of the tendons shall be not less than num mm unless specified otherwise in contract specific appendix num. ii for internal tendons the duct shall transmit full bond strength from the tendons to the surrounding concrete over a length no greater than num duct diameters or other such requirement as given in contract specific appendix num .
num vents vents providing an air passage of at least num mm internal diameter shall be provided at the anchorages and in the troughs and crests and beyond each intermediate crest in the direction of flow of the grout at the point where the duct is one half diameter lower than the crest but no further than num m from the crest unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num .
the maximum spacing of vents shall be num m unless specified otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
the vent diameter and spacing may be varied in fullscale trials demonstrating the suitability of alternatives .
the vents shall be rigidly connected to the ducts and shall be capable of being closed and reopened .
holes in the ducts shall be at least the internal diameter of the vents and shall be formed before pressure testing .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num for external tendons the arrangement and detailing of the vents at positions within deflectorsdiaphragms shall be proven by detailed testing .
vents on each duct shall be identified by labelling and shall be protected against damage at all times .
vents at high points shall extend to a minimum of num mm above the highest point on the duct profile unless described otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
num grouting equipment num num grouting equipment shall comply with the requirements of section num of bs en num .
the equipment shall be capable of maintaining pressure on completely grouted ducts and shall be fitted with a valve that can be locked off without loss of pressure in the duct .
during the grouting operation the contractor shall provide adequate flushingout plant to facilitate complete removal of the grout in the event of a breakdown of the grouting equipment or other disruption before the grouting operation has been completed .
standby and emergency equipment shall be provided .
all equipment shall be kept free from buildup of adhering materials .
num grouting procedures num num grouting procedures shall comply with the requirements of section num of bs en num .
grouting of the ducts shall be carried out within num days of installation of the tendon or as soon as is practicable thereafter in which case additional measures shall be taken to avoid corrosion of the prestressing steel .
the overseeing organisations written agreement to commence grouting operations shall be obtained .
during grouting operations once the fluidity of the grout flowing from the vents is the same as the grout being injected to within the limits specified in bs en num as per num of bs en num num litres of grout at each vent or such other requirement of contract specific appendix num shall be vented into a clean receptacle and then discarded .
the volume of all grout that is expelled shall be measured .
the opening shall be firmly closed .
all vents shall be closed in a similar manner one after another in the direction of the flow except that at intermediate crests the vents immediately downstream shall be closed before their associated crest vent .
the injection tubes shall then be sealed off under pressure with a pressure of num nmmnum being maintained for at least one minute .
grout vents at high points shall be reopened immediately after num minute while the grout is still fluid .
any escape of air water or grout shall be recorded and reported immediately to the overseeing organisation .
a further pumping of grout shall then be carried out to expel bleed water andor entrapped air .
this shall be carried out with the vents open one at a time sequentially in the direction of grouting with a further num litres being released at each vent .
in the event of disagreement over the quality of the vented grout testing shall be undertaken immediately by the contractor .
finally when all outlets are closed the grout pressure shall be maintained for at least one minute to confirm there is no unintended loss due to leakage .
the filled ducts shall not be subjected to shock or vibration for at least num hours from the time of grouting .
when the grout has set the grout vents shall be temporarily reopened .
if voids are apparent on inspecting vents at end caps the overseeing organisation may require all or some of the end caps to be removed to demonstrate that they are satisfactorily filled with grout .
end caps which have been removed shall then be replaced and permanently sealed against ingress of contaminants such sealing to be proved to the overseeing organisation .
if the method of demonstrating filling of the anchorage caps involves their removal a photographic record shall be made by the contractor .
the record shall clearly identify the individual anchorages and shall be included in the report to the overseeing organisation .
if in the opinion of the overseeing organisation there is doubt that the ducts or any part of the system are not satisfactorily filled with grout the overseeing organisation may require investigations to be carried out .
the contractor shall keep full records of grouting for each duct in accordance with the acceptance scheme requirements for the installation of posttensioning systems .
copies of these records shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation within num hours of completing grouting to each duct .
on completion of grouting grout vents shall be positively sealed and waterproofed by a means additional to but separate from the concrete waterproofing .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num num grouting during cold or hot weather num num requirements for grouting in cold or hot weather are given in num of bs en num .
when the ambient temperature is expected to fall below numc accurate records shall be kept by the contractor of the maximum and minimum air temperatures and the temperatures of the structural elements adjacent to the ducts to be grouted .
when heating is considered appropriate methods of heating shall be to the acceptance of the overseeing organisation .
ducts shall not be warmed with steam .
num void grouting num num void grouting is the injection of grout into voids left in tendon ducts after the original grout has hardened and shall not be confused with regrouting which means the reinjection of grout into ducts while the original grout is still fluid .
where the use of void grouting is proposed it shall be subject to the approval of the overseeing organisation through its departure from standard processes .
num num reinforcement materials num hot rolled and cold worked carbon steel bars num numall hot rolled and cold worked steel bars shall conform to bs en num and bs num grades bnumb or bnumc .
reinforcement shall be cut and bent in accordance with bs num .
the bars shall be obtained from and cut and bent by organisations holding a valid cares product acceptance scheme or equivalent scheme certificate of approval for the production and supply of steel for the reinforcement of concrete see also subclause num .
num num hot rolled and cold worked carbon steel bars shall conform to bs en num and bs num except that no bar shall contain a flash weld .
num steel wire num num steel wire shall only be used in precast concrete elements and shall be ribbed grade num conforming to bs en num and bs num .
steel wire shall have a minimum nominal diameter of num mm and shall be obtained from organisations holding a valid cares product acceptance scheme or equivalent scheme certificate of approval for the production and supply of steel wire see also subclause num .
num steel fabric num num steel fabric reinforcement shall be grades bnuma bnumb or bnumc conforming to bs en num and bs num .
steel fabric reinforcement shall be cut and bent in accordance with bs num .
steel fabric reinforcement shall have a minimum nominal bar size of num mm num mm for grade bnuma and shall be obtained from organisations holding a valid cares product acceptance scheme or equivalent scheme certificate of approval for the production and supply of steel fabric reinforcement see also subclause num .
steel fabric reinforcement shall be delivered to site in flat mats or prebent .
num stainless steel reinforcement num num all stainless steel reinforcement shall conform to bs num and shall be cut and bent in accordance with bs num and shall be obtained from organisations holding valid cares product acceptance scheme or equivalent scheme certificates of approval for the production and supply of stainless steel reinforcement see also subclause num .
num num stainless steel reinforcement shall be ribbed grade num conforming to bs num and the additional properties described in contract specific appendix num .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num num bond strength num num for hot rolled and cold worked carbon steel bars and for steel fabric reinforcement the bond property requirements of bs num shall be complied with based on the surface geometry requirements of that standard .
for steel wire the bond property requirements of bs num shall be complied with based on the surface geometry requirements of that standard .
num traceability and identification of reinforcement num num any product acceptance scheme shall ensure that materials used in reinforcing bars are traceable from their initial production casts through rolling and other treatments to delivery on site of straight bar or cut and bent steel .
the marking system on reinforcement shall be secure clear and unambiguous .
marking must also identify the grade of a reinforcement bar both in terms of strength and ductility .
materials complying with the requirements given in subclauses num to num and supplied in accordance with the cares product acceptance scheme or equivalent scheme shall be deemed to meet the requirements for traceability and identification of materials described above .
num num carbon steel reinforcement and stainless steel reinforcement bar schedule dimensions cutting and bending num num the bar schedules are based on the dimensions of the concrete and the nominal cover to the reinforcement shown on the drawings .
the reinforcement shall be cut and bent within the tolerances given in bs num but this shall not relieve the contractor of his responsibility for the correct fit of the reinforcement and the achievement of the required cover as described in clause num .
the mandrel diameter for bending bars shall comply with clause num of bs en num .
bending of reinforcement at temperatures below numc or in excess of numc shall not be carried out .
rebending of carbon steel bars and fabric reinforcement shall not to be permitted .
rebending of stainless steel reinforcement bars shall not be permitted .
site storage of reinforcement shall ensure that it is clear of the ground and covered with a waterproof sheeting or fixed cover in order to reduce contamination and excess corrosion prior to placement .
num num reinforcement fixing num num reinforcement shall be secured against displacement and tied together in accordance with bs num .
the positioning of reinforcement shall be within the tolerances given in subclause num .
bars in inner layers shall be located as shown on the drawings .
welding of carbon steel reinforcing bars for fixing purposes shall be in accordance with clause num .
welding of stainless steel reinforcement bars shall not be permitted .
cover shall be achieved by using spacers and chairs which meet the performance requirements of bs num .
they shall be designed so that they will not overturn or be displaced when the concrete is placed .
reinforcement spacers and chairs shall be fixed in accordance with bs num .
spacer blocks shall be factory produced proprietary products .
site produced or other nonproprietary spacers shall not be used .
wire cast in spacer block for the purpose of tying it to the reinforcement shall be as described below .
projecting ends of ties or clips shall not encroach into the concrete cover .
tying wires shall be num mm diameter stainless steel wire for bridge decks and exposed surfaces and any other locations as described in contract specific appendix num .
in other areas num mm soft annealed iron wire may be used .
stainless steel tying wire shall be used when tying stainless steel reinforcement .
the contractor shall provide access and carry out a cover measurement survey of all reinforced concrete surfaces within the numhour period following the removal of formwork .
the cover measurement survey shall be carried out on a num mm grid over the whole structure .
a record of the survey shall be kept and subsequently supplied to the overseeing organisation in accordance with the requirements of bd num .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num num num reinforcement surface condition num num immediately before concrete is placed around it reinforcement shall be free from mud oil paint retarder release agent loose rust loose mill scale snow ice grease or any other substance that can be shown to have an adverse chemical effect on the steel or concrete or to reduce the bond between the steel and the concrete .
num num reinforcement laps and joints num num laps and joints shall be made only where shown on the drawings except in the case where additional laps or splice bars are required and the overseeing organisations approval has been obtained .
num num where reinforcing bars are required to be coupled the coupling system shall have a current british board of agrment roads and bridges certificate or cares product acceptance scheme certificate of product assessment tanuma for use with highway structures or equivalent scheme and shall be sourced applied and processed from organisations holding relevant valid cares product acceptance scheme or equivalent scheme certificate of approval .
couplers shall comply with cover requirements of subclause num .
num num reinforcement welding num general num num welded reinforcement other than steel fabric reinforcement shall not be incorporated in the permanent works unless permitted in contract specific appendix num .
when required welding of reinforcing bars shall comply with the requirements of clause num of bs en num shall be carried out in accordance with bs en iso num and be subject to the demonstration of the satisfactory performance of trial joints .
the contractor shall demonstrate that at each location the fatigue life durability and other properties of the member are not adversely affected by the proposal .
site welding of stainless steel reinforcement bars shall not be permitted .
num strength of structural welded joints num num the strength of all structural welded joints shall be assessed following tests on trial joints to establish the minimum specified mechanical properties of the joint .
tests shall be carried out by an independent testing body appropriately accredited as described in clause num .
num num prestressing tendons materials num steel wires and strands num num steel wires and strands shall comply with bs num and shall be obtained from an organisation holding a valid cares product acceptance scheme certificate of approval for the production of prestressing steel wires and strands ptnumptnum or equivalent scheme .
num cold worked high tensile alloy bar num num cold worked high tensile alloy steel bars for prestressed concrete shall comply with bs num and shall be obtained from an organisation holding a valid cares product acceptance scheme certificate of approval for the production of prestressing steel bars ptnum or equivalent scheme .
num sampling and testing num num when it is proposed to use other than the lowest strength diameter wire or strand complying with bs num the following shall apply i a sample shall be taken from each reel of material proposed for use in the works .
ii a reel shall only be accepted if both the breaking load and the num proof load of the sample exceeds the specified characteristic loads given in bs num .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num num num where scheduled in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall arrange for samples of the steel intended for use in the permanent works to be tested at a testing laboratory appropriately accredited as described in clause num .
num num testing of prestressing steel bar wire and strand shall be performed in accordance with bs en iso num .
num num prestressing tendons handling and storage num num prestressing tendons shall not be mechanically damaged work hardened or heated during handling .
all prestressing tendons shall be stored clear of the ground and protected from the weather from splashes from any other materials and from splashes from the cutting operation of an oxyacetylene torch or arcwelding processes in the vicinity .
in no circumstances shall prestressing tendons after manufacture be subjected to any welding operation or heat treatment or metallic coating such as galvanizing .
this does not preclude cutting as described in clause num .
num num prestressing tendons surface condition num num prestressing tendons and internal and external surfaces of sheaths or ducts shall be clean and free from pitting at the time of incorporation in the works .
slight surface rusting is generally acceptable unless in environmentally severe sites marine or industrial .
num num prestressing tendons straightness num wire num low relaxation and normal relaxation wire shall be in coils of sufficiently large diameter to ensure that the wire pays off straight except that in cases where straight asdrawn wire is not essential wire in smalldiameter coils corresponding to the diameter of the blocks in the drawing machine may be used .
num strand num prestressing strand however manufactured shall be in coils of sufficiently large diameter to ensure that the strand pays off straight .
num bars num num prestressing bars as delivered shall be straight .
any small adjustments for straightness that are necessary on site shall be made by hand .
bars bent in the threaded portion shall be rejected .
any straightening of bars shall be carried out cold but at a temperature of not less than numc .
any necessary warming shall be by means of steam or hot water .
num num prestressing tendons cutting num num all cutting of wire strand or bar shall be carried out after gradual release of the tension in the tendons to be cut .
cutting shall be executed using either i a highspeed abrasive cutting wheel friction saw or equivalent mechanical method at not less than one tendon diameter from the anchor or ii an oxyacetylene cutting flame using excess oxygen to ensure a cutting rather than a melting action not less than num mm from the anchor .
the temperature of the tendon adjacent to the anchor shall not be greater than numc .
neither the flame nor splashes from the cutting operations shall come into contact with the anchorages or uncut tendons .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num num num prestressing tendons positioning of tendons sheaths and duct formers num num tendons sheaths and duct formers shall be accurately located and maintained in position both vertically and horizontally as shown on the drawings .
the position shall be within the tolerances given in subclause num .
where tendons are described in the contract as debonded from the concrete they shall be covered with suitable sleeves .
the ends of the sleeves shall be taped to the tendon to prevent the ingress of grout .
joints in sheaths shall be securely taped to prevent penetration of the duct by concrete or laitance and ends of ducts shall be sealed and protected after the stressing and grouting operations .
joints in adjacent sheaths shall be spaced at least num mm apart .
num num prestressing tendons tensioning num general num num all wires strands or bars stressed in one operation shall be taken where possible from the same parcel .
each cable shall be tagged with its number from which the coil numbers of the steel used can be identified .
cables shall not be kinked or twisted .
individual wires and strands for which extensions are to be measured shall be readily identifiable at each end of the member .
no strand that has become unravelled shall be used .
strands of the same diameter but with different strength grades must not be used in the same beam .
num tensioning apparatus num num the tensioning apparatus shall meet the following general requirements i the means of attachment of the tendon to the jack or tensioning device shall be safe and secure .
ii where two or more wires or strands are stressed simultaneously they shall be approximately of equal length between anchorage points at the datum of load and extension measurement .
the degree of variation shall be small compared with the expected extension .
iii the tensioning apparatus shall be such that a controlled total force is imposed gradually and no dangerous secondary stresses are induced in the tendons anchorage or concrete .
iv the force in the tendons during tensioning shall be measured by directreading load cells or obtained indirectly from gauges fitted in the hydraulic system to determine the pressure in the jacks .
facilities shall be provided for the measurement of the extension of the tendon and of any movement of the tendon in the gripping devices .
the load measuring device shall be calibrated to an accuracy within num and checked at frequent intervals .
the valid calibration records shall be available on site before tensioning starts .
elongation of the tendon shall be measured to an accuracy within num or num mm whichever is the greater .
v the tensioning equipment shall be calibrated before the tensioning operation and subsequently at frequent intervals .
num pretensioning num numwhere pretensioning methods are used the tension shall be fully maintained by some positive means during the period between tensioning and transfer .
the transfer of stress shall take place slowly to minimize shock .
i straight tendons .
in the longline method of pretensioning sufficient locator plates shall be distributed throughout the length of the bed to ensure that the wires or strands are maintained in their proper position during concreting .
where a number of units are made in line they shall be free to slide in the direction of their length and thus permit transfer of the prestressing force to the concrete along the whole line .
in the individual mould system the moulds shall be sufficiently rigid to provide the reaction to the prestressing force without distortion .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num ii deflected tendons .
where possible the mechanisms for holding down or holding up tendons shall ensure that the part in contact with the tendon is free to move in the line of the tendon so that frictional losses are nullified .
if however a system is used that develops a frictional force this force shall be determined by test and due allowance made .
for single tendons the deflector in contact with the tendon shall have a radius of not less than num times the tendon diameter for wire or num times the tendon diameter for strand and the total angle of deflection shall not exceed num .
the transfer of the prestressing force to the concrete shall be effected in conjunction with the release of holddown and holdup forces .
unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num concrete shall not be stressed until it has reached at least the age at which num test results from specimens taken from it each obtained from the average of two test cubes made from one concrete sample attain the specified characteristic compressive strength at the time when the concrete is subjected to the prestressing force .
testing shall be as described in annex b.num of bs num and annex b of bs en num .
the samples shall be taken as described in bs en num and the test cubes shall be made and tested as described in bs en num and bs en num respectively .
they shall be cured in similar conditions to the concrete to which they relate .
the contractor shall cast and test sufficient cubes to demonstrate that the required strength of the concrete at transfer has been reached .
num posttensioning num num in addition to the present clause the installation of posttensioning systems shall comply with the requirements of clause num. i arrangement of tendons .
where wires strands or bars in a tendon are not stressed simultaneously the use of spacers shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the system manufacturer .
ii anchorages .
prestressing anchorages for posttensioning systems shall be in accordance with clause num of bs en num and shall be supplied by organisation certificated with the cares product acceptance scheme for the production and supply of prestressing anchorages for posttensioning systems ptnum or an equivalent scheme .
anchorages shall comply with the minimum performance requirements of bs en num .
for each anchorage system used in the works the characteristic value for anchorage efficiency shall be not less than num .
proprietary anchorages shall be handled and used strictly in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and recommendations .
iii deflected tendons .
the deflector in contact with the tendon shall have a radius of not less than num times the diameter of the tendon and the total angle of deflection shall not exceed num. iv tensioning procedure .
before tensioning the contractor shall demonstrate that all tendons are free to move in the ducts unless the geometry of the ducts makes this impracticable .
tensioning shall be carried out in such a manner that the stress in the tendons increases at a gradual and steady rate .
tensioning shall not be carried out at a temperature below numc .
unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num concrete shall not be stressed until it has reached at least the age at which num test results from specimens taken from it each obtained from the average of two test cubes made from one concrete sample attain the specified characteristic compressive strength at the time when the concrete is subjected to the prestressing force .
testing shall be as described in annex b.num of bs num and annex b of bs en num .
the samples shall be taken as described in bs en num and the test cubes shall be made and tested as described in bs en num and bs en num respectively .
they shall be cured in similar conditions to the concrete to which they relate .
the contractor shall cast and test sufficient cubes to demonstrate that the required strength of the concrete at transfer has been reached .
the contractor shall ensure that those carrying out the stressing are provided with particulars of the required tendon loads order of stressing and extensions .
allowance shall be made during stressing for the friction in the jack and in the anchorage although the former is not necessary when using load cells and for drawin of the tendon during anchoring .
stressing shall continue until the required extension and tendon load are reached .
the extension shall allow for any drawin of the tendon occurring at a nonjacking end but measurement shall not commence until any slack in the tendon has been taken up .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num immediately after anchoring the forces in the prestressing tendons shall not exceed num of their characteristic strength .
during stressing the value may exceed num of their characteristic strength but shall not exceed num .
after the tendons have been anchored the force exerted by the tensioning apparatus shall be decreased gradually and steadily so as to avoid shock to the tendon or the anchorage .
full records shall be kept of all tensioning operations including the measured extensions pressuregauge or loadcell readings and the amount of drawin at each anchorage .
when requested by the overseeing organisation copies of these records shall be provided within num hours of each tensioning operation .
tendons shall not be cut within num days of their being grouted however in the case of deviation from the planned performance during tensioning cutting of the tendons grouting and work which can impair the retensioning shall not take place until the causes have been investigated and revised tensioning report has been approved .
num num prestressing tendons protection and bond num num the prestressing tendons shall be protected in their permanent positions from both mechanical damage and corrosion as described in contract specific appendix num .
grout and grouting operations for filling ducts and anchorages of posttensioned bonded tendons internal or external shall be in accordance with clause num .
grease and wax for the protection of sheaths and anchorages of unbonded tendons shall be in accordance with clauses num and num of bs en num .
vents grout inlets and outlets and anchorages shall be sealed to assure corrosion protection equivalent to that provided along the tendon .
anchorage zones shall be protected from drainage water .
unbonded tendons shall be sealed throughout their length against penetration of moisture .
num num stainless steel dowels materials num num dowels shall be made from steel designation num or num and grade num or num steel bars complying with bs num .
num num inspection and testing of structures and components num general num num inspection and testing of structures and components shall be in accordance with bs en num for the designated execution class see clause num and carried out as described in contract specific appendix num and as scheduled in contract specific appendices num andor num .
the documentation of inspection shall be in accordance with bs en num and this specification .
num num geometrical tolerances num general num num the tolerances given in clauses num to num of bs en num and in its annex have been derived specifically for buildings and shall not be applied to highway works .
instead the requirements of this clause apply .
the tolerances given in this clause are not cumulative .
further project specific tolerances shall be as described in contract specific appendix num and on the drawings .
num reference system num num the location of the reference grids or primary lines and levels for the overall positioning of the works shall be agreed between the overseeing organisation and the contractor before the works are set out .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num num sections num num the dimensions of crosssection the cover and position of reinforcement and prestressing tendons shall not deviate more than the values given in figure num .
with the exception of case d in figure num these values do not apply to precast concrete elements which shall conform to the provisions for geometrical tolerances in bs en num andor to the relevant product standard as appropriate see subclause num .
no .
type of deviation description permitted deviation  a crosssectional dimensions li length of cross sectional dimension applicable to beams slabs and columns for li num mm li num mm li num mm with linear interpolation for intermediate values num mm num mm num mm b location of ordinary reinforcement cross section cmin required minimum cover cn nominal cover cmin minus c actual cover permitted deviation from cn h height of crosssection h num mm h num mm h num mm with linear interpolation for intermediate values plus num mm plus num mm plus num mm all values of h minus cdev a requirement cn plus c cn minus a cdev can be taken equal to num mm as recommended in the uk national annex to bs en num num and bs en num .
see ng num and table ng num for guidance on cover .
note permitted plusdeviations for cover to reinforcement for foundations and concrete members in foundations may be increased by num mm .
the given minusdeviations apply .
manual of contract documents for highway works august num no .
type of deviation description permitted deviation  a crosssectional dimensions li length of crosssectional dimension applicable to beams slabs and columns for li num mm li num mm li num mm with linear interpolation for intermediate values num mm num mm num mm h num mm h num mm h num mm with linear interpolation for intermediate values plus num mm plus num mm plus num mm location of ordinary reinforcement cross section cmin required minimum cover cn nominal cover cmin minus c actual cover  permitted deviation from cn h height of crosssection all values of h minus cdev a b requirement cn plus c cn minus a cdev can be taken equal to num mm as recommended in the uk national annex to bs en num and bs en num .
see ng num and table ng num for guidance on cover .
note permitted plusdeviations for cover to reinforcement for foundations and concrete members in foundations may be increased by num mm .
the given minusdeviations apply .
manual of contract documents for highway works august num no .
type of deviation description permitted deviation  a crosssectional dimensions li length of crosssectional dimension applicable to beams slabs and columns for li num mm li num mm li num mm with linear interpolation for intermediate values num mm num mm num mm h num mm h num mm h num mm with linear interpolation for intermediate values plus num mm plus num mm plus num mm location of ordinary reinforcement cross section cmin required minimum cover cn nominal cover cmin minus c actual cover  permitted deviation from cn h height of crosssection all values of h minus cdev a b requirement cn plus c cn minus a cdev can be taken equal to num mm as recommended in the uk national annex to bs en num and bs en num .
see ng num and table ng num for guidance on cover .
note permitted plusdeviations for cover to reinforcement for foundations and concrete members in foundations may be increased by num mm .
the given minusdeviations apply .
num figure num permitted sectional deviations volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num num c lapjoints l lap length num l d location of prestressing duct longitudinal section y intended distance to centreline of duct in plan or elevation num mm num figure num permitted sectional deviations continued num permitted deviations at support bearings num num the position of bearings at supports shall not deviate more than the values given in figure num .
no .
type of deviation description permitted deviation  a position of bearing axis of support when structural bearings are used l intended distance from all edges the larger value taken with the negative sign between lnum and num mm and not greater than num mm but for columns not greater than the larger value taken with the negative sign between num mm and hnum where h free height of column num figure num permitted deviations at support bearings manual of contract documents for highway works august num c lapjoints l lap length num l d location of prestressing duct longitudinal section y intended distance to centreline of duct in plan or elevation nummm figure num permitted sectional deviations permitted deviations at support bearings num the position of bearings at supports shall not deviate more than the values given in figure num .
no .
type of deviation description permitted deviation  a position of bearing axis of support when structural bearings are used l intended distance from all edges the larger value taken with the negative sign between lnum and nummm and not greater than num mm but for columns not greater than the larger value taken with the negative sign between num mm and hnum where h free height of column figure num permitted deviations at support bearings manual of contract documents for highway works august num c lapjoints l lap length num l d location of prestressing duct longitudinal section y intended distance to centreline of duct in plan or elevation nummm figure num permitted sectional deviations permitted deviations at support bearings num the position of bearings at supports shall not deviate more than the values given in figure num .
no .
type of deviation description permitted deviation  a position of bearing axis of support when structural bearings are used l intended distance from all edges the larger value taken with the negative sign between lnum and nummm and not greater than num mm but for columns not greater than the larger value taken with the negative sign between num mm and hnum where h free height of column figure num permitted deviations at support bearings manual of contract documents for highway works august num c lapjoints l lap length num l d location of prestressing duct longitudinal section y intended distance to centreline of duct in plan or elevation nummm figure num permitted sectional deviations permitted deviations at support bearings num the position of bearings at supports shall not deviate more than the values given in figure num .
no .
type of deviation description permitted deviation  a position of bearing axis of support when structural bearings are used l intended distance from all edges the larger value taken with the negative sign between lnum and nummm and not greater than num mm but for columns not greater than the larger value taken with the negative sign between num mm and hnum where h free height of column figure num permitted deviations at support bearings volume num series num specification for highway works structural concrete amendment december num numf num permitted deviations for columns and walls num num the dimensions of columns and walls shall not deviate more than the values given in figure num .
no .
type of deviation description permitted deviation  a inclination of a column or wall h free height the larger of hnum or num mm b curvature of a column or wall h free height the larger of hnum or num mm num figure num permitted deviations for columns and walls manual of contract documents for highway works august num permitted deviations for columns and walls num the dimensions of columns and walls shall not deviate more than the values given in figure num .
no .
type of deviation description permitted deviation  a inclination of a column or wall h free height the larger of hnum or nummm b curvature of a column or wall h free height the larger of hnum or nummm figure num permitted deviations for columns and walls manual of contract documents for highway works august num permitted deviations for columns and walls num the dimensions of columns and walls shall not deviate more than the values given in figure num .
no .
type of deviation description permitted deviation  a inclination of a column or wall h free height the larger of hnum or nummm b curvature of a column or wall h free height the larger of hnum or nummm figure num permitted deviations for columns and walls series num structural steelwork contents clause title page num num general num num num scope num num num normative references num num num terms and definitions num num num specifications and documentation num num num constituent products num num num preparation and assembly num num num welding num num num mechanical fastening num num num erection num num num surface treatment num num num geometrical tolerances num num num inspection testing and correction num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highways works amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork structural steelwork num num general num num introduction and basis of execution num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num num the contractor shall supply and install all structural steelwork in accordance with this series .
any requirement to be fulfilled by the constructor in this series and appendix num is a requirement on the contractor .
num num the terms execution and constructor have been used throughout this series to be compatible with the terms used in bs en numanum .
num num the basis for the execution of structural steelwork in this series shall be bs en numanum with options and requirements described in this series see num .
num num clause numbering num num the clause and subclause numbering and headings in clauses num to num in this series adopt those in bs en numanum clauses num to num respectively except that the clause numbers are prefixed by num for clauses num to num and num for clauses num num and num .
num num the numbering of paragraphs in this series bears no specific relationship to the order of paragraphs presented in bs en numanum .
num num cross reference to a specific paragraph within this series is by subclause number followed by the paragraph number in brackets where appropriate .
num num options and requirements num num where the requirements specified in bs en numanum are to apply to this series without amendment the heading of the related subclause in this series is followed by the abbreviation aen i.e .
as in bs en numanum .
num num where there is a choice between two or more different requirements in a sub clause in bs en num numanum the selected requirements shall be as described in this series .
all other requirements in that subclause in bs en numanum shall apply to this series unless otherwise described in this series .
num num where requirements are described in this series the requirements in the related subclause in bs en numanum shall also apply to this series unless otherwise described in this series .
num num where appendix num shall be referred to for any contract specific requirements the heading of the subclause in this series is followed by the abbreviation num .
num num where a requirement in bs en numanum is qualified in that standard by the words unless otherwise specified the requirement shall not be amended unless it is described otherwise in this series or in appendix num .
num num qualification of constructors num num in order to satisfy the general assumptions stated in bs en numanum num relating to the execution of structures designed to the eurocodes all structural steelwork executed in accordance with this series shall be undertaken by a constructor which has the necessary technical capability and competence for the type and value of work to be undertaken .
these requirements will be satisfied by registration and audit through a registration scheme such as the register of qualified steelwork contractors scheme for bridgeworks rqsc see www .
steelconstruction.org to the levels appropriate for the value and technical complexity of the structural steelwork .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num the constructor shall undertake a review to confirm that their technical capability and competence is sufficient for the execution of the works described in appendix num .
the review shall be documented and shall be submitted for the approval of the overseeing organisation in advance of execution .
the documented review shall be treated as an execution record and shall form part of the execution documentation see num and num .
the review shall include supporting evidence that shall include but not be limited to details demonstrating compliance with num num and num num type and size of construction works product forms and thicknesses material grades execution processes level of welding control in accordance with the relevant part of bs en iso num and quantified service categories .
num num quality management schemes num num execution of steelwork num num in order to satisfy the requirements stated in bs en numanum num relating to quality management measures in the execution of structures designed to the eurocodes the constructor shall have an independently certified quality management system complying with en iso num in place for all structural steelwork executed in accordance with this series .
this requirement will be satisfied by the constructor being registered to national highway sector scheme num the execution of steelwork in transportation infrastructure assets as described in appendix a .
num num supply of mechanical fasteners num num the requirements described in num num for the verification of mechanical fasteners will be satisfied through mechanical fasteners being supplied by an organisation registered to national highway sector scheme num stocking and distribution activities for mechanical fasteners as described in appendix a .
num num ce marking num num general num num conformity assessment of structural steel components shall be undertaken in accordance with bs en numanum .
a declaration of performance under a ce mark in accordance with the construction products regulations shall be provided for all structural steel components .
the declaration of performance shall include a declaration of structural characteristics in accordance with num num .
num num declaration of structural characteristics num num in the property declaration for structural characteristics of a structural steel component the entry for manufacturing shall read as follows according to component specification x which specifies the relevant en num requirements and execution classes .
where x is the component specification reference defined in num .
num num component specification reference num num num the component specification reference to be adopted for the conformity assessment of a structural steel component shall be as identified in appendix num .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num component specification num num the component specification for a structural steel component shall comprise the following this series appendix num .
num num scope num num this series shall apply to the execution of all permanent structural steelwork and to all temporary structural steelwork required for the execution of the permanent structural steelwork .
num num normative references num num general num num for normative references not given in bs en numanum see appendix f. num num constituent products num num steels aen num num steel castings aen num num welding consumables aen num num mechanical fasteners num num for normative references not given in bs en numanum see appendix f. num num high strength cables aen num num structural bearings num num for normative references not given in bs en numanum see appendix f. num num preparation aen num num welding num num for normative references not given in bs en numanum see appendix f. num num testing num num for normative references not given in bs en numanum see appendix f. num num erection aen num num corrosion protection aen num num tolerances aen num num miscellaneous aen amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num terms and definitions num num quantified service category category that characterises a component or structure or part thereof in terms of the circumstances of its use within specified limits of static and cyclic stressing .
quantified service category is designated by one of the symbols fnum fnum fnum fnum fnum or fnum .
see also num and num num num num factory production control abbreviated to fpc in this series the documented permanent and internal control of production in a factory in accordance with bs en numanum num .
num num inspection lot for mechanical fasteners as defined in bs en iso num num num specifications and documentation num num execution specification num num general num num num the execution specification for structural steelwork shall comprise the following this series appendix num .
num num certain requirements in this series are differentiated on the basis of quantified service category see num num .
these are given in the following subclauses num surface conditions of steel products num special properties of steel products num identification marks num free edge hardness num execution of holing num cut outs num qualification of welding procedures num temporary attachments num single side weld permanent backing num execution of welding num acceptance criteria for fpc num scope of specific weld inspection num final visual acceptance criteria for welds num final mt pt ut and rt acceptance criteria for welds num production tests on welding num num where requirements are differentiated on the basis of quantified service category the quantified service category for a component or structure or part thereof is identified in appendix num .
num num execution classes num num certain technical requirements in bs en numanum are differentiated on the basis of execution class .
where this series including appendix num specifies a requirement which is common to more than one execution class all relevant execution classes are indicated .
for example if the specified requirement is the same for excnum excnum and excnum this is designated excnum .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork amendment august num num num num preparation grades aen num num geometrical tolerances aen num num constructors documentation num num quality documentation num num quality documentation shall conform to the requirements for excnum .
num num quality plan num num a quality plan for the execution of the works is required and shall include the items recommended in bs en numanum annex c and num .
num num the execution records shall include the constructors drawings including electronic files for the execution of all components .
num num the constructors drawings including electronic files shall include the quantified service category and unique component mark information .
num num constructors drawings in this series shall be treated as fabrication drawings in accordance with series num .
num num execution records described in this series shall be treated as quality records in accordance with series num .
num num safety of erection works aen num num execution documentation aen num num constituent products num num general aen num num num identification inspection documents and traceability num num inspection documents for steel grades snum jr and jo shall conform to the requirements for excnum in bs en numanum table num note a .
num num stages of traceability shall conform to the requirements for excnum .
num num specialist proprietary andor bespoke products incorporating nonstandardised features components or methods of manufacture eg castings forgings cables and their terminations energy absorbing devices mechanical components such as movement joints and major bearings shall be uniquely traceable .
num num the identification of different grades andor qualities of constituent products shall conform to the requirements for excnum .
num num structural steel products num num general num num num option num in bs en num num allowing charpy quality to be verified at a temperature above the lowest test temperature shall not be adopted .
num num thickness tolerances num num thickness tolerance class a shall be used .
volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num surface conditions num num num for plates and wide flats excnum shall apply and more stringent surface conditions shall be required as follows .
class anum and class bnum to bs en num shall apply in all circumstances except that class anum and class bnum may be adopted where steels are not specified to bs en num the quantified service category is fnum or less reports on weld repairs are submitted ut and mpi are used for inspection of weld repairs and weld repairs are rechecked on delivery for quantified service categories fnum and above .
num num for sections the special restrictions on surface imperfections and repair shall conform to bs en num num as follows cracks shells and seams in sections shall be repaired in all circumstances class cnum and class dnum require no special restrictions class cnum and class dnum shall have the same restrictions in use as for plates to class anum and class bnum in num class cnum and class dnum shall be restricted to quantified service category fnum .
num num steel with pitted surfaces ie rust grades c and d according to bs en iso num shall not be used .
num num special properties num num num the following requirements shall apply to cross plates in welded cruciform and welded tee joints transmitting primary stresses through the plate thickness on a band of width four times the thickness of the plate each side of the proposed attachment .
for quantified service category fnum the internal discontinuity quality class shall conform to the requirements for excnum for quantified service category fnum and above bs en num internal discontinuity class snum shall be used num num flange or web plates close to bearing diaphragms and or single sided bearing stiffeners where attached by welding shall be checked for conformance to bs en num internal discontinuity quality class snum in the areas defined in bs en numanum num .
num num the precautions necessary to avoid lamellar tearing in tee cruciform and corner joints shall be decided by the constructor whether or not improved deformation properties have been specified for the through plates .
num num steel castings aen num num num welding consumables num num as an alternative to the consumables in bs en numanum table num cmn consumables may be used for welding steels supplied to en num but only for single run fillet welds not exceeding nummm leg length using processes num and num butt welds using one run only per side the body of multipass butt welds except for the outer nummm thick surface zones of the cap root and ends excluding any overfill .
the surface zones shall be deposited using consumable conforming to options num num or num of bs en numanum table num .
see also bs en numanum num .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num mechanical fasteners num num general aen num num terminology num num the partturn method of tightening of preloaded fasteners is similar to the combined method in bs en numanum .
however it is restricted to grade num assemblies but class ko assemblies may also be used .
it has reduced torque values in the first step and higher nut rotations in the second step see num .
num num structural bolting assemblies for nonpreloaded applications aen num num num structural bolting assemblies for preloading num num num the following products shall be used for preloaded bolt assemblies using all tightening methods except the hrc method bolt assemblies conforming to bs en num hr type nuts lubricated by the manufacturer after the nuts have been tapped and if relevant after any coating passivation process has been completed .
num num electroplated property class num bolt assemblies shall not be used .
num num cleaning of property class num bolts prior to hot dip galvanising shall be by blast cleaning and not by pickling .
num num nuts of property class num shall be used with bolts of property class num .
num num bolts of property class num shall not be used for assemblies tightened by the part turn method see num num and num .
num num direct tension indicators aen num num weather resistant assemblies num num the chemical composition of weather resistant assemblies shall comply with the requirements for type num fasteners to astm standard anum grade a or equivalent .
num num foundation bolts num num num reinforcing steels shall not be used for foundation bolts carrying applied tension forces .
num num locking devices aen num num num washers aen num num plain washers aen num num taper washers aen num num hot rivets aen num num fasteners for thin gauge components aen num num num special fasteners aen num num num delivery and identification num num see num num .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num studs and shear connectors num num headed stud connectors shall be type sdnum in accordance with bs en iso num .
num num grouting materials num num num bedding mortars shall conform to the requirements of series num clause num .
num num expansion joints for bridges num num expansion joints shall conform to the requirements of series num clause num and contract specific appendix num .
num num high strength cables rods and terminations aen num num num structural bearings num num num the guidance given in pd num on the execution of bearings shall be followed where relevant .
num num preparation and assembly num num general aen num num identification num num num identification of components shall conform to the requirements for excnum .
num num hard stamps punched or drilled marks shall not be used for zones with a quantified service category of fnum and above .
num num soft or low stress stamps may be used for zones with a quantified service category of fnum and below .
num num no method of marking involving deformation or removal of metal shall be used for zones with a quantified service category of fnum and above .
num num handling and storage aen num num cutting num num general aen num num shearing and nibbling aen num num thermal cutting num num the quality of cut surfaces shall conform to the requirements for excnum .
num num hardness of free edge surfaces num num num free edge surfaces with hardnesses exceeding numhvnum values shall be ground linished or machined until sufficient material has been removed such that the numhvnum limit is not exceeded subject to the exceptions in num .
num num unless prohibited in appendix num the hardness limit described in num need not apply to machine plasma cut edges where a the steel grade does not exceed snum b plain edge surfaces are not subject to a quantified service category exceeding fnum subject to c c edge surfaces within nummm of stress raising features such as reentrant corners openings weld terminations on the edge that are not subject to a quantified service category exceeding fnum amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork d edge surfaces are not subject to subsequent cold forming unless fully fused over the full length and width by subsequent welding and e procedure tests have been carried out to verify that the proposed method of surface preparation of the plasma cut edge can readily achieve the cleanliness and profile described in series num where corrosion protection of the edges is required .
num num shaping aen num num general aen num num hot forming aen num num flame straightening num num a suitable procedure shall be developed in accordance with the requirements for excnum and shall include the following the materials being used for procedure approval purposes shall be of a higher grade and subgrade than that used in the component being straightened for destructive tests any reduction in tensile strength shall not exceed num of the original value and any reduction in charpy energy shall not exceed num of the original value at the same test temperature .
num num cold forming aen num num num holing num num dimensions of holes aen num num num tolerances on hole diameter for bolts and pins aen num num execution of holing num num for material nummm thick or less with a quantified service category of less than fnum round holes for fasteners or pins may be formed by punching without reaming as permitted for excnum .
for material nummm thick or less with a quantified service category of fnum and above round holes for fasteners or pins shall be drilled or be punched at least nummm undersize in diameter and reamed after punching .
num num for material thicker than nummm round holes for fasteners or pins shall be drilled or be punched at least nummm undersize in diameter and reamed after punching in accordance with the requirements for excnum .
num num for slotted holes the methods given in table num may be used up to the maximum quantified service categories and thicknesses given in table num .
num table num method for slotted holes method maximum quantified service category maximum thickness mm punching and hand thermal cutting fnum punching in a single operation thermal cutting by machine fnum num drilling andor milling fnum amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num cut outs num num num the minimum radius for reentrant corners and notches in all thicknesses of material shall conform to the requirements for excnum except for quantified service category fnum and above when the requirement for excnum shall apply when the stress direction is in the plane of the radius subject to a smaller radius not being described in appendix num .
if form b in bs en numanum num is to be used the design shall be verified for the loss of section .
num num the restriction on the use of punched cut outs required for excnum shall apply where quantified service categories fnum and above are required materials conforming to bs en num are used .
num num full contact bearing surfaces aen num num num assembly num num num elongations of holes by drifting shall be limited according to the tolerance class for excnum when applied to nonpreloaded connected parts .
the tolerance class for excnum shall apply to preloaded connected parts .
num num all connections for temporary components shall be executed in accordance with the requirements of this series including those described in appendix num according to the quantified service category appropriate to the connection location .
see also num num num connections for temporary components shall not result in the removal or addition of permanent material or introduce permanent notches unless permitted by appendix num .
num num assembly check num num num where a full or staged trial assembly is undertaken the correction of hole alignment by reaming of bolted splices selection of pack thicknesses correction of weld preparation fitup and correct positioning of temporary alignment cleats shall be carried out at that time .
num num the following shall be taken into account support of the assembly parts to minimise dead weight deflections correct reestablishment of the alignment of assembly parts in staged trial assembly control of or allowance for differential temperature distributions throughout the steelwork if exposed to direct sunlight when surveys are made unique marking for identification and orientation of individual members .
num num welding num num general num num num the bs en iso num quality requirements shall conform to the requirements for excnum unless excnum is required by appendix num .
num num permanent welds that are not described in appendix num shall not be permitted .
num num welding plan num num requirements for a welding plan aen num num content of a welding plan aen num num welding processes aen num num qualification of welding procedures and welding personnel amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num qualification of welding procedures num num general num num where tack welds are used in the root of a preparation a weld procedure specification wps shall be produced for this specific condition .
the tolerances on size and length of the tack weld and any subsequent profiling requirements shall be specified in the wps .
the wps shall state whether the tack weld is intended to be fully remelted by the root run or not .
num num if the tack weld is to be removed prior to welding of the joint the minimum permitted size of tack weld shall be subject to a welding procedure test in accordance with bs en iso num .
num num if the tack weld is to be left in the joint the maximum cross section of tack weld shall be used and the root and subsequent passes shall be deposited until such time as the root pass is fully covered .
the full length of the tack weld location shall be subjected to a welding procedure test in accordance with bs en iso num see table num footnote a .
num num the tack weld shall be assumed to be a fillet weld for the purposes of qualification .
num num qualification of welding procedures for processes num num num num and num num num methods of qualification shall be in accordance with those permitted for excnum in bs en num numanum table num .
num num the weld procedure qualification acceptance levels in bs en iso num are less stringent in some respects than those required for fpc for excnum see bs en numanum num .
also for the highest quantified service categories the acceptance limits for certain imperfection types are more stringent than for excnum see num and num .
if either of these criteria are being used for fpc the relevant weld procedure qualification acceptance levels shall be amended .
existing procedures qualified to bs en iso num shall be requalified accordingly by reference to the original test results if possible .
if this can not be done or the original results do not conform to the more stringent requirements the relevant qualification tests for evaluation of imperfections shall be repeated .
num num joints with restricted access for welding eg slot and plug welds shallow angle branch connections shall be subject to procedure testing in accordance with bs en iso num .
num num qualification of welding procedures for other welding processes processes num num num num num num num and num num num welding procedure qualification for welding process reference numbers num and num shall conform to the requirements for excnum in bs en numanum table num note a .
num num validity of a welding procedure qualification num num welding production tests shall be carried out in accordance with the qualification standard for the process concerned .
num num welders and welding operators num num welders shall be qualified by specific test for welding of joints with restricted access see num num .
num num welding coordination num num welding coordination shall conform to the requirements for excnum .
num num preparation and execution of welding num num joint preparation num num general amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num where prefabrication primers are to be left on fusion faces the weld procedures shall be tested in accordance with the requirements for excnum .
num num hollow sections aen num num storage and handling of welding consumables aen num num weather protection aen num num assembly for welding num num the guidance on preparation assembly and welding of joints in hollow sections given in bs en num numanum annex e shall be applied .
in addition for the assembly of hollow sections the following shall apply in the case of a full penetration butt weld where access is restricted a preproduction welding test conforming to bs en iso num shall be conducted to demonstrate that the full penetration butt weld can be achieved in the case of fillet welded joints with root gaps compensation shall be made for loss of throat and leg length see bs en numanum num .
num num preheating aen num num temporary attachments num num num temporary welded attachments shall not be permitted in zones of quantified service categories fnum and above or within nummm of an edge or where described in appendix num .
num num the use of temporary welded attachments shall be specified as required for excnum .
num num restrictions on the removal of temporary welded attachments shall be in accordance with the requirements for excnum for thermal cutting and chipping except that thermal cutting may be used provided that the finished cut surface is at least nummm proud of the permanent member surface .
remnants of temporary materials proud of the permanent member surface shall be removed by grinding parallel to the member axis and the ground surface checked for freedom from cracking using magnetic particle testing .
num num tack welds num tack welds shall be made using qualified welding procedures as required for excnum see num .
num num fillet welds aen num num general aen num num fillet welds for thin gauge components aen num num butt welds num num general num num num runon and runoff pieces shall be used on all butt welds and shall conform to the requirements for excnum where access allows .
num num where a weld surface is required to be ground or machined flush this shall be executed prior to non destructive testing .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num single sided welds num num num permanent steel backing shall only be used if described in appendix num .
the continuity of permanent steel backing shall conform to the requirements for excnum .
the execution of the continuity weld shall depend upon the quantified service category related to stresses parallel to the axis of the backing component as follows fnum no additional requirements fnum to fnum make continuous by full penetration butt weld at any stage followed by surface crack detection fnum to fnum make continuous by full penetration butt weld followed by flush grinding and surface crack detection before assembly .
num num back gouging aen num num welds on steels with improved atmospheric corrosion resistance num num the requirements for the consumables to be used for welds on steels with improved atmospheric corrosion resistance are given in num .
num num branch connections aen num num stud welding num num with reference to bs en iso num annex b table b.num the comprehensive quality requirements in accordance with iso num shall be adopted .
num num slot and plug welds num num num the depthtominimum width ratio of the slot or plug hole shall not exceed that used for the weld procedure qualification test .
num num spot welds for thin gauge components num num arc spot welds aen num num num resistance spot welds aen num num other weld types aen num num num post weld heat treatment aen num num execution of welding num num num the requirements for removal of weld spatter shall conform to the requirements for excnum except where permitted in tables num and num .
the requirements for excnum shall apply to exposed steels to bs en num and bs en num .
num num the direction of grinding of the surfaces of completed welds shall be parallel to the stress direction for welds with a quantified service category of fnum and above .
num num welding of bridge decks aen num num acceptance criteria num num acceptance criteria for fpc shall not be to a lower standard than that required for specific testing of the work taking into account the method of testing and maximum quantified service category required for the work see num and num for acceptance levels for specific testing .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num welding of stainless steels num num amendments to en num requirements aen num num amendments to en num requirements num num num coloured oxide films shall be removed .
num num copper backing shall be nickel or chromium plated and when high heat input is used it shall be water cooled .
num num welding dissimilar steels aen num num num mechanical fastening num num general aen num num use of bolting assemblies num num general num num num welding of nuts bolts or washers shall not be used on bolt assemblies above property class num .
welding of property class num nuts bolts and washers shall only be undertaken where described in appendix num and shall be subject to the requirements in num num and bs en numanum num .
num num bolts aen num num num nuts aen num num washers num num num washers shall be placed under the nut or head of the bolt in nonpreloaded assemblies whichever is rotated .
num num tightening of nonpreloaded bolts aen num num num preparation of contact surfaces in slip resistant connections num num num all surfaces which overlap each other in the final assembled connection excluding any painted edge strip around the perimeter of the connection described in series num num shall be deemed to be contact surfaces .
num num the specified surface treatment applied to the friction surfaces shall be maintained until the surfaces are brought together and the connection assembled .
num num tightening of preloaded bolts num num general num num num at the snug tight stage the exposed surfaces of the components being connected shall be aligned within nummm where they emerge from beneath the cover plates at the joint plane .
this is subject to the tolerances of thickness difference between the two components including any packing plates in bs en numanum num also being met .
if this is exceeded steel packing plates shall be used .
num num in the case of preloaded lap joints subject to axial load only in the plane of the friction surfaces the out of plane bending stiffness of cover plates may need to be limited to achieve adequate contact between friction surfaces .
measures to limit the outofplane bending stiffness of cover plates shall be as described in appendix num .
additional contact surfaces shall be treated as contact surfaces in slip resistant connections .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num where a connection is designed to transfer applied tensile forces through a flanged and bolted end plate as a minimum the area of the mating surfaces in direct line with the tension member cross section shall be in contact when all bolts are snug tight .
any remaining gaps in this zone shall be filled by steel shims prior to the application of the remaining preload .
if necessary bolts can be partially slackened to enable shims to be inserted .
the shims shall not be loose in the final snug tight stage .
in the event of a tapering gap a purpose machined tapered steel shim may be used .
as an alternative flat parallel steel shims of not less than nummm and of not more than nummm thick shall be inserted to refusal in steps until the gap in the contact zone is filled followed by retightening to the snug tight stage .
num num the part turn method may be used for tightening preloaded bolts if the bolts are property class num and assemblies conform to num the required nominal minimum preloading force is not in excess of the values specified in bs en numanum table num and the joint fitup conforms to num or num above whichever is applicable .
num num the part turn method is the same as the combined method in bs en numanum num except that ko bolt assemblies may be used in the first tightening step the nut shall be tightened to a specified torque as given in table num of this series in the second tightening step the nut shall be tightened to a specified turn as given in table num of this series .
num table num torque values for the part turn method step one bolt diameter d mm num num num num num num torque value m nm num num num num num num num table num rotation values for the part turn method step two bolt diameters mm grip lengtha mm rotation  num to num tnum numtnum num  turn num  turn num to num tnum numtnum num  turn num  turn a equal to nominal thickness t in bs en numanum table num num num the torque method shall not be used for the tightening of preloaded bolts unless described in appendix num .
num num torque reference values aen num num torque method num num the k value shall be checked daily with torque wrenches in accordance with bs en num numanum annex h and the torque for both tightening steps adjusted accordingly .
any assembly lots that fail to conform to this test shall be discarded .
num num combined method num num for property classes num and num bolt assemblies to bs en num see num the further rotation values in bs en numanum table num shall be amended as follows for the same thickness ranges replace num by num  turn replace num by num num turn replace num by num  turn .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num the k value shall be checked daily with the torque wrenches in accordance with bs en num numanum annex h and the torque for the first tightening step adjusted accordingly .
any assembly lots that fail to conform to this test shall be discarded .
num num the simplified value of mrnum numdfpc shall not be used .
num num hrc method num num the preload shall be checked on sample assemblies for each assembly lot within seven days prior to use in accordance with bs en numanum annex h. any assembly lots showing values of preload below the minimum specified value shall be discarded .
num num the pretightening step shall be repeated until the shear wrench outer socket has stopped turning on all assemblies in a joint .
num num direct tension indicator method aen num num fit bolts aen num num hot riveting num num rivets aen num num installation of rivets aen num num num acceptance criteria aen num num num fastening of thin gauge components num num general aen num num use of selftapping and selfdrilling screws aen num num use of blind rivets aen num num fastening sidelaps aen num num num use of special fasteners and fastening methods aen num num num galling and seizure of stainless steels aen num num erection num num general aen num num site conditions aen num num erection method num num design basis for the erection method aen num num constructors erection method aen num num survey amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num reference system num num num the reference temperature shall be numoc unless otherwise described in appendix num .
the reference temperature shall be recorded in the quality plan .
num num position points aen num num supports anchors and bearings num num inspection of supports aen num num setting out and suitability of supports aen num num maintaining suitability of supports aen num num num temporary supports num num num levelling nuts or other devices providing temporary support shall be slackened off before final tensioning of foundation bolts where a posttensioning force is specified to allow the posttensioning force to be transferred to the foundations .
num num in the case of exposed steelwork and irrespective of bedding material the minimum finished cover to steel packings or other steel temporary support devices left in position shall be nummm .
num num grouting and sealing num num num unless otherwise described in appendix num the surfaces of steelwork and bearings that are to be in contact with grout or bedding mortar shall be treated in accordance with num .
num num anchoring aen num num erection and work at site num num erection drawings aen num num marking aen num num handling and storage on site num num the defined procedure for restoration of damaged steelwork shall conform to the requirements for excnum and shall be approved by the overseeing organisation in advance of implementation .
num num the processes used for the restoration of damaged steelwork shall be in accordance with the requirements of this series .
num num trial erection aen num num erection methods num num general aen num num temporary works aen num num fitup and alignment num num the use of shims shall be avoided where possible by suitable controls on preparation assembly and weld distortion and if necessary by machining .
num num if welding is required for securing shims it shall be carried out in accordance with bs en num numanum num as required for excnum .
the requirements of clause num and num shall also apply .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num where steel shims are needed to correct the fit between members particularly in preloaded tension joints see num and where gaps are variable across the interface flat parallel steel shims may be used as an alternative to a purpose machined tapered steel shim .
the gap shall be filled by insertion of shims of not less than nummm and not more than nummm thick from the widest gap position until refusal .
the excess material shall be cut off on completion .
num num surface treatment num num general num num num treatment of surfaces to receive corrosion protection shall be in accordance with series num .
num num the requirements for the execution of corrosion protection in bs en numanum appendix f shall be supplemented by those in series num .
num num the performance specification required by bs en numanum f.num shall be as given in appendix num .
num num the prescriptive requirements for corrosion protection required by bs en numanum f.num shall be as given in series num .
num num with reference to bs en numanum f.num the requirements for friction surfaces and class of treatment or tests required for surfaces in slip resistant connections shall be as described in appendix num .
num num with reference to bs en numanum f.num where corrosion protection is specified the requirements for corrosion protection and extent of surfaces to be painted at preloaded connections shall be as given in series num clause num and appendix num .
num num with reference to bs en numanum f.num the extent of surfaces affected by preloaded bolts in connections that are not required to be slip resistant shall be as given in appendix num .
num num the requirements for the protection of the lower embedded part of foundation bolts shall be as described in bs en numanum f.num unless otherwise described in appendix num .
num num with reference to bs en numanum fnum for components that are to be galvanized after manufacture the requirements for procedure qualification of the dipping process shall be as given in appendix num .
num num with reference to bs en numanum fnum the requirements for the inspection checking and qualification of the preparation to be carried out before subsequent overcoating of galvanized components shall be as given in appendix num .
num num with reference to bs en numanum f.num reference areas shall be as required by series num clause num .
num num preparation of steel substrates for paints and related products num num num all surfaces shall meet the requirements of bs en iso num preparation grade pnum unless otherwise described in appendix num .
num num all edges requiring preparation grade pnum shall be rounded to a constant radius of not less than nummm the radius being tangential to the original surfaces see bs en iso num num and fig .
d.num .
num num weather resistance steels num num num exposed surfaces of uncoated weather resistant steel shall be blast cleaned to grade sanum to bs en iso num to achieve a uniform surface .
any surfaces that are subsequently marked or contaminated shall be cleaned to a similar standard .
num num uncoated weather resistant steel shall be kept free of contamination such as oil grease paint concrete and asphalt .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num galvanic coupling aen num num galvanizing aen num num num sealing of spaces num num num the internal treatment system to be provided to enclosed spaces that are to be sealed by welding or provided with internal protective treatment shall be as described in series num .
num num all internal spaces which have been identified as being hermetically sealed in appendix num shall have all joints whether welded mechanically fastened or bonded leak tested prior to application of the external protective coating see bs en num .
the bubble emission technique in accordance with bs en num shall be used .
num num surfaces in contact with concrete num num num when formwork is in contact with the outer surfaces of the steelwork the embedded length shall be measured from the junction between the concrete the formwork and the steelwork .
num num inaccessible surfaces num num faying surfaces and surfaces beneath washers in connections other than slip resistant connections that are to be painted shall be treated in accordance with series num .
num num in uncoated weather resisting steels faying surfaces and surfaces beneath washers in connections other than slip resistant connections shall be cleaned to grade stnum to bs en iso num immediately prior to the connection being made .
num num repairs after cutting or welding num num num protective treatment on edges and adjacent surfaces which have been damaged by cutting shall be restored in accordance with the original specification .
num num coatings on precoated constituent products that have been damaged by welding shall be restored in accordance with appendix num num num cleaning after erection num num cleaning of thin gauge components aen num num cleaning of stainless steel components aen num num num geometrical tolerances num num tolerance types num num num where full contact end bearing is specified see bs en numanum d.num special tolerances are required .
the maximum gap between the two surfaces shall be limited to nummm .
in the case of fitted web stiffeners the gap shall also be limited to a maximum of nummm over num of the fitted area .
num num essential tolerances num num general aen num num manufacturing tolerances num num rolled sections aen amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num welded sectionsaen num num cold formed sections aen num num stiffened plating aen num num profiled sheets aen num num shells aen num num erection tolerances num num reference system aen num num foundation bolts and other supports aen num num column bases aen num num columns aen num num full contact bearing aen num num functional tolerances num num general aen num num tabulated values num num functional tolerance class num shall be adopted except in the following cases from bs en num numanum where class num shall be adopted d.num num to num at bearing and bearing stiffener locations d.num num d.num num and num .
num num alternative criteria aen num num num inspection testing and correction num num general aen num num constituent products and components num num constituent products num num num specific testing of products not covered by the european or international standards references in bs en numanum shall be as described in appendix num .
num num the constructor shall verify that mechanical fasteners conform to the requirements of the product standard to which the mechanical fasteners have been manufactured see num .
reports of the verification undertaken shall be prepared .
the reports shall be treated as execution records and shall form part of the execution documentation see num and num .
the verification shall include obtaining evidence of certification of the quality of the mechanical fasteners such as the manufacturers declaration of performance under a ce mark manufacturers certificates and test reports from manufacturers or suppliers .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork review of the mechanical fastener documentation to confirm authenticity relevance accuracy and completeness .
inspection and sample testing of the mechanical fasteners to be used in the works in accordance with bs en iso num to confirm that the dimensional and mechanical properties comply with the product standard to which the mechanical fasteners have been manufactured .
the inspection and sample testing shall use an aql of num for nondestructive tests an aql of num for destructive tests and an ac level of num zero .
num num in addition to the requirements of num or num as appropriate the constructor shall undertake suitability testing of mechanical fasteners supplied for use in the works in accordance with a relevant standard .
for each inspection lot of mechanical fasteners three fasteners shall be drawn at random and tested in accordance with the suitability test related to the product standard to which the mechanical fasteners have been manufactured .
the mechanical fasteners that are subjected to the suitability testing shall be discarded following testing .
in the event of a mechanical fastener not meeting the requirements of the suitability test all mechanical fasteners in the associated inspection lot shall be discarded .
the suitability testing shall be reported in accordance with the relevant standard .
the reports shall be treated as execution records and shall form part of the execution documentation see num and num .
num num components aen num num nonconforming products num num records of testing undertaken to prove product conformity shall be treated as execution records and shall form part of the execution documentation see num and num .
num num manufacturing geometrical dimensions of manufactured components num num the inspection plan shall identify all dimensions which could be at risk of nonconformity .
checks shall be made during execution and action taken to ensure that any nonconformity is corrected at the earliest opportunity .
all such dimensions shall be checked before the steelwork is dispatched to site .
components in the neighbourhood of site connections shall be rechecked once the connections are complete .
num num if the correction of a nonconformity is not practicable proposed modifications to the steel structure to compensate for the nonconformity shall be approved by the overseeing organisation in advance of implementation .
num num repair of local dents in hollow sections by means of welded cover plates shall only be undertaken if approved by the overseeing organisation in advance of implementation .
num num welding num num inspection before and during welding aen num num inspection after welding aen num num timing aen num num scope of inspection num num all welded joints shall be subject to specific inspection .
the scope of specific inspection for each joint shall be num visual and in accordance with the extent and methods of supplementary non destructive testing ndt given in table num table num and table num of this series .
num num table num specifies the minimum proportions of welded joints subjected to specific supplementary ndt for shop welds in steel grades up to and including snum and quantified service category fnum which represent the most common conditions .
the percentages in table num shall be applied to the number of joints tested up to weld lengths of one metre in any joint .
for joints with weld lengths exceeding one metre the percentage shall be applied to the proportion of weld in every joint .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num where other conditions than those assumed in table num apply the minimum proportion of welded joints to be subjected to specific supplementary ndt shall be increased or decreased by one or more levels in accordance with table num .
this shall be done by applying the next highest or lowest proportion using the following sequence of seven increasing levels of proportion num num num num num num num .
note for example if the proportion in table num is num an increase of one level changes the requirement to num and a decrease of one level to num .
num num if adjustments are made according to more than one condition in table num the net number of levels shall be used after adding andor subtracting the number of levels given in each note .
note for example if the proportion in table num is num and the adjustments according to table num are num num and num level respectively the net adjustment would be num level which would result in a proportion of num .
num num for quantified service category fnum and above for shop welds in steel grades up to and including snum the minimum proportions of welded joints which shall be subjected to supplementary ndt are specified in table num .
for other conditions the proportion tested in table num shall be adjusted in accordance with table num as described in num num and num for table num .
num num the selection of exc in bs en numanum table num for scope of routine fpc inspection shall be determined by the manufacturer according to the nature of the work in normal production .
it shall be not less than the specific inspections required in num to num whichever is the greater .
note any fpc inspections undertaken on a specific structure which conform to table num in this series providing that the acceptance criteria in num and num are fully met can be regarded and documented as part of the specific inspection required in num to num .
num num visual inspection of welds num num the criteria for final acceptance without the need for repair shall be in accordance with table num and table num in this series .
these criteria shall apply irrespective of those adopted for fpc .
num num the selection of exc in bs en numanum num for the purposes of routine fpc of visual weld quality shall be determined by the manufacturer according to the nature of the work in normal production .
num num additional ndt methods num num the criteria for final acceptance without the need for repair shall be in accordance with table num for magnetic particle and penetrant testing and table num for ultrasonic and radiographic testing .
these criteria shall apply irrespective of those used for fpc .
num num the selection of the exc in bs en numanum num for the purposes of routine fpc of ndt based weld quality shall be determined by the manufacturer according to the nature of the work in normal production .
note the capability of proving that some of the criteria are met can depend on the method of testing .
num num correction of welds num num repairs shall be carried out as required for excnum .
num num inspection and testing of welded shear studs for composite steel and concrete structures num num production tests in accordance with bs en iso num num shall be performed before the beginning of welding operations and repeated after every num welds for each combination of stud diameter parent material and type of equipment that is used .
num num every stud on a production piece of steelwork shall be tested by striking the side of the head of the stud with a numkg hammer .
the weld shall be considered acceptable if there is a clear ring tone due to the striking .
any stud considered to be unacceptable as a result of this test shall be tested as part of the testing described in num num .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num simplified production tests shall be carried out as required by bs en iso num num and at a minimum rate of num test comprising num studs after every num welds on each piece of steelwork with a minimum of num test comprising num studs per piece .
the bend test shall be carried out in accordance with bs en iso num num a .
the direction of the bend test shall be such that the bent stud shall not interfere with other elements of the works .
studs shall not be bent back after testing .
num num the documented results of the production and simplified production tests shall be treated as execution records and shall form part of the execution documentation see num and num .
num num production tests on welding num num production tests conforming to the requirements for excnum are required .
num num specific production testing shall be conducted on runoff coupon plates in accordance with table num and shall apply to all parts of the structure .
num num mechanical fastening num num inspection of nonpreloaded bolted connections aen num num num inspection and testing of preloaded bolted connections num num inspection of friction surfaces aen num num num inspection before tightening num num the tightening procedure shall be checked as required for excnum .
num num inspection during and after tightening num num inspection during and after tightening shall be as required for excnum .
num num in bs en numanum numc the number of bolt assemblies inspected overall in a structure shall conform to the requirements for excnum .
num num the part turn method shall conform to the requirements of bs en numanum numci .
num num in bs en numanum numd the sampling plan shall conform to the requirements for excnum .
num num for the final tightening inspection the bolt assembly shall be checked for overtightening .
num num for the part turn method the inspection and testing requirements of bs en numanum num shall apply except as follows the first step shall be checked as required for excnum but using the same torque conditions as given in table num of this series .
for inspection after the second step rotation angle values given for the combined method shall be replaced with a num in lieu of num b num in lieu of num .
num num torque method num num inspection of tightening by the torque method shall conform to the requirements for excnum in bs en numanum table num .
num num combined method num num for the combined method checking of the first step shall conform to the requirements for excnum .
num num hrc method aen amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num direction tension indicator method aen num num inspection testing and repairs of hot rivets num num inspection num num the sampling plan shall conform to the requirements for excnum .
num num repairs aen num num inspection of cold formed components and sheeting fastening num num selftapping and selfdrilling screws aen num num blind rivets aen num num special fasteners and fastening methods num num general aen num num num cartridge fired and air driven pins aen num num other mechanical fasteners aen num num surface treatment and corrosion protection aen num num erection num num inspection of trial erection num num num the following checks shall be carried out during trial erection where applicable in addition to those that may be described in appendix num dimensions critical to assembly to other parts of the structure overall horizontal and vertical alignment and twist evidence of correct reestablishment of alignment of units in staged trial erection temperature differentials in box girders fitup of bolted joints and site welding preparations alignment of bolt holes identification marks of members and their orientation including packer plates .
num num inspection of the erected structure aen num num survey of geometrical position of connection nodes num num survey methods and accuracy num num the survey of the completed structure shall conform to the requirements for excnum .
this shall include recording of dimensional checks at acceptance of the structure .
num num system of measurement aen num num reference points and levels aen num num location and frequency num amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num num account shall be taken of the deflection effects due to temporary equipment supported by or supporting the erected structure and any nonsteelwork dead weight which is in place at the time of measurement of the positional accuracy of the steelwork .
num num acceptance criteria aen num num definition of nonconformity aen num num num action on nonconformity aen num num other acceptance tests aen num amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num table num minimum extent of supplementary ndt of shop welds in steel grades up to and including snum and quantified service category fnum weld type orientation a thickness t or throat a b mm proportion of joints tested magnetic particle mt or penetrant testing pt ultrasonic testing ut c butt transverse t num num t num t num num num num not applicable num d num longitudinal t num num t num t num num num num not applicable num num fillet transverse t num num no requirement t num a num num no requirement t num num a num num num t num a num num num longitudinal as per transverse fillet but reduced by num levels e a transverse applies to all welds orientated within num of the longitudinal axis of members except for connection zones where all orientations are deemed to be transverse .
connection zones are all locations within num mm of a main structural connection loading point or support position .
b t the nominal maximum parent metal thickness in the joint a the nominal fillet weld throat dimension including any specified penetration .
c testing conditions to bs en iso num shall be as follows level b evaluation level dac num db .
d num for single sided butt where there is no access to root side .
e see num for definition of change in level .
num table num adjustments in proportions of supplementary ndt for conditions other than those covered by table num and table num condition change in level a site welded joints num automatic and robotic welded joints b num standard proprietary products manufactured on a mass production basis b num steel grades above snum and below snum num steel grades snum and above num quantified service category fnum relative to fnum num after a nonconformance with acceptance criteria in table num or table num applicable to all joints of similar type tested in the same production batch to be maintained until the cause has been identified and rectified and defects eliminated .
num minimum depending on degree of severity of non conformance a see num .
b not applicable to transverse butt welds of fnum and above .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num table num minimum extent of supplementary ndt of shop welds in steel grades up to and including snum and quantified service categories fnum to fnum weld type orientation a thickness t b or throat a mm proportion of joints tested magnetic particle mt or penetrant testing pt ultrasonic testing ut c radiographic testing rt d fnum fnum fnum and fnum fnum fnum fnum and fnum fnum fnum fnum butt transverse t num num num num not applicable not applicable not applicable num num nume num t num num num num num num num num num nume t num num num num num num num num num nume longitudinal t num num num num not applicable not applicable not applicable num num num num t num num num num num num num num num num t num num num num num num num num num num fillet transverse t num num num num no requirement no requirement no requirement no requirement t num a num num num num num num num t num num a num num num num num num num t num a num num num num num num num longitudinal as per longitudinal butt weld a and b as per table num footnotes a and b .
c testing conditions to bs en iso num shall be as follows quantifiedservicecategoriesfnumandfnumtestinglevelbevaluationleveldacnumdb quantifiedservicecategoryfnumtestinglevelcevaluationleveldacnumdb quantifiedservicecategoriesfnumtestinglevelcevaluationleveldacnumdb transverse indication scans required for longitudinal welds .
d applies to inline butt welds only .
bs en num test class b shall be used .
e not relevant for designs based on table num in bs en num amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork amendment august num num num table num weld acceptance criteria for visual inspection all dimensions in mm main criterion imperfection type a dimensional parameter b joint type weld type acceptance limits b c to quantified service category applies to longitudinal welds only d remedial action in event of non conformance e description bs en iso num ref no .
symbol bs en iso num ref no .
fnum for fnum see f fnum to fnum overall joint geometry weld location error dr all fillet dr num num as per fnum refer to welding co ordinator for remedial action incorrect weld type dr all all np np as per fnum refer to welding co ordinator for remedial action inadequate weld length dr all all drnum num as per fnum add extra weld length linear misalignment num num h num in line butt butt h numt h num numt num see table num remove existing weld realign joint remake preparations and check with mt or pt reweld to awps check with ut num h cruciform all h numt h num numt num see table num angular misalignment num  in line butt butt  num num see table num correct using approved procedure check with mt or pt root gap g num h num lap tee cruciform fillet h num num see table num refer to welding co ordinator for remedial action volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork amendment august num num main criterion imperfection type a dimensional parameter b joint type weld type acceptance limits b c to quantified service category applies to longitudinal welds only d remedial action in event of non conformance e description bs en iso num ref no .
symbol bs en iso num ref no .
fnum for fnum see f fnum to fnum surface notches crack num to num num num all all np np as per fnum remove imperfections by grinding to approved excavation shape check with pt reweld to awps refer to welding coordinator for establishment of cause lack of fusion num num num num all all np np as per fnum lack of penetration unspecified num h num all single sided butt np h numt h num as per fnum np large cavities num num num num num num num all butt np np as per fnum undercut under fill etc .
num num num num num h num num num num num all all h num num see table num remove by grinding repair to awps pore num d num all all d num num see table num remove to depth of num mm repair to awps toe angle num  num all all  num num see table num correct with high speed rotary burr or reweld to awps damage num num to num num all all np np as per fnum grind out to smooth profile repair by awps if h num loss of cross section insufficient weld throat a h num h num tee lap cruciform fillet np g h numa g h num g as per fnum increase size using same awps insufficient leg length z h num h tee lap cruciform fillet np g h numz g h num g as per fnum multiple conforming surface imperfections num num num num num num num h l d lp num num all all see i see i as per fnum increase cross sectional area using methods above depending on imperfection type num table num weld acceptance criteria for visual inspection all dimensions in mm continued volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork amendment august num num main criterion imperfection type a dimensional parameter b joint type weld type acceptance limits b c to quantified service category applies to longitudinal welds only d remedial action in event of non conformance e description bs en iso num ref no .
symbol bs en iso num ref no .
fnum for fnum see f fnum to fnum surface condition deposits num num num num num all all not permitted if surface to receive corrosion protection see table num remove by grinding or blast cleaning a the three digit bs en iso num designation is deemed to include all four digit subcategories .
b symbols are as defined by bs en iso num or bs en iso num .
dr the dimension or weld type specified on the drawings .
np not permitted .
c where more than one limit is given for an imperfection for a given quantified service category and weld orientation all limits shall apply .
d longitudinal welds are those not deemed to be transverse see table num footnote a. e awps approved welding procedure specification for repair qualified in accordance with num f for joints in any orientation to fnum the imperfection limits given for longitudinal welds for fnum are applicable .
g where a root gap h has been observed in a tee cruciform or corner joint the nominal required fillet weld dimensions as measured with a weld gauge shall be increased as follows unless compensating penetration beyond the root has been proven minimum required throat size a numh minimum required leg length z h on affected leg only .
see also h. h both a and z measurements shall be checked irrespective of which has been specified on the drawings .
they are related as follows angle between fusion faces num num num num num num num see also g za num num num num num num num i all permitted imperfections resulting in loss of crosssection shall be summed and assessed as follows hl numdt numt or numt .
hl shall include subsurface imperfections assuming h num see table num footnote k. measurement length lp num mm .
for fillet welds a shall be substituted for t. num table num weld acceptance criteria for visual inspection all dimensions in mm continued volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num table num weld acceptance criteria for visual inspection for quantified service categories fnum to fnum where limits differ from those for fnum in table num all dimensions in mm imperfection type a acceptance limits according to quantified service category b c applies to longitudinal welds only d remedial action in event of non conformance fnum fnum fnum fnum linear misalignment inline butt h numt h num numt num h numt h num numt num h numt h num numt num h numt h num num t num as per table num cruc iform h numt h num numt num h numt h num numt num h numt h num numt num h numt h num numt num angular misalignment  num num  num num  num num  num num as per table num root gap e h num num h num num h num num h num num as per table num undercut underfill h num h num np h num np h num np h num as per table num porosity d num num d num num np np np np as per table num toe angle  num num  num num  num num  num num as per table num deposits not permitted if surface to receive corrosion protection np np np np np np see f variation in root or cap longitudinal profile b h num g h num h num g h num h num g h num h num g h num see h a imperfection types as designated in table num footnote a .
b symbols are as defined by bs en iso num or bs en iso num .
np not permitted .
h the maximum variation in cap or root profile measured along weld axis over any length of num mm .
c where more than one limit is given for an imperfection for a given quantified service category and weld orientation all limits shall apply .
d longitudinal welds are those not deemed to be transverse see table num footnote a. e correct fillet weld sizes as per table num footnote g. f for fnum and above remove with high speed rotary burr .
g transverse welds outside connection zones are exempt from this restriction see table num footnote a. h correct by tapering slope to shallower angle or repair to awps .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num table num weld acceptance criteria for magnetic particle and penetrant testing imperfection type acceptance standards indication pattern acceptance limits according to quantified service category a applies to longitudinal welds with longitudinal linear indications only b remedial actions in event of nonconformance c fnum for fnum see d fnum fnum to fnum surface notches identified in table num and table num bs en iso num and bs en iso num isolated level num level num level num level num np np remove by high speed burr machining with machining marks in longitudinal direction .
repair to awps if non conformance with table num and table num depth requirements h. grouped e np np np np np np a np not permitted .
b longitudinal welds are those not deemed to be transverse see table num footnote a .
c approved welding procedure specification awps for repair qualified in accordance with num .
d for joints in any orientation to fnum the imperfection limits given for longitudinal welds for fnum are applicable .
e grouped shall be deemed to apply to any indications separated by less than num mm .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num table num weld acceptance criteria for ultrasonic testing with limited optional radiographic testing all dimensions in mm imperfection type a dimensional parameter b location in cross section or throat acceptance limits according to quantified service category b c applies to longitudinal welds only d remedial action in event of non conformance e description bs en iso num ref no .
symbol bs en iso num ref no .
fnum for fnum see f fnum fnum fnum fnum cracks num to num num num full depth np h np h np h np h np h np h np i np i np j np j refer to welding coordinator to determine cause .
remove by grinding to approved excavation shape .
check with mt or pt .
reweld to awps .
pores g inclusions g cavities g lack of fusion lack of penetration num num num num num num num to num num num h l num num num to num within num mm of any surface h num num h num num np h h num np i np i np j np j l num num l num num np h l num np i np i np j np j deeper than num mm from any surface h num num h num num h num num np h h num np i np i l numt numt l num numt l num num np h l num np i np i h l lp h l num full depth l numt j numt j l numtj numt k l numt k numt k np l numt k np np lp num num lp num num lp num num np lp num np np h num num h num num h num num np h num np np l num num l num num l num num np l num np np uniformly distributed or clustered porosity num num num num full depth not permitted if obstructs detection or evaluation of imperfections above npl np l a imperfection types as designated in table num footnote a .
b symbols are as defined by bs en iso num .
np not permitted .
h the clear gap between adjacent imperfections measured in through thickness direction .
l the gap between ends of adjacent imperfections measured along weld axis .
c where more than one limit is given for an imperfection for a given quantified service category and weld orientation all limits shall apply .
if surface breaking imperfections are detected by ut the criteria given in table num table num and table num apply .
d longitudinal welds are those not deemed to be transverse see table num footnote a. e approved welding procedure specification awps for repair qualified in accordance with num .
f for joints in any orientation to fnum the imperfection limits given for longitudinal welds for fnum are applicable .
g radiographic testing may be used to assist in interpretation of these imperfections .
h rejectionleveldacnumdb .
i rejectionleveldacnumdb .
j rejectionleveldacnumdb .
k if permitted surface imperfections resulting in loss of crosssection also exist the criteria in table num footnote i also apply .
l also not permitted when checked by radiographic testing .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works structural steelwork num table num production tests on run off coupon plates weld type quantified service categories material grades test type testing rate inline transverse butt weld in tension fnum and above all utnum macros num in num fnum and above snum to snum ml nl charpys num in num snum to snum q tensile num in num snum to snum ql qlnum tensile and charpys num in num longitudinal butt or fillet fnum all ut num macrosa num in num fnum and above all ut num macrosa num in num a a tack weld shall be included in the coupon plate if used in production and at least one macro shall be taken at each end of the tack weld .
amendment august num numf manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendment august num num series num protection of steelwork against corrosion contents clause title page num num introduction num num surface preparation general num requirements num surface preparation materials and num methods num num workmanship standards for the num surface preparation of steel by blast cleaning abrading grinding and cleaning num num workmanship standards for the num surface preparation of coated steelwork by blast cleaning abrading grinding and cleaning num num procedures for treatment num at joints num num procedures for treatment at num areas of mechanical damage or other surface defects num num procedures for treatment of num local failure in protective coatings num num metal coatings num num num testing of thermally num sprayed aluminium metal coatings num num paint and similar protective num coatings num num testing of paints num num storage requirements and keeping num periods for paints num application of paint num num procedure trials num num storage and transport of steel and num fabricated steelwork num num surfaces in contact with concrete num num num form hapnum new works num paint system sheet appendix num form hapnum paint data sheet appendix num num access and lighting num clause title page num num additional requirements for num the protection of steel in bridge bearings num num additional requirements for numf the protection of cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland clause title page scotland numse num paint and similar protective snum coatings numse num testing of paints snum numse num additional requirements for snumf the protection of steel in bridge bearings denotes a clause which has a substitute national clause for one or more of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales or northern ireland .
volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion protection of steelwork against corrosion num num introduction num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num num surface preparation and protection against corrosion of steelwork shall be carried out in compliance with clauses num to num and where applicable series num num using systems appropriate to the information given in appendix num form hapnum new works paint system sheet parts num num and num and appendix num if applicable as appropriate to the design and method of execution of the components .
num num the manual of paints for structural steelwork which is included in bd num dmrb num provides data on paints and similar materials for use in the overseeing organisations contracts .
the manual contains item numbers and a summary is also given in table num .
num num subject and without prejudice to the conditions of contract the contractor shall comply with any measures to contain people plant materials dust and debris described in appendix num .
num num compliance with subclause num of this clause does not confer immunity from relevant legal requirements .
num num corrosion protection of steelwork shall be undertaken by a contractor registered to national highways sector scheme numa for corrosion protection of ferrous metals by industrial coatings as described in appendix a .
num num numbered appendices identified by digits e.g .
num contain contract specific information and requirements .
num surface preparation general requirements num workshop and site work num num before blast cleaning or abrading steel surfaces or before overcoating painted or hot dip galvanized surfaces any contamination including by oil or grease shall be removed .
unless otherwise described in appendix num solvents shall not be used .
num num clean water which does not leave harmful residues on the surface shall be used for wet cleaning and rinsing .
num num cleaning agents which are not harmful to the surface being cleaned and which do not leave harmful residues on the surface after final rinsing may be used for cleaning .
num num surface preparation shall be continued until the required standard has been achieved .
num num weld spatter shall be removed in accordance with series num num if applicable .
num after dry surface preparation of internal surfaces and before any wet cleaning all dust and debris shall be removed from accessible areas by sweeping and vacuum cleaning .
num num immediately before application of each coat of paint the contractor shall ensure that the surfaces to be painted i meet the required standard of preparation ii are free from harmful residues and detrimental contamination including water moisture condensation oil grease mortar concrete dust grit paint degradation products chlorides and sulphides .
see sub clause num num num joints plies and fasteners shall be sealed in compliance with subclauses num and num .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num coats of paint shall be free from embedded metallic or other foreign particles including metallic dust .
deposits of adherent matter on metallic coatings or painted surfaces shall be cleaned off immediately they occur .
coatings damaged in the process shall be restored .
num num unless otherwise described in appendix num the final workshop coats on external surfaces shall be wet cleaned on site .
num surface preparation materials and methods num dry blast cleaning in the workshop num num unless otherwise described in appendix num metallic blast cleaning abrasives complying with bs en iso num or nonmetallic blast cleaning abrasives complying with bs en iso num shall be used .
grades for metallic abrasives shall comply with the following profile see subclause num grade fine gnum or snum medium gnum or snum coarse gnum or snum num the particle size of metallic abrasive in plant or equipment shall not exceed the maximum for the relevant grade as specified above .
num num before the start of blast cleaning and during blast cleaning the contractor shall ensure that the abrasive is free from matter which could leave detrimental contamination as defined in subclause num on the surfaces to be coated .
num abrading in the workshop or on site num any encrusted foreign matter or paint which may be difficult to remove by abrading alone shall be dislodged by scraping aided by hand or power wirebrushing .
this work shall be completed before abrading the areas so affected .
num num abrading shall be carried out using abrasive paper or other material or a flexible abrasive disc mounted on a power driven flexible pad or a power driven arbor or spindlemounted flexible abrasive flap wheel .
abrading tools may be used to remove weld spatter .
wet abrading may be employed for the preparation of finishes over sound undercoats over unsound systems over hot dip galvanizing or hot dip galvanizing .
wet abrading shall not be allowed to come into contact with exposed thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings .
num num all equipment including tools abrasive sheets abrasive discs and abrasive wheels shall be of a type capacity and in a condition appropriate for the work .
the use of hard grinding wheels for abrading shall not be permitted .
num num a polished appearance caused by polishing in of paint rust or dirt shall not be acceptable .
num num areas of previously corroded steel or unsound metal coatings except hot dip galvanizing which have been prepared by abrading down to bright steel or bright metal coating and blast cleaned where appropriate shall be protected by the primer and next coat of paint before any cleaning down or preparation of adjacent surfaces .
num wet cleaning in the workshop or on site num num wet cleaning shall be carried out by scrubbing with a stiffbristled brush using water and a cleaning agent or a pressure washer .
immediately after cleaning the surfaces shall be thoroughly rinsed .
num dry cleaning in the workshop or on site num surfaces shall be cleaned by scrubbing with a dry stiffbristled brush .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num dry blast cleaning on site using dry airabrasive system num num metallic abrasives shall comply with subclauses num num and num of this clause .
metallic grit or aluminium oxide abrasive shall be used for dry blast cleaning of relatively small areas on site which are to receive a thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating such as at site welds at areas prepared to clean steel or areas where a thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating is to be restored as indicated in subclause numi .
the contractor shall ensure that the grade and particle shape of nonmetallic abrasives are adequate for the purpose intended .
non metallic abrasives shall not be recycled .
num wet blast cleaning using low pressure airwaterabrasive system on site num num unless otherwise specified in appendix num a lowpressure airwaterabrasive system shall be used .
the airwater pressure at the nozzle shall not exceed num kgfcm and shall be fully adjustable below this level .
the system shall incorporate a mechanical metering device remote controlled by the operator from the nozzle to enable him to regulate from zero to maximum the quantity of nonmetallic abrasive being fed into the airwater mixture .
during abrasive cleaning the air water and abrasive shall be thoroughly mixed and this mixture shall be projected on to the surface to be cleaned through a single bore nozzle or tube .
the use of an inhibitor during wet blast cleaning or washing shall not be permitted .
num wet blast cleaning using high pressure waterabrasive system or ultra high pressure water system on site num num unless otherwise specified in appendix num the water pressure shall not exceed num kgfcmnum for high pressure or between num and num kgfcmnum for ultra high pressure .
the system shall incorporate a mechanical metering device controlled by the operator at the nozzle to regulate from zero to maximum the quantity of non metallic abrasive being fed into the water .
num num within num minutes of wet blast cleaning the whole of the cleaned surface shall be thoroughly washed using the blast cleaning equipment with air and water .
any further deposits of abrasive on already rinsed surfaces shall be removed in a similar manner also within num minutes of being deposited .
all accumulated deposits of abrasive and debris on other parts of the structure shall be removed by the same method before the end of the working day .
after washing the surfaces shall be free from all detrimental contamination .
tests for freedom from detrimental contamination shall be made after the washing .
combined wetdry blast cleaning on site num num wet blast cleaning using the low pressure airwaterabrasive system in compliance with subclauses num and num of this clause shall be followed after a minimal interval by dry blast cleaning in compliance with subclause num of this clause of all the previously wet blast cleaned areas .
num num the specified standard of surface preparation shall have been achieved in full initially by wet blast cleaning and washing before any later dry blast cleaning of the same areas to remove flash rusting or to restore the required standard of surface preparation .
other requirements num num when surface preparation is to be carried out by dry blast cleaning and on adjacent surfaces by wet cleaning and or abrading then unless otherwise necessary the wet cleaning and any abrading shall be carried out first .
when combined wetdry blast cleaning has been specified instead of dry blast cleaning only the above sequence may be reversed .
on completion of the wet blast cleaning part of the process the areas to be abraded shall be cleaned in compliance with subclause num of this clause except that for rinsing the wet blast cleaning equipment may be used .
the dry blast cleaning part of the process and dry abrading shall be carried out after any wet abrading required and final rinsing .
any prepared dry metal surface shall be protected from the effects of any further wet method of surface preparation by the application of a minimum num microns dry film thickness of paint .
num grinding after surface preparation in the workshop or on site num num grinding wheels and discs shall be of the size shape and grade of coarseness appropriate to the particular operation .
the speed of revolution shall be appropriate for the work .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num num grinding shall be carried out after surface preparation by other methods including cleaning down has been completed except where it is necessary to achieve a blast profile and this would necessitate blast cleaning after grinding .
num num surfaces prepared by grinding to bright steel shall be protected by the application of the primer and the next coat of paint including any stripe coats before cleaning down or other preparation of adjacent surfaces specified in appendix num is undertaken .
num num workmanship standards for the surface preparation of steel by blast cleaning abrading grinding and cleaning num num the surface profile to be achieved by blast cleaning either fine medium or coarse as appropriate shall be within the limits set by the surface profile comparator for the assessment of abrasive blast cleaned surfaces conforming to bs en iso num .
num blast cleaned surfaces shall be virtually free from sharp spikes of parent metal defined as rogue peaks formed by the impact of abrasive particles and which project above the blast cleaning profile .
any rogue peaks which would be detrimental to the protective system shall be removed .
num num hackles and inclusions caused by the rolling process visible after blast cleaning which would be detrimental to the protective system shall be removed .
affected surfaces shall be prepared by grinding or abrading to bright steel in compliance with subclause num .
sharp edges shall be rounded to a radius of not less than nummm in accordance with series num num if applicable .
if thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating is to be applied the surfaces shall then be blast cleaned .
num steel surfaces to be prepared by any of the methods described in the contract shall be such that after surface preparation the surfaces are free from detrimental contamination .
num surface preparation by blast cleaning shall be to one or more of the following standards of visual cleanliness i num sanum to bs en iso num ii num sanum to bs en iso num num num additionally after surface preparation by blast cleaning to sanum or sanum quality the surface profile shall be virtually free from embedded abrasive particles when viewed through a numx illuminated magnifying glass .
surfaces assessed as unsatisfactory in this respect shall be blast cleaned again with fresh abrasive .
another abrasive complying with the specification may be used if necessary .
num harmful residues or detrimental contamination num surfaces shall be deemed to be free from harmful residues or detrimental contamination after surface preparation when any such remaining matter will not be detrimental to the application adhesion curing or reduce the required durability of the specified protective system .
num bright steel surfaces free from defects or prepared to this standard by grinding or abrading shall have an overall bright appearance .
num num workmanship standards for the surface preparation of coated steelwork by blast cleaning abrading grinding and cleaning num before overcoating surfaces shall be free from i num any visible gloss ii any unsound paint down to sound paint iii any unsound paint down to sanum or sanum quality steel iv any unsound paint down to bright steel v any unsound paint down to sound metal coating amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion amendment august num num vi any unsound paint down to bright metal coating vii any unsound metal coating down to sound metal coating viii any unsound metal coating down to bright metal coating ix any unsound metal coating down to sanum or sanum quality steel x any unsound metal coating down to bright steel xi detrimental contamination .
num definitions of terms used in describing the above standards of workmanship are as follows i sanum or sanum quality as in subclause num ii bright steel as in subclause num iii free from detrimental contamination as in subclause num iv bright metal coating resulting from abrading a metal coating whose surfaces are free from all corrosion products and of bright appearance overall v unsound metal coating a metal coating showing signs of disruption inadequate adhesion or penetration by rust or other corrosion products vi sound metal coating a metal coating which complies with subclause num including such a metal coating which has been blast cleaned but which has a reduced thickness in accordance with subclause num vii unsound paint paint showing signs of disruption rusting through having inadequate adhesion or covering rust scale loose rust loose mill scale or other detrimental products viii sound paint paint which is sound down to a metal substrate .
num definitions of terms used in clauses num num and num are as follows i num restored coatings .
unless otherwise described in appendix num when paint or similar coatings or thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings are to be restored the standard of surface preparation and coating material shall comply with the original standard .
damaged or failed paint systems over thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be restored using dry blast cleaning .
the thickness of any underlying thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating or paint coating which may have been reduced in thickness during surface preparation shall be brought up to specification ii num restored surface preparation .
unless otherwise described in appendix num the original standard shall be obtained .
when further thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating is to be applied the surface of the existing thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be restored by dry blast cleaning with metallic grit abrasive or aluminium oxide to metal coating iii local failure .
an isolated breakdown of a protective coating or system due to extraneous causes excluding mechanical damage .
num permitted residual thermally sprayed aluminium .
num when clean steel is exposed through a metal coating during remedial surface preparation remnants of sound thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating which can not be removed with a tungsten scraper blade may be retained within the blast clean profile .
num num procedures for treatment at joints num fasteners joint material and parent material in joints before assembly or welding in the workshop or on site fasteners including bolts nuts and washers num surfaces of uncoated fasteners shall be free from all but traces of oil or grease before assembly .
volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num num unless otherwise described in appendix num threaded fasteners at joints in hot dip galvanized steelwork or in hot dip galvanized steelwork which is to be painted shall be hot dip galvanized .
hot dip galvanized fasteners which are to be painted shall be treated with an adhesion promoter as described in table numb .
num metal coatings on surfaces of fasteners which are to be painted shall be i num free from all traces of oil or grease and then treated with an adhesion promoter where specified or ii treated at the same time as the parent material where fasteners are already assembled in compliance with subclause num of this clause .
num fasteners excluding those in ii above shall be pressurerinsed with water and allowed to dry before assembly or packing for delivery at least one hour and not more than four hours after satisfactory application of adhesion promoter item num .
num fasteners which have become difficult to tighten because of corrosion shall be replaced .
joint material and parent material in joints num num the standard of blast cleaning of joint material and parent material in joints shall be at least equal to that for the parent material .
the standard of preparation and treatment of the friction surfaces of joint material and parent material in slip resistant connections shall be as described in series num num .
before a slip resistant connection is made friction surfaces shall meet the standard of preparation and treatment described in series num num .
num at preloaded connections num in steelwork painted only overall num unless otherwise described in appendix num the blast primer applied to the parent material shall be taken num mm to num mm inside the perimeter of the joints .
the outer surfaces and edges of site joint material may at the option of the contractor also be given a coat of the blast primer .
num num in steelwork with thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating at joints only and painted overall num unless otherwise described in appendix num the thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be applied to the contact surfaces of the joints and to the outer surfaces and edges of joint material .
the thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating on the contact surfaces of the parent material shall be taken num mm to num mm outside the perimeter of the joints .
the blast primer applied to the parent material shall be taken num mm to num mm inside the perimeter of the joints .
the thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating on the outer surfaces and edges of site joint material shall be given a coat of aluminium epoxy sealer item num .
num num in steelwork with thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating overall and sealed only or painted overall num unless otherwise described in appendix num the thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be applied to the contact surfaces of the joints and to the outer surfaces and edges of joint material .
the sealer applied to the parent material shall be taken num mm to num mm inside the perimeter of the joints .
the thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating on outer surfaces and edges of site joint material shall also be given a coat of aluminium epoxy sealer item num .
num in steelwork hot dip galvanized only or hot dip galvanized and painted overall all material at joints shall be hot dip galvanized .
when an adhesion promoter and a first undercoat are applied before a joint is made they shall be taken num mm to num mm inside the perimeter of the joint these coats shall also be applied to edges and outer surfaces of the joint material .
num num the thickness of a protective paint coat applied to the outer surfaces of joint material prior to assembly of any preloaded connection shall not exceed num microns dry film thickness .
num at non preloaded connections num num at workshop joints in all steelwork other than in hot dip galvanized steelwork the blast primer alone or thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating plus sealer shall be applied initially to parent and joint material .
immediately before assembly of a joint which is to be painted the first undercoat shall be applied to the contact surfaces and the joint made while the paint is wet .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num num at site joints in all steelwork other than in hot dip galvanized steelwork unless otherwise described in appendix num all surfaces except those of fasteners shall receive in the workshop the workshop protective system which is applied to the parent material .
num num at all joints in hot dip galvanized steelwork an adhesion promoter and workshop coats may be applied to the joint material before or after workshop joints are made .
when hot dip galvanized steelwork is painted on site an adhesion promoter and paint shall be applied to joint material after the joint has been made .
at welded joints num num at workshop and site joints in all steelwork surfaces to be welded shall be restored to sanum quality or to bright steel and shall be free of any protective or other coating immediately prior to welding .
num parent material workshop treatment adjacent to joints which are to be assembled or welded later on site num at preloaded connections num the paint coats with the exception of the primer or first coat of paint shall be stepped back at num mm intervals commencing num mm from the perimeter of the joints .
num at non preloaded connections num num unless otherwise described in appendix num workshop paint coats are not required to be stepped back .
at welded joints num num thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be kept clear of the weld by a distance of at least num times the thickness of the steel in the area to be welded with a minimum of nummm and maximum of num mm from the joint .
the restricted area shall be masked during metal spraying .
hot dip galvanizing shall be removed a minimum of num mm back from the edges of weld areas .
paint coats shall be stepped back at num mm intervals commencing at least num mm from the joint or from the edge of the thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating starting with the numnd coat of paint .
at completed joints num within num days of a joint being completed exposed surfaces of parent and joint material shall be prepared in compliance with subclauses num to num of this clause and fasteners in compliance with subclauses num to num of this clause .
at bolted joints num num in steelwork painted only overall blast cleaned only or primed surfaces shall be prepared by dry blast cleaning to restore or provide the required standard of surface preparation for workshop or site work as appropriate .
num num in steelwork with thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating at joints only and painted overall primed or sealed thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall be prepared by dry blast cleaning to restore the surfaces to the required standard .
num num in steelwork with thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating overall and sealed only or painted overall thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall be prepared as described in subclause num of this clause .
num num in steelwork hot dip galvanized only or hot dip galvanized and painted overall the surfaces shall be free from detrimental contamination by wet cleaning .
at welded joints num num in all steelwork welds shall be prepared by the methods and to the standards described in subclause num ii num num or appendix num for workshop or site work as appropriate .
surfaces of areas adjacent to the weld shall be similarly prepared .
for site welds in hot dip galvanized steelwork surfaces shall be treated in accordance with subclause num .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion surfaces of fasteners num num uncoated and temporarily coated fasteners shall be free from all traces of oil and grease and be blast cleaned to sanum quality medium profile before painting .
num num fasteners including those which have been treated with an adhesion promoter shall be dry cleaned after final surface preparation of the joint and then painted .
num num fasteners which are to receive thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating after assembly shall be blast cleaned to sanum quality medium profile with chilled iron grit cast steel grit or aluminium oxide .
sealing at joints or plies num bolted joints or builtup sections shall be free from any water which has penetrated the plies .
when drying out has been completed or when surfaces are dry after surface preparation fine gaps around the perimeter of joints or along plies shall be sealed by successive application of undercoat paint .
all wider gaps shall be sealed with a proprietary sealant compatible with the paint system .
sealing of gaps at nibs of load indicating fasteners or washers num gaps shall be sealed by brush application of primer and successive undercoats of the types used on adjacent areas .
num num procedures for treatment at areas of mechanical damage or other surface defects num num score marks other surface defects and indentations in the surface of a steel substrate or of a metal coating shall be treated by abrading or grinding to bright steel or bright metal coating to produce a surface without sharp edges or abrupt change in contour .
damage to unprepared surfaces shall be treated before blast cleaning .
a blast cleaning profile shall be restored on areas to be thermally aluminium metal sprayed but not necessarily areas to be painted only .
other surface defects in the steel substrate including fissures caused by the removal of hackles or inclusions described in subclause num shall be similarly treated .
num in the case of damage to paint coatings only surface preparation shall be by blast cleaning or abrading .
the paint coatings shall then be restored .
num num when a twopack epoxy paint system is restored over a steel substrate prepared by abrading the adhesion of the first paint coat to the substrate shall be checked in accordance with astm dnum type iii before overcoating with the next coat in the system .
the first paint coat over abraded surfaces shall be an aluminium epoxy twopack primer item num .
num num when an area of a thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating is to be restored after surface preparation by abrading or grinding any affected thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating or exposed steel substrate shall be dry blast cleaned immediately before further application of thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating .
num num in the workshop a damaged thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating together with any damaged sealer or paint coats shall be restored .
num num on site with the exception of the small areas relative to the size of the component permitted under subclause num of this clause a damaged thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating together with any damaged sealer or paint coats shall be restored but with a minimum thickness of num microns of thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating .
num num on site small areas of isolated damage in a thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating plus paint system need not be restored after surface preparation in compliance with subclause num of this clause the thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be replaced by num microns of the first undercoats omitting the sealer .
adjacent paint coats excluding the sealer shall then be restored over the repaired area .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num num in the workshop in the case of hot dip galvanizing only small isolated areas of up to num mmnum and not exceeding num of the total surface area of the component whichever is the lesser may after surface preparation be repaired with low melting point zinc alloy providing that the total area of any damage on a component does not exceed num of the total surface area of the component .
components with damaged areas greater than the above limits shall be regalvanized .
isolated areas of damage larger than num mm in hot dip galvanizing which is to be painted later or which has already been painted may be repaired with low melting point zinc alloy after surface preparation .
alternatively the whole of the affected area including exposed steel substrate shall after surface preparation be overcoated with two coats of zinc rich epoxy blast primer item num minimum dry film thickness of num microns each .
num num on site surfaces of hot dip galvanized components found to have minor damage shall be prepared in accordance with subclause num of this clause and coated with two coats of zinc rich epoxy blast primer item num minimum dry film thickness of num microns each .
alternatively the components shall be regalvanized .
num in all cases where paint coats only are to be restored or thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings replaced or restored or hot dip galvanizing is to be replaced by paint the edges of paint coatings or metal coating adjacent to the affected area shall be bevelled back into sound paint or metal coating .
this work shall be carried out before any final blast cleaning described in subclause num of this clause .
num num in the workshop exposure and overcoating times shall not exceed those specified in clause num .
on site overcoating shall be started immediately after surface preparation of the affected area and before any deterioration in the standard of the prepared surface occurs and continued as soon as each coat is dry enough for overcoating .
num num procedures for treatment of local failure in protective coatings num num in the workshop failed paint coatings and failed thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be restored .
abrading down to sound paint only is permissible .
if a thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating is damaged or reduced to less than num of the specified minimum thickness during abrading it shall be restored .
num num on site failed paint coatings and thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall be restored except that i abrading down to sound paint or to bright steel or ii blast cleaning to sanum quality are permissible methods of surface preparation when restoring paint systems over a steel substrate .
num num in the workshop and on site hot dip galvanized components showing signs of failure eg blisters and rust of the coating shall be regalvanized .
num num in the workshop and on site failed paint coatings over hot dip galvanizing shall be restored .
surface preparation of affected areas shall be by abrading .
areas of sound hot dip galvanizing exposed through a paint system shall be abraded only as necessary to ensure satisfactory application of an adhesion promoter and paint .
if the hot dip galvanizing is damaged or reduced to less than num of the specified minimum thickness during abrading the component shall be regalvanized .
num num subclauses num num num and numshall be complied with .
num num metal coatings hot dip galvanized coatings num num hot dip galvanized coatings shall unless otherwise described in appendix num comply with bs en iso num and with the following i inhibited hydrochloric acid with a strength not exceeding num and within a temperature range of numc to numc or inhibited sulphuric acid with a strength not exceeding num and within a temperature range of numc to numc shall be used for pickling .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion ii components shall not be immersed in the pickling acid longer than is necessary for cleaning the surfaces prior to hot dip galvanizing .
components shall receive a fresh water rinse between pickling and the galvanising bath .
iii the surfaces of components to be hot dip galvanized shall be dried before immersion in the molten zinc .
iv when an aqueous flux is to be used all traces of acid shall be washed off immediately after pickling .
v hot dip galvanized coatings shall be relatively smooth continuous and free from flux staining .
vi detrimental contamination of hot dip galvanized coatings which are to be painted shall be removed by wet cleaning in compliance with subclause num .
surfaces to be painted shall not receive chromate passivation treatment .
vii vent holes drilled in hollow sections prior to hot dip galvanizing shall be plugged after hot dip galvanizing and before any painting in accordance with series num num if applicable .
viii the contractor shall take measures to minimise the potential for liquid metal assisted cracking occurring during the galvanizing process and to identify any cracks that may have occurred in galvanized steelwork .
num thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating num num thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall unless otherwise described in appendix num comply with bs en iso num and with the following i aluminium coating material shall have a composition complying with bs en iso num num. ii the thickness of the coating shall be not less than num microns .
iii the strength of adhesion of thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall not be less than the following aluminium num kgfcm iv thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall be applied continuously over each num m per gun or the area of the component whichever is the lesser until the specified thickness has been achieved .
v the application of thermally sprayed aluminium metal in separate layers shall not be permitted .
vi all surfaces to be thermally metal sprayed including that of the reference panel having equivalent hardness to that of the parent material shall be blast cleaned with chilled iron grit or high carbon cast steel grit with a hardness value greater than num hv or aluminium oxide with a hardness value greater than num mohs and the standard shall be sanum quality medium profile .
vii thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings shall be denibbed .
other requirements num num when a metal coating is required on only part of a component it shall be applied before the rest of the component receives paint .
num num testing of thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings num num at the start of the works and subsequently at intervals scheduled in appendix num with the exception of coatings on steel in bearings curved surfaces repairs to mechanical damage local failure of thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating at site joints or areas restored on site the contractor shall demonstrate by means of a pull off adhesion test in accordance with astm dnumtype iii that the minimum adhesion requirement is being attained as detailed in subclause num iii .
in the excepted areas the contractor shall demonstrate that the adhesion is satisfactory by means of grid tests in accordance with bs en iso num .
areas affected by the tests shall be restored in accordance with clause num .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num num the tensile tests shall be carried out initially on flat panels num mm x num mm x num mm which are of the same grade of steel as the parent material and which before blast cleaning had the same surface condition .
the panels shall be blast cleaned and thermally aluminium metal sprayed together with the parent material to the same standard and using the same technique .
num the contractor shall ensure that adhesion tests have been carried out satisfactorily before any further work continues .
num num if the adhesion requirement on any test panel is not met the contractor shall carry out a further test on the parent material adjacent to the panel position .
in the case of adhesion failure on the steelwork itself by either method of test unsound thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be restored and the tests repeated .
num num if more than two local areas of faulty adhesion occur on any one component the whole of the thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating on the component shall be considered as having failed and it shall be restored .
subclause num is not applicable in the case of adhesion failure .
num num paint and similar protective coatings general num num the term paint shall be deemed to refer to protective coatings in general .
num num the paints permitted for use by the overseeing organisation in the works are listed in the manual of paints for structural steelwork which is included in bd num dmrb num and which also contains details of the quality assurance scheme for paints and similar protective coatings .
all paints shall have a current bba hapas roads and bridges certificate or equivalent appropriate to the use of the paint in the proposed paint system .
num num all paints shall be supplied in sealed containers of a capacity suitable for the volume and method of application .
for sitework all paints shall be supplied in sealed containers of not more than num litre capacity .
the capacity of the containers to be used shall be confirmed as being suitable as part of the procedure trials described in clause num .
all containers shall be used in order of date of manufacture and batch number the oldest being used first .
each container shall have a completely removable lid and be clearly marked on the side to show the name of the manufacturer registered description of the material including purpose e.g .
whether primer undercoat or finish colour item no paint manufacturers reference number batch number and date of manufacture .
where date of manufacture is coded the contractor shall provide the code key .
in addition paints may be supplied in sealed containers of num litre capacity for testing purposes in accordance with clause num for a samples .
num num the contractor shall ensure that the properties of the paints he has selected are suitable for the conditions in the workshop and on site including temperature and humidity and that he is able to apply the paints satisfactorily to all parts of the structure in these conditions .
num num unless otherwise described in appendix num all paints forming any one protective system or overlapping systems shall be obtained from the same manufacturer as named by the contractor in appendix num form hapnum new works paint system sheet .
num surface preparation and protective systems for steelwork except bearings cctv masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms num num protective systems note mdft minimum dry film thickness b apply by brush as apply by airless spray hb high build dft above num m per coat nb normal build dft between num and num m per coat lb low build dft below num m per coat amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion i num item numbers in the protective systems are listed in the manual of paints for structural steelwork at annex a of bd num dmrb num and a summary is shown in table num. ii num details of surface preparation and protective systems for steelwork except bearings cctv masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms are given in tables numa and numb .
surface preparation and protective systems for steel in bridge bearings and metal coated fasteners num num details of surface preparation are given in table numa and the protective system type v is given in table numb .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table num num bd num quality assurance scheme for paints and similar protective coatings annex a manual of paints for structural steelwork current paint item numbers item description coat type build applied by num zinc rich epoxy blast primer two pack blast primer lb or nb b or as b to small areas only num zinc phosphate epoxy two pack blast primersealer lb b or as b to small areas only num zinc phosphate high build quick drying epoxy two pack blast primer hb as b to small areas only num mio high build quick drying epoxy twopack undercoatfinish hb as num water based epoxy primer for blast cleaned internal surfaces twopack primer hb b or as num water based epoxy undercoat sheen finish for internal use twopack undercoatsheen finish hb b or as num high build aluminium epoxytwopack surface tolerant maintenance e.g .
for abraded surfaces hb b or as num high build epoxy numpack maintenance undercoat surface tolerant hb b or as num extended cure epoxy mio twopack primer undercoat andor finish for hot dipped galvanized steel hb as b to small areas only num high build glass flake epoxy twopack undercoat for blast cleaned steel new construction hb as stripe coats and small repairs only by brush num t wash adhesion promoter for hot dip galvanized steel lb b num adhesion promoting single component to promote substrate adhesion properties of coating systems for hot dip galvanized steel aluminium and stainless steel surfaces lb b or as num aluminium epoxy twopack sealerprimer lb b or as num red oxide moisture cured polyurethane single component primerblast primer for maintenance or new works lb b or as num mio moisture cured polyurethane undercoatfinish nb or hb b or as num moisture cured polyurethane singlecomponent semigloss finish lb nb b as num epoxy acrylic finish two pack gloss or semigloss finish nb b small areas by brush as amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table num num bd num quality assurance scheme for paints and similar protective coatings annex a manual of paints for structural steelwork continued item description coat type build applied by num polyurethane twopack gloss finish lb nb b as num polyurethane twopack semigloss finish nb hb b small areas by brush as num organic modified polysiloxane twopack gloss finish for new works or maintenance nb hb b as num grease paint primer b as for difficult access areas num grease paint undercoatfinish hb b or as num notes num colour reference shall be as per the manufacturers declared colour given with reference to bs num andor bs numc where appropriate .
num num dry film thickness dft range shall be as per the manufacturers data sheet .
the minimum dry film thickness of the paint coats and paint system shall be as per the protective systems detailed in tables num to num where given .
num num all materials to be handled and applied in accordance with the manufacturers product and health safety data sheets .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table numa num requirements for bridges parapets and other highway structures except bearings cctv masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms surface preparation and protective systems surface preparation protective systems given in table numb i bridge steelwork fabrication stage area description method surface standard type area a exterior main surfaces including shop welds blast clean sanum medium profile i for inland ready access ii for inland difficult access marine ready or difficult access area b interior of box girder surfaces except area c but including shop welds blast clean sanum medium profile iii area c friction surfaces of parent material at slip resistant connections as described in series num num as described in series num num as described in series num num area d friction and outer surfaces of joint material at slip resistant connections .
friction surfaces as described in series num num outer surfaces blast clean friction surfaces as described in series num num outer surfaces sanum medium profile friction surfaces as described in series num num outer surfaces i for inland ready access ii for inland difficult access marine ready or difficult access ii bridge steelwork erection stage area e exterior surfaces of site welds and weld affected areas remove slag wire brush wet clean and blast clean as area a sanum medium profile i for inland ready access ii for inland difficult access marine ready or difficult access area f interior surfaces of site welds and weld affected areas remove slag wire brush wet clean and blast clean as area b sanum medium profile iii with additional coat of primer iii parapets .
area g all surfaces subject to accessibility pickling for hot dip galvanizing in accordance with clause num iv amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table numb num requirements for bridges parapets and other highway structures except bearings cctv masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms protective systems type metal coating numst coat numnd coat numrd coat numth coat minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns i item no num num num num num or num num num if item num finish is specified min dry film thickness per coatm num num num or num item no num num num num num or num num num if item num finish is specified min dry film thickness per coatm num num num or num ii item no num num num num num num or num num num if item num finish is specified min dry film thickness per coatm num num num num or num item no num num num num num or num num num if item num finish is specified min dry film thickness per coatm num num num or num item no num num num num num num or num num num if item num finish is specified min dry film thickness per coatm num num num num or num iii item no num num num min dry film thickness per coatm num num item no num num num min dry film thickness per coatm num num item no num num num min dry film thickness per coatm num num iv item no hot dip galvanize num or sweep blast num num or num num or num num num num or num numnd coat item num num num if item num finish is specified min dry film thickness per coatm num item num or num items num or num num num or num numnd coat items num or num num num if item num finish is specified amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table numb num requirements for bridges parapets and other highway structures except bearings cctv masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms continued num notes num finish coats i items num num or num finish coats min .
dft numm .
item num finish coat min .
dft num m .
ii type i type ii and type iv a finish coat may need to be applied in the workshop to comply with the maximum overcoating times for the preceding epoxy mio undercoat item num or item num .
in such circumstances an additional finish coat shall be applied on site to meet the requirements of subclause num .
prior to applying the additional finish coat on site any damage to the paint system shall be restored in accordance with the requirements of clause num and the surface of the workshop applied finish coat shall be prepared by light abrading and wet cleaning .
num area d type ii i a type ii system incorporating a metal coating of thermally sprayed aluminium metal numst coat item num num mnumlitre numnd coat item num mdft num m numrd coat item num mdft num m numth coat item num num num mdft num m or num mdft num m with a total minimum dft of the paint system of num m items num num or num or num m item num may be used for area d outer surfaces only where aluminium metal spray is identified as the required treatment of area d friction surfaces in series num num .
num parapets i type iv for parapets to be erected in a marine environment numst numnd and numrd coats shall be applied in the workshop the numth coat may be applied in the workshop or if within the intermediate coat overcoating time on site .
for parapets in an inland environment all coats of paint may be applied in the workshop or on site .
ii where sweep blast is the chosen method of adhesion promotion it shall be undertaken in accordance with bs en iso num to surface roughness fine in accordance with bs en iso num .
num fasteners i unless otherwise specified in appendix num fasteners in steelwork shall be supplied with an anti corrosive protective coating comprising hot dip galvanizing in accordance with bs en iso num or a similar alternative surface protection treatment which has a current bba hapas roads and bridges certificate or equivalent as an anticorrosion protective coating for use on steel fixings intended for use on steel highway structures .
for such similar alternative surface protection treatments prior to commencement of the works the contractor shall provide to the overseeing organisation a copy of the bba hapas roads and bridges certificate or equivalent and the fasteners shall be installed and prepared prior to application of paint in accordance with the requirements of the certificate .
ii hot dip galvanized fasteners in steelwork that is to be painted shall have surfaces that are to be painted treated with an adhesion promoter item num before installation or alternatively after installation shall be cleaned with a solvent wipe to remove all traces of oil and grease and be abraded with coarse grade abrasive paper to sufficiently roughen the exposed galvanized surface in order to provide a suitable adhesion key and be painted with a coat of either item num item num or item num as an adhesion promoter .
iii after the joints are made and fasteners have been treated with an adhesion promoter fasteners shall be protected as specified for the joint material .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table numa num requirements for steel in bridge bearings and metal coated fasteners surface preparation area description method standard area a exterior surfaces excepting wearing surfaces but including a nummm minimum return on areas of top bearing plates or base plates in contact with grout or mortar blast clean sanum medium profile area b central area of top bearing plates in contact with grout or mortar blast clean sanum medium profile area c areas of top bearing plates or base plates in contact with structural steel components blast clean sanum medium profile area d exposed shop fasteners in components to be coated after assembly blast clean sanum medium profile area e concealed shop fasteners no requirement no requirement area f site fasteners for fixing bearings to piers or abutments and for fixing bridge components to bearings restore metal coating as necessary to specified standard of cleanliness restore metal coating as necessary to specified standard of cleanliness amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table numb num requirements for steel in bridge bearings and metal coated fasteners protective system type v applied over metal coating numst coat numnd coat numrd coat numth coat minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns area a and d item no aluminium metal spray num or num num num num num num or num num num if item num finish is specified min dry film thickness per coat m num num mnum litre num num num or num area b item no num num min dry film thickness per coat m num area c item no aluminium metal spray num min dry film thickness per coat m num num mnum litre area f item no hot dip galvanize adhesion promoter see notes num num or num num num num or num num num if item num finish is specified min dry film thickness per coat m num num num or num num notes num finish coats i items num num or num finish coats min .
dft numm .
item num finish coat min .
dft num m num area a and d i numth coat for bearings for steel bridge beams brush applied on site colour to match finish on main steelwork .
ii aluminium metal spray plus items num or num are required on interfaces of machined surfaces of spreader plates and of bearing .
num areas a b c and d i aluminium metal spray items num or num num and num shall be applied at the bearing manufacturers works .
item num num num or num shall be applied on site .
ii items num or num shall not be overapplied and shall not be included in the overall thickness of the protective paint system .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table numb num requirements for steel in bridge bearings and metal coated fasteners continued num area f i adhesion promoter item num shall be applied on site either before or after erection to surfaces to be painted .
item num coming into contact with adjacent paint coats shall be removed immediately .
alternatively after installation surfaces to be painted shall be cleaned with a solvent wipe to remove all traces of oil and grease and be abraded with coarse grade abrasive paper to sufficiently roughen the exposed surface in order to provide a suitable adhesion key and be painted with a coat of either item num item num or item num as an adhesion promoter .
the remaining site coats shall be applied to exposed surfaces after erection .
num stripe coats for bearings only i area f stripe coats are not required for bearing site fasteners .
ii area a and d a single stripe coat in item num paint shall be applied over item num at the bearing manufacturers works .
a second stripe coat in item num shall be applied on site .
item num coats shall be in contrasting shades eg medium grey natural grey .
num site coats i site coats shall be applied by the contractor .
num paint suppliers i the requirements of clause num shall be noted .
num appendix num i when completing appendix num the appropriate finish paints shall be selected from the protective system .
the letter references a b c etc shall be varied as appropriate and the application instructions arranged to suit .
num surface preparation and protective systems for cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms num num general i details of protective systems anum gnum anuma and gnuma anumb and gnumb are given in tables numa b c. ii in the case of protective systems anuma and gnuma anumb and gnumb the contractor may opt to apply the finishes in the workshop or if within the intermediate coat overcoating time at site unless otherwise specified .
iii when a white or pale tint finish is specified an additional finish coat may be required to ensure full opacity is achieved completely obliterating the item num undercoat .
iv type anum anuma and anumb protective systems are based on aluminium metal spray .
v type gnum gnuma and gnumb protective systems are based on hot dip galvanizing .
vi unless otherwise stated in appendix num the nominal ground level adjacent to a mast or column shall be assumed to be at a distance of num mm below the door opening .
the ground section of planted masts and columns shall extend from the bottom of the mast or column to nummm above the nominal ground level .
the ground section of flange mounted masts and columns applies where the flange is below ground level or is built over and shall extend from the bottom of the mast or column to nummm above the nominal ground level .
the upper section of a mast or column with a ground section is the remainder of the mast or column above the ground section .
num num protective system amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table numa num requirements for cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms systems system environment access anum inland ready anuma and anumb inland difficult marine ready or difficult gnum inland ready gnuma and gnumb inland difficult marine ready or difficult table numb num requirements for cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms surface preparation system anum anuma and anumb location method surface standard external surface flange mounted and planted masts and columns overall surface preparation .
blast clean sanum medium profile internal surfaces flange mounted and planted masts and columns surface preparation from the bottom to nummm above the door opening .
blast clean where access allows or hand tool preparation sanum medium profile or bright steel system gnum gnuma and gnumb external and internal surfaces flange mounted and planted masts and columns overall surface preparation .
in accordance with subclause num in accordance with subclause num amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table numc num requirements for cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms protective systems type metal coating numst coat numnd coat minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns anum i external surfaces flange mounted and planted masts and columns overall protection plus numnd coat for ground section see num vi .
item no thermally sprayed aluminium metal num num num application ratemin dry film thickness per coat m num mnumlitre num ii internal surfaces flange mounted and planted masts and columns protection applied from the bottom to nummm above the door opening .
item no num num num min dry film thickness per coat m num num num notes i item num finish coat colour to be black bs num shade num e num ii blast cleaning thermally sprayed aluminium metal and all workshop paint coats on external surfaces shall be returned on to edges at ends at door and other openings and under the base flange .
iii all paint coats shall be applied in the workshop .
iv item num shall be overcoated within num hours .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table numc num requirements for cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms protective systems continued type metal coating numst coat numnd coat numrd coat minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns anuma i external surfaces flange mounted and upper section see num vi of masts and columns overall protection .
item no thermally sprayed aluminium metal num or num num num num num or num num num if item num finish is specified application ratemin dry film thickness per coatm num mnum litre num num or num overall protection for ground section see num vi .
item no thermally sprayed aluminium metal num or num num num num application ratemin dry film thickness per coatm num mnumlitre num num ii internal surfaces flange mounted and planted masts and columns protection applied from the bottom to nummm above the door opening .
item no num num num min dry film thickness per coatm num num num notes i items num num or num finish coats min .
dft numm .
item num finish coat min .
dft num m ii item num finish coat colour to be black bs num shade num e num iii blast cleaning thermally sprayed aluminium metal and all workshop paint coats on external surfaces and site paint coats where access permits shall be returned on to edges at ends at door and other openings and under the base flange .
iv all paint coats except finish coats shall be applied in the workshop .
finish coats may be applied in the workshop or if within the intermediate coat overcoating time on site .
v item num or num applied over thermally sprayed aluminium metal shall be overcoated within num hours .
vi for external surfaces the upper section finish coat shall overlap the ground section finish coat by nummm .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table numc num requirements for cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms protective systems continued type metal coating numst coat numnd coat numrd coat minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns anumb i external surfaces flange mounted and planted masts and columns overall protection .
item no thermally sprayed aluminium metal num or num num num num application ratemin dry film thickness per coatm num num num ii internal surfaces flange mounted and planted masts and columns protection applied from the bottom to nummm above the door opening .
item no num num num min dry film thickness per coatm num num num notes i blast cleaning thermally sprayed aluminium metal and all workshop paint coats on external surfaces and site paint coats where access permits shall be returned on to edges and nummm inside at ends at door and other openings and under the base flange .
ii item num or num shall be overcoated within num hours .
iii the ground section see num vi of masts and columns shall have an additional sacrificial steel section thickness of a minimum nummm above that needed in the design .
the additional thickness shall be recorded in which ever is appropriate of the following part a of appendix num typical lighting column and bracket data sheet part a of appendix num typical cctv mast data sheet part a of appendix num typical cantilever mast data sheet .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table numc num requirements for cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms protective systems continued type metal coating numst coat numnd coat numrd coat minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns gnum i external surfaces flange mounted and planted masts and columns overall protection plus adhesion promotion and numnd and numrd coats for ground section see num vi .
item no hot dip galvanize num or sweep blast num or num num or num num at ground section min dry film thickness per coatm num num ii internal surfaces flange mounted and planted masts and columns overall protection item no hot dip galvanize min dry film thickness per coatm num notes i items num or num finish coat colour to be black bs num shade num e num ii the requirements of subclause num relating to the application of the first coat of paint need not apply for cctv masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms which remain in a workshop environment after hot dip galvanizing .
iii all workshop paint coats on external surfaces shall be returned on to edges and nummm inside at ends at door and other openings and under the base flange .
iv all paint coats shall be applied in the workshop .
v where sweep blast is the chosen method of adhesion promotion it shall be undertaken in accordance with bs en iso num to surface roughness fine in accordance with bs en iso num .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table numc num requirements for cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms protective systems continued type metal coating numst coat numnd coat numrd coat numth coat minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns gnuma i external surfaces flange mounted and upper section see num vi of masts and columns overall protection .
item no hot dip galvanize num or sweep blast num or num num or num num num num or num num num if item num finish is specified min dry film thickness per coatm num num num or num overall protection for ground section see num vi .
item no hot dip galvanize num or sweep blast num or num num or num num or num num min dry film thickness per coatm num num num ii internal surfaces overall protection .
item no hot dip galvanize min dry film thickness per coatm num notes i items num num or num finish coats min .
dft numm .
item num finish coat min .
dft num m ii items num or num finish coat colour to be black bs num shade num e num iii the requirement of subclause num relating to the application of the first coat of paint need not apply for cctv masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms which remain in a workshop environment after hot dip galvanizing .
iv all workshop paint coats on external surfaces and site paint coats where access permits shall be returned on to edges and nummm inside at ends at door and other openings and under the base flange .
v all paint coats except finish coats shall be applied in the workshop .
finish coats may be applied in the workshop or if within the intermediate coat overcoating time on site .
vi where sweep blast is the chosen method of adhesion promotion it shall be undertaken in accordance with bs en iso num to surface roughness fine in accordance with bs en iso num. vii for external surfaces the upper section finish coat shall overlap the ground section finish coat by nummm .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion table numc num requirements for cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms protective systems continued type metal coating numst coat numnd coat numrd coat numth coat minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system microns gnumb i external surfaces flange mounted and upper section see num vi of masts and columns overall protection .
item no hot dip galvanize num or sweep blast num num or num num num num or num num num if item num finish is specified min dry film thickness per coatm num num num or num overall protection for ground section see num vi .
item no hot dip galvanize num or sweep blast num num or num num or num num min dry film thickness per coatm num num num ii internal surfaces overall protection .
item no hot dip galvanize min dry film thickness per coatm num notes i items num num or num finish coats min .
dft num m .
item num finish coat min .
dft num m ii items num or num finish coat colour to be black bs num shade num e num iii the requirements of subclause num relating to the application of the first coat of paint need not apply for cctv masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms which remain in a workshop environment after hot dip galvanizing .
iv all workshop paint coats on external surfaces and site paint coats where access permits shall be returned on to edges and nummm inside at ends at door and other openings and under the base flange .
v where sweep blast is the chosen method of adhesion promotion it shall be undertaken in accordance with bs en iso num to surface roughness fine in accordance with bs en iso num. vi for external surfaces the upper section finish coat shall overlap the ground section finish coat by nummm .
vii the ground section see num vi of masts and columns shall have an additional sacrificial steel section thickness of a minimum nummm above that needed in the design from the bottom of the column to at least nummm above ground level .
the additional thickness shall be recorded in which ever is appropriate of the following part a of appendix num typical lighting column and bracket data sheet part a of appendix num typical cctv mast data sheet part a of appendix num typical cantilever mast data sheet .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num num testing of paints provision of samples num num unless otherwise described in appendix num the contractor shall provide unopened samples known as a samples for quality assurance purposes for each type of paint to be used for the works in accordance with this clause .
in addition the contractor shall supply at least num ml samples known as b samples for application control purposes .
num num a and b samples are tested for paint composition andor properties against the values obtained during the approval testing of the original formulation and issued by the paint manufacturer to the certifying body .
a samples num num a samples are required in all cases where more than num litres of any one type of paint is to be used in the works .
a samples are not required for paints to be applied to bearings cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms .
for twopack systems separate samples of the base and activator shall be despatched by the contractor to the testing authority .
num num the first a samples shall be taken from the first representative batch of each type of paint delivered to the fabricators workshop or to site .
num num additional a samples of the paints subject to testing under subclause num of this clause shall be provided by the contractor at a rate of one set of samples for each num litres or part there of of each type of paint used in the works .
the contractor shall also provide an a sample i of any replacement batch of paint subject to testing under subclause num of this clause ii returned paint described in subclause num iii when the paint is showing unsatisfactory application characteristics under clause num .
num num the a samples shall be selected at random to be fully representative of each num litres or part thereof of paint to be used in the works .
num num immediately after selection the a samples shall be despatched by the contractor to the testing authority together with appendix num form hapnum .
num num paint shall be supplied in sufficient time to allow for sampling and testing before the start of application .
num num except for procedure trials paint shall not be applied until the a sample from the paint to be applied has been tested and confirmed as being satisfactory for use .
b samples num num b samples are required in all cases including for paints to be applied to bearings cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms .
b samples shall be taken as spot checks with a minimum of every batch of paint being sampled .
the contractor shall take b samples for twopack materials as separate unmixed samples of the base and activator cure components .
the b samples shall be taken following homogenization of the individual components and immediately prior to mixing the two components for use in the works .
the samples shall be decanted directly into clean new and clearly labelled numml tins which shall be filled and immediately sealed prior to despatch to the testing authority .
num num immediately after selection the b samples shall be despatched by the contractor to the testing authority together with appendix num form hapnum .
provision of num ml tins packing and transport of a and b samples num num the contractor shall provide num ml tins with lids and lid clips for b samples at the start of painting or before any procedure trials required by clause num .
the quantity supplied shall be sufficient to avoid any delay in taking b samples throughout the work .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num num the contractor shall ensure that the lids of all tins of sample paint are securely clipped down when they are despatched for testing .
num num the contractor shall be responsible for handling packing as necessary prompt despatch and transit of a and b samples including collection of samples from the testing authority for use or disposal as appropriate following satisfactory testing and reporting .
num num overseeing organisation shall report back to the supervising firm as stated on appendix num form hapnum all results of the testing who shall then notify the contractor of the results .
num storage requirements and keeping periods for paints num num on delivery to the workshop or site paint shall be unloaded directly into one or more secure paint stores which shall be located within num metres of the painting area .
insulation and means of heating and ventilating shall be provided as necessary to maintain the temperature of paint stores between numc and numc .
num if at any time or place paint in tins painters kettles or airless spray containers is allowed to reach temperatures outside the numc and numc limits or the paint manufacturers recommended storage temperature the paint shall be discarded and not used in the works .
two pack products which produce an exothermic reaction when mixed may be allowed to exceed the specified higher temperature limit .
num the contractor shall also implement any additional storage requirements recommended by the paint manufacturer .
num num unless excepted in accordance with subclause num of this clause paint which has not been used within the shelf life recommended by the manufacturer or within num months of the date of manufacture whichever is the lesser shall be discarded or returned to the manufacturer and not used in the works .
num chemically or moisture cured paints shall not be used after the expiry of the pot life stipulated by the paint manufacturer .
they shall be discarded on expiry of the pot life or at the end of each working daynight whichever is the less .
all other paints in opened tins or open containers including painters kettles shall be returned to store and kept in sealed containers with not more than num ullage .
num num exceptionally components of twopack epoxy paints may have their shelf life extended to num months provided that the contractor returns the paints to the paint manufacturer and ascertains that the manufacturer examines the contents of each tin and reconstitutes the paints as necessary so that such paints are equal in all respects to the paints described in the contract .
the contractor shall provide a certificate of conformity confirming that such paints have been inspected and where necessary reconstituted and conform in all respects to the contract .
num num each tin of reconstituted paint returned to the workshop or site by the manufacturer shall have an additional label affixed stating extended shelf life to date .
the previous date marking shall remain and not be obscured .
a set of a samples shall be taken and be submitted for testing in accordance with clause num from all batches of paint that have their shelf life extended .
num application of paint num num paint shall be supplied from the contractors paint store to the painters ready for application the only adjustment of formulation permitted being as described in subclause num .
in exceptional circumstances any addition of solvent necessary to improve application shall be in accordance with the paint manufacturers instructions and be carried out by the paint manufacturer preferably in the paint process plant with adequate equipment and controlled measurements .
num num paint shall be applied only to surfaces that have been prepared and cleaned to the specified standard as described in this series .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num num unless otherwise described in appendix num a coat of paint in a system shall be applied by one of the following methods i brush b ii airless spray as iii air assisted spray .
application of paint by roller is not permitted .
num num paint shall not be applied when the following conditions will apply during paint application andor curing i when the temperature of the surfaces to be coated is less than numc above the dew point andor when the ambient air temperature is at or below numc or the relative humidity is above num in an enclosed workshop or num on site or outside the temperatures and humidities recommended in the paint manufacturers data sheet ii during rain snow fog mist or in a dust laden atmosphere iii when moisture is likely to be deposited on the surface by condensation or rain iv when windborne dust may adhere to and contaminate the paint .
num num all workshop painting of steelwork shall be carried out in a fully enclosed weatherproof workshop .
num before starting the procedure trials described in clause num the contractor shall make available details of the overall wet film thickness for each coat he proposes to apply .
he shall also make available information as to the total amount of paint that he expects to use for each coat of each system for which procedure trials are required .
the calculation of the amount of paint to be used shall be based on the volume solids plus an allowance for waste .
num num the following requirements on paint film thicknesses shall apply i wet film thickness gauges shall be used where practicable to check that the wet film thickness is not less than minimum dry film thickness mdft x num volume solids ii num during the application of a paint system the contractor shall ensure that the progressive total thickness of the applied coats shall allow the specified minimum total dft of the system to be attained without exceeding overall the proposed wet film thicknesses referred to in subclause num of this clause by more than num. iii num in no case shall the total dry film thickness of a paint system or the mdft of the last undercoat and finish be less than that specified in appendix num form hapnum new works paint system sheet .
iv the local dry film thickness for any primer shall not exceed the specified mdft by more than num and for other paints by more than num .
num num each coat of paint of a specified system shall have satisfactory adhesion which shall be determined by testing to astm dnum type iii .
a minimum value of num kgfcmnum numpsi shall be achieved before any paint film detachment occurs .
the satisfactory adhesion of the coating system shall be confirmed by representative testing .
damage resulting from the adhesion testing shall be restored in accordance with clause num .
num num each applied specified paint coat shall be free from defects including bloom cratering pinholing blistering rivelling sagging bittiness dry spray and cissing etc .
the presence of these defects shall be determined by unaided visual assessment supplemented by other appropriate test methods .
the presence of pinholing or porosity in the completed paint system except at corners bolted joints or welds shall be determined by using low or highvoltage detectors in accordance with astm gnum .
the finished system shall have an even and uniform appearance with no defects and the finishing paint in visually sensitive areas shall be from the same batch .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num num the gloss level of the finishing coat shall be established before the procedure trials .
a painted tin plate reference panel num mm x num mm shall be provided by the contractor for this purpose .
num num all successive coats in a system including the stripe coats shall be contrasting colours to aid identification .
num num before starting the procedure trials described in clause num the contractor shall provide a reference panel coated with the steppedback paint system to indicate the contrast between each coat of paint .
stripe coats num num stripe coats shall be applied to all welds and all fasteners including washers and to all external corners except those of rhs .
the first stripe coat using second undercoat paint shall be applied over the primer sealer or adhesion promoter .
when a second stripe coat is specified in appendix num it shall be separated from the first stripe coat by an undercoat .
all stripe coats shall be applied by brush .
a solvent shall be used to remove all traces of oil and grease from fasteners before treatment with an adhesion promoter .
the contractor shall enter the details of the stripe coats he has selected in appendix num form hapnum new works paint system sheet giving the item no .
colour and method of application .
num square solid infill bars shall after the second undercoat has been applied be given an extra coat of first undercoat in lieu of stripe coats .
exposure times for prepared steel surfaces and for metal coatings .
num exposure times and treatment of item num and overcoating times for paints num clean steel prepared by dry blast cleaning or bright steel prepared by abrading or by grinding shall be primed within num hours .
num clean steel prepared by wet blast cleaning only shall be primed within num hours of being dry enough for painting .
num clean steel prepared by combined wetdry blast cleaning shall be primed within num hours of dry blast cleaning .
num num steel or steelwork blast cleaned and primed at the mills or in the workshop shall be overcoated within num weeks .
the primed surfaces shall only be exposed outside for a maximum of num weeks of the num week period .
prepared surfaces affected by detrimental contamination or corrosion shall be restored before overcoating .
num num workshop steelwork which has been thermally metal sprayed shall be primed and sealed within num hours .
the next coat shall be applied within num hours .
num num workshop prepared steel surfaces unsealed thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating and undercoats except final workshop undercoat shall not be exposed outside .
num num all surfaces treated with item num except those of fasteners which have been treated in compliance with subclause num shall after initial drying be wet cleaned in compliance with subclause num taking care not to remove adhering item num and allowed to dry before overcoating .
the first coat of paint shall be applied within num hours of the surfaces treated with item num being first dry enough for painting over .
num num when hot dip galvanized steel is to be protected by a paint system the adhesion promoter shall be applied not later than num days after delivery to site .
num num when hot dip galvanized steelwork is to be erected in a marine environment and is to be protected by a paint system the adhesion promoter and the workshop coats shall be applied within num days after hot dip galvanizing .
num num a first workshop undercoat shall be overcoated within num hours .
further shop coats shall be applied within num hour intervals per coat .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num num the application of sealant in gaps in compliance with subclause num may be carried out either before or after application as appropriate of the first coat of paint to be applied to the completed joints or assembled plies .
num num prepared steel surfaces and thermally sprayed aluminium metal coatings which have been restored also paint coats and hot dip galvanizing which have been prepared after surface damage or deterioration shall be overcoated with the sealer primer or first undercoat as appropriate before the surfaces have been affected by moisture and in any case within num hours .
num num on site steel surfaces and thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating shall be primed or sealed within num hours and shall have the following coat applied within num hours .
the next coat shall be applied within a further num hours .
finish coats shall be applied within num days of application of the preceding undercoat .
num procedure trials num num unless otherwise described in appendix num the contractor shall carry out workshop and site procedure trials of the protective system when more than num litres of any coat of paint are to be applied to difficult access roadbridge footbridge and gantry steelwork .
procedure trials are not required for systems applied to joints or for hot dip galvanizing only .
the procedure trials shall be completed at least ten days before the start of application of the systems on the main steelwork .
the trials shall be carried out with the labour methods and equipment to be used for the work .
num num the contractor shall provide for the workshop trials samples of steel from num m to num m representing the main steelwork hot dip galvanized when necessary .
the contractor shall demonstrate his ability to carry out surface preparation by blast cleaning and by using power assisted tools to apply thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating where specified and the paints he has selected .
the contractor shall provide sufficient paint for the trials in containers of the size to be used for the works .
num num thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating application and painting of the main steelwork shall not be started in the workshop or on site until procedure trials have been completed satisfactorily .
num any adjustment to the registered paint formulations shown to be required by the trials other than an adjustment to the solvent shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation and made at the paint manufacturers works .
num the contractor shall carry out further procedure trials whenever he employs replacement skilled labour or proposes to use equipment of a different type .
num storage and transport of steel and fabricated steelwork num num steel awaiting fabrication for the works and uncoated steelwork shall be adequately protected from contaminants liable to cause heavy rusting and possibly pitting of the surfaces .
num steelwork shall not be loaded for transport until the paint system is sufficiently hard for handling .
num during storage steelwork shall be kept clear of the ground and shall be laid out or stacked so as to prevent water or dirt accumulating on or against any of the surfaces .
suitable packings shall be placed between layers of stacked steelwork .
when cover is provided it shall be ventilated sufficiently to keep condensation to a minimum .
num components weighing less than one tonne shall be kept in a storage area away from their erection point in order to minimise damage to protective coatings .
num num lengths of parapet and individual steel lighting columns and masts shall be supported on timber and precautions taken to prevent damage to their protective coatings and ingress of water .
they shall only be positioned adjacent to their erection point immediately before erection .
if the planned erection time is delayed by more than num hours the components shall be returned to the storage area .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num num hot dip galvanized components shall be transported and stored under dry and well ventilated conditions to avoid wet storage staining .
if stored outdoors close contact of surfaces of components shall be avoided and suitable packing shall be placed between components and to keep the components clear of the ground .
components shall be stored wherever possible at a slight angle to allow water run off .
when cover is provided it shall be ventilated sufficiently to keep condensation to a minimum .
num if damage to coatings is excessive or may be difficult to deal with satisfactorily after erection the contractor shall restore the coatings before erection .
num num surfaces in contact with concrete num num unless otherwise described in appendix num or in series num if applicable thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating and all workshop paint coats shall be returned num mm into the concretesteelwork contact area .
num where aluminium metal spray which has been sealed only is returned into the contact area it shall be given a coat of item num of num microns mdft not later than num hours before concreting .
application of the paint outside the contact area shall be prevented by masking if necessary .
num num hot dip galvanized coatings shall be applied overall .
unless otherwise described in appendix num or in series num if applicable concrete may come into direct contact with the hot dip galvanized surfaces .
num num form hapnum new works paint system sheet appendix num form hapnum paint data sheet appendix num num num as soon as the contract has been awarded the contractor shall prepare and make available a copy of form hapnum new works paint system sheet appendix num of which he shall have completed parts num to num together with relevant copies of form hapnum paint data sheet appendix num .
num num following any relevant approvals in accordance with the contract and recorded in part num of form ha pnum new works paint system sheet appendix num forms hapnum new works paint system sheet appendix num shall be adopted for the works .
num access and lighting num without prejudice to the conditions of contract access for inspection shall be provided and erected by the contractor .
the access shall be adequate in all respects for inspection purposes .
num manual surface preparation and coating application work shall not be carried out when light intensity at the workface is less than num lux .
when the natural light intensity falls below this level the contractor shall install and maintain temporary lighting which shall provide a minimum light intensity of num lux over at least num m at the workface during the work and also for inspection when required .
num num additional requirements for the protection of steel in bridge bearings applicable clauses num num unless otherwise described in appendix num the work described in this clause shall be carried out in compliance with appendix num and with clauses num to num and the following supply of coatings num num information including the name of the paint manufacturer required for completing form hapnum new works paint system sheet appendix num for the bearings shall be obtained by the contractor from the bearing manufacturer .
amendment august num num volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion num num item num and epoxy mio paints when required for application on site shall be obtained from the manufacturer of the workshop applied coats .
paint applied to the bearings on site to match the bridge steelwork paint system shall be obtained from the manufacturer of that system .
num num additional requirements for the protection of cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms applicable clauses num unless otherwise described in appendix num the work described in this clause shall be carried out in compliance with appendix num and with clauses num to num and the following surface preparation num num in the workshop any cctv mast steel lighting column or component material the surfaces of which show rust pitting when viewed by normal vision after surface preparation shall be discarded and not used for the works .
num num on site any cctv mast cantilever masts steel lighting column and bracket arms or component material the internal surfaces of which show rust pitting when viewed by normal vision after surface preparation shall be discarded and not used for the works .
stripe coats num num for cctv masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms only one stripe coat in undercoat paint is required .
for protective system types anum and gnum the stripe coat shall be applied before the last undercoat of the total protective system in the workshop or on site as appropriate .
all stripe coats shall be applied by brush .
adhesion strength of aluminium metal spray num num for aluminium metal sprayed cctv masts cantilever masts and steel lighting columns and bracket arms the strength of adhesion of thermally sprayed aluminium metal coating to the steel shall not be less than num kgfcm when tested by means of a tensile test in accordance with bs en iso num .
amendment august num numf volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion national alterations of the overseeing organisation of scotland numse num paint and similar protective coatings num the term paint shall be deemed to refer also to similar protective coatings including specialist coatings such as grease paints .
num num the paints permitted for use by the overseeing organisation in the works are listed in the manual of paints for structural steelwork which is included in bd num dmrb num and which also contains details of the quality assurance scheme for paints and similar protective coatings .
all paints shall have a current bba hapas roads and bridges certificate or equivalent .
num all paints shall be supplied in sealed containers of not more than num litre capacity and these shall be used in order of delivery .
each container shall be of the completely removable lid type and be clearly marked on the side to show the name of the manufacturer registered description of the material including purpose eg whether primer undercoat or finish colour item no paint manufacturers reference number batch number and date of manufacture .
where date of manufacture is coded the contractor shall provide the code key .
num num the contractor shall ensure that the properties of the paints he has selected are suitable for the conditions in the workshop and on site including temperature and humidity and that he is able to apply the paints satisfactorily to all parts of the structure in these conditions .
num num unless otherwise described in appendix num all paints forming any one protective system or overlapping systems shall be obtained from the same manufacturer as named by the contractor in form hapnum new works paint system sheet appendix num .
num num the requirements of subclauses num num and num and their respective tables shall apply in scotland .
numse num testing of paints num num unless otherwise described in the contract the contractor shall provide unopened num litre samples known as a samples of each type of paint to be used in the works for testing for quality assurance purposes .
a samples shall be taken from the first batch of each type of paint delivered to the fabricators workshop or site .
in addition during the painting work the contractor shall supply numml samples known as b samples taken from painters kettles or from nozzles of airless spray guns directly into clean new tins .
for twopack systems separate unmixed samples of the base and activator shall be dispatched by the contractor to the testing authority approved by the overseeing organisation .
num depending upon the importance of the proposed painting application the overseeing organisation may elect to have a samples sent for limited testing by a local paint testing firm or other agency approved by the overseeing organisation .
appropriate forms for use in connection with limited testing shall be derived from the standard paint forms and shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation .
num num the contractor shall supply paint in sufficient time to allow for sampling and testing of a samples at least num weeks prior to the start of application .
the contractor shall be responsible for handling provision of clean tins for samples packing as necessary and prompt despatch and transit of all samples for testing .
num num a and b samples are tested for paint composition andor properties against the original formulation issued by the paint manufacturer to the certifying body .
num num the requirements of subclauses num num and num shall apply in scotland .
num except for procedure trials painting shall not start until the first of the a samples are confirmed as satisfactory .
amendment august num snum volume num series num specification for highway works protection of steelwork against corrosion numse num additional requirements for the protection of steel in bridge bearings applicable clauses num unless otherwise described in the contract the work described in this clause shall be carried out in compliance with appendix num and with clauses num to num inclusive .
supply of coatings num num information including the name of the paint manufacturer required for completing form hapnum new works paint system sheet appendix num for the bearings shall be obtained by the contractor from the bearing manufacturer .
num num item num and mio epoxy paints when required for application on site shall be obtained from the manufacturer of the workshop applied coats .
paint applied to the bearings on site to match the bridge steelwork paint system shall be obtained from the manufacturer of that system .
amendment august num snumf manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works series num waterproofing for concrete structures contents clause title page num num general num num protection of bridge deck waterproofing during construction num num num materials for waterproofing concrete bridge decks num num materials for waterproofing below ground concrete surfaces num num num workmanship for waterproofing concrete bridge decks num num workmanship for waterproofing below ground concrete surfaces num num num integrity testing of concrete bridge deck waterproofing num num num repair and replacement of bridge deck waterproofing num num amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num waterproofing for concrete structures waterproofing for concrete structures num num num general num the surface finish for new bridge decks between parapet upstands and to top of buried structures to be waterproofed shall be class unum finish in accordance with subclause num .
num existing waterproofing systems to bridge decks between parapet upstands are to be repaired or replaced in accordance with clause num .
num protection of bridge deck waterproofing during construction num num on any structure providing no damage results plant and equipment all fitted only with rubber tyres may stand or travel on permitted waterproofing systems solely for the purposes of laying an additional protective layer or surfacing course on that structure .
rollers shall not be permitted to stand or travel directly on the waterproofing system .
where it is necessary for plant equipment or traffic to stand or travel on a bridge deck that has been waterproofed with a permitted system before the laying of an additional protective layer suitable temporary protection shall be provided .
all such plant and equipment shall have its tyre treads regularly inspected and any embedded hard objects removed .
num temporary protection shall be provided where damage to the waterproofing protective layer or additional protective layer could result from particular site traffic .
num num the protective layer of a permitted two layer waterproofing system or any protective layer additional to that included as part of a permitted waterproofing system shall be laid immediately after the waterproofing layers bonding agent has set or cured .
where a waterproofing membrane also serves as an adhesive for the protective layer any additional protective layer shall not be laid until the liquid waterproofing membraneadhesive has set or cured .
num num materials for waterproofing concrete bridge decks permitted waterproofing systems num permitted waterproofing systems incorporated in the permanent works shall have a current bba british board of agrment roads and bridges agrment certificate which shall be registered with the overseeing organisation .
prior to commencement of the works the contractor shall provide to the overseeing organisation a copy of the bba roads and bridges agrment certificate appropriate to the work to be undertaken .
the procedure shall be repeated for each subsequent operation either for a different system or a different location .
additional bituminous protection num num bituminous protection where required as an additional protective layer shall comply with bs num recipe type f surface course mixture designation num except that num num of the total mix shall be inorganic red oxide and regarded as part of the filler content where the additional protective layer is required to be tinted .
num materials for waterproofing below ground concrete surfaces primer for tar and bitumen num primer for sealing concrete surfaces prior to waterproofing shall be compatible with the selected tar or bitumen waterproofing material .
the viscosity of the primer shall be such that it penetrates the concrete without forming a skin .
tar num tar shall comply with bs num of viscosity grade within the range numc equiviscous temperature .
cut back bitumen num cut back bitumen shall comply with bs num part num of viscosity grade num seconds .
amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num waterproofing for concrete structures proprietary materials num num subject to any restrictions specified in appendix num proprietary materials may be used .
num num workmanship for waterproofing concrete bridge decks permitted waterproofing systems num permitted waterproofing systems shall be supplied and installed in accordance with the bba roads and bridges agrment certificate .
the formation of defects affecting the integrity of the membrane including pinblow holes continuous or noncontinuous and blisters in the waterproofing shall i be made good by repair in accordance with the bba roads and bridges agrment certificate before any subsequent layers are applied or ii require the system to be replaced .
for sheet membranes bonded with oxidized bitumen the heating and temperature of the bitumen shall comply with the manufacturers requirements within the limits stated in bs num part num .
a means of checking the bitumen temperature shall be provided .
sheet membranes shall wherever possible be laid in the direction that the additional protective layer or surfacing will be laid and compacted by roller .
num unless otherwise specified in the bba roads and bridges agrment certificate joints between sheets shall be lapped with end laps of at least num mm and side laps of at least num mm .
the joints shall be arranged so that i at no point are there more than three thicknesses of sheeting and ii water will drain away from the exposed edge .
num permitted waterproofing systems shall be laid to follow the contours of the concrete surface .
laps ridges and ripples in waterproofing sheeting and peaks and steps at butt joints in waterproofing boards shall not be greater than num mm in height .
additional bituminous protection num bituminous protection complying with subclause num shall be laid on the clean and dry substrate and compacted in accordance with clause num to the areas and thickness shown on the drawings .
bond between additional protective layer or surfacing and the waterproofing system num the additional protective layer or surfacing laid on the waterproofing system shall be fully bonded to the system for the life of the system .
the bond shall be achieved by either i the binder within the directly applied additional protective layer or surfacing or ii a separate tack coat which has been assessed by the bba as part of the registration procedure and details of which are given on the bba roads and bridges agrment certificate .
where the tack coat is of the type activated by the heat of the succeeding bituminous layer the rolling temperature of this layer shall be sufficient to ensure adhesion .
num workmanship for waterproofing below ground concrete surfaces priming for tar and bitumen num num unless otherwise described in appendix num and prior to the application of the selected tar or bitumen waterproofing concrete surfaces shall be thoroughly sealed with an evenly applied primer .
the primer shall be well brushed in and not allowed to pond in any depressions .
tar num for tar waterproofing two coats of tar shall be hot applied at a rate of spread per coat of num litrem .
the first coat shall be allowed to dry before the second coat is applied .
cut back bitumen num for bitumen waterproofing two coats of cut back bitumen shall be hot applied at a rate of spread per coat of num litrem .
the first coat shall be allowed to dry before the second coat is applied .
proprietary materials num num for proprietary materials the method of application rate of spread number of coats and other requirements for each system shall be as described in the product literature supplied by the manufacturer .
num amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num waterproofing for concrete structures num num integrity testing of concrete bridge deck waterproofing num waterproofing systems to concrete bridge decks shall be tested where required in appendix num in accordance with the requirements therein to verify the integrity of the waterproofing .
num num repair and replacement of bridge deck waterproofing num the repair and replacement of existing bridge deck waterproofing systems shall comply with the requirements of clauses num num num and num and any additional requirements described in appendix num .
numf amendment may num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendment february num num series num bridge bearings contents clause title page num num general numf num num surface preparation and protection against corrosion numf num num bedding mortars numf volume num series num specification for highway works bridge bearings amendment february num numf bridge bearings num num general num num this series is part of the specification for highway works .
whilst this series is particularly relevant to the subject matter in its title it must be read in conjunction with the general requirements in series num and num and with all other series relevant to the specification for the particular works to be undertaken .
num num bridge bearings shall be in accordance with this series and contract specific appendix num .
they shall conform to bs en num and the contractor shall submit a declaration of performance for each bearing to the overseeing organisation a minimum of four weeks prior to the installation of the bearing .
the declaration of performance shall demonstrate that the bearing meets the requirements of the relevant part of bs en num and the performance requirements stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num the system of attestation of conformity or assessment and verification of consistency of performance avcp as detailed in annex za of the relevant part of bs en num shall be that which has intended use requirements on individual bearings which are critical .
num num the contractor shall undertake the design of bearings detailed in contract specific appendix num .
the design shall be in accordance with requirements stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall undertake the contract compliance testing detailed in contract specific appendix num in accordance with requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall provide reports on the transport storage and installation of the bearings installed and information on the required maintenance in accordance with the relevant parts of bs en num and requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
this shall include identifying any requirements for the bearings to be replaced in the future .
the reports shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation within the timescale stated in contract specific appendix num .
the reports shall include the following as appropriate i details of clamping required during transport storage and lifting ii details for protection measures for improved durability including skirts concertinas or housing assemblies this shall include details of how to remove maintain or replace these for inspection andor maintenance of the bearing iii installation and removal methods including sequences and timings iv as installed information including confirmation of removal of any temporary measures for example transit bolts or props v specific maintenance requirements including cleaning grease measurements and the required intervals .
num num surface preparation and protection against corrosion num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the surface preparation and corrosion protection of bearings shall comply with series num num num bedding mortars num num bedding mortars shall be in accordance with clause num .
march num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works series num bridge expansion joints and sealing of gaps contents clause title page num general num num installation of bridge deck expansion joints num num sealing of gaps num num protective treatment num num amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num bridge expansion joints and sealing of gaps bridge expansion joints and sealing of gaps num num general num bridge deck expansion joints and sealing of gaps in bridges and structures shall be as described in appendices num and num respectively and shall comply with the requirements of this series .
num num only bridge deck expansion joints which have been registered with the overseeing organisation in accordance with the requirements of bd num shall be incorporated into the works .
num storage and installation of joints jointing materials sealants and other associated items shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num the same joint system seal or sealant shall continue across the full width of the deck including footway verge hard strip hard shoulder and central reserve .
different joint systems shall not be combined at one end of a deck unless otherwise specified in appendix num .
num installation of bridge deck expansion joints num the positioning of holding down bolts and anchorage systems shall be checked for accuracy before the casting of concrete commences .
templates or shuttering shall be fixed to box out the concrete for the joint and to locate holding down bolts or anchorage pockets .
threaded parts shall be protected kept clean and free from rust .
num where the surfacing and bridge deck waterproofing are to be removed to accommodate the bridge joint these shall be cut to a clean straight line for the full depth of the surfacing without damage to the concrete substrate .
num before installation of the joint the concrete surfaces shall be free from laitance sound clean and comply with the manufacturers requirements .
num the expansion joint and the bridge deck waterproofing shall be formed so that a watertight seal is provided .
where prefabricated units are used the seal between each unit shall be made watertight and in addition a secondary waterproofing system in the form of a continuous membrane shall be installed .
num the gap width shall be set in relation to the prevailing deck temperature with the joint gap sides parallel as described in appendix num .
seals which are not held in metal runners shall remain in compression for the full range of joint movement .
num expansion joints shall be of uniform width and straight alignment and shall be accurately set and finished and aligned with the finished surface .
num during the placing and hardening of the bedding and bonding materials movement between the joint and the substrate shall be prevented .
num where required in appendix num subsurface and belowjoint drainage systems shall be designed provided and installed in accordance with the requirements therein and the joint manufacturers recommendations .
the complete drainage system shall be accessible for cleaning and on completion of the joint the drainage system shall be checked and cleared of any obstructions .
num before vehicles traffic the joints temporary covers capable of withstanding vehicular loading shall be provided over expansion joints during and after their installation as appropriate for protection .
num sealing of gaps num sealant materials and water stops shall be as described in appendix num .
joint filler board in any gaps shall comply with clause num .
num joint filler board and sealant materials shall be compatible .
num gunned or poured sealants shall be placed when the temperature of the structure is such that any movements which may take place will not cause the strain in the sealant to exceed the maximum value recommended by the manufacturer .
num immediately before sealing the contractor shall ensure that the sides of the joint gap are clean dry and free from loose material .
any concrete projections into the gap shall be removed .
num where a bond breaker in the form of a compressible strip is placed between the filler board and the sealant it shall be compatible with both materials .
num all seals shall where practicable be poured or fixed in one continuous length .
where required a joint amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num bridge expansion joints and sealing of gaps numf in a seal shall be located and formed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num where gunned or poured sealants are visible the concrete shall be masked on either side of the joint with suitable tape prior to the placement of the sealant to prevent its adherence to the exposed concrete surface .
the tape shall not stain the concrete surface .
num protective treatment num surface preparation and protection of metal components of expansion joints shall be in accordance with the joint manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise specified in appendix num .
amendment may num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works series num brickwork blockwork and stonework contents clause title page num cement num num aggregates num num water num num mortar num num lime mortar num num num masonry units bricks num num blocks num num reconstructed stone num num natural stone num num reinforcement num num anchorages dowels fixings and ties num num brickwork and blockwork num num stonework num num cold weather working num num protection of new work num num brick block and stone facework fixed to concrete num num brick and other works for unreinforced masonry arch bridges num num unreinforced masonry arch bridges num num volume num specification for highway works series num brickwork blockwork and stonework brickwork blockwork and stonework num cement num cement shall be one of the following i num portland cement conforming to bs en num ii num masonry cement conforming to bs en num iii num sulfateresisting portland cement conforming to bs num where described in appendix num .
num aggregates num num fine aggregate shall conform to bs en num .
num water num num if water for the works is not available from a water companys supply the contractor shall ensure that the water complies with the guidance given in bs en num .
the sulfate content of the water shall be tested in accordance with test no .
num in trl report num .
the water shall not be used if the sulfate content exceeds num g of sulfate as sonum per litre .
water from the sea or tidal rivers shall not be used .
num mortar num mortar work other than unreinforced masonry arch bridges num cement mortar for brickwork blockwork and stonework shall be mixed in the proportions given in table num according to the mortar designation described in appendix num .
num num the chloride ion content of the mortar determined in accordance with bs en num shall not exceed num of the mass of cement for mortar made with portland cement and num for mortar made with sulfateresisting portland cement .
calcium chloride or admixtures containing calcium chloride shall not be used .
num num for work in which cement mortars of designation ii or iii as defined in bs num are required the contractor shall select the appropriate mortar from one of the mixes for the designation given in table num .
if the work is to be carried out in frosty weather and the bricks are wet when laid then a cement sand mortar with an air entraining plasticiser shall be used .
admixtures shall conform to bs en num and any additional performance requirements stated in appendix num and shall not contain calcium chloride .
table num mortar proportions by volume mortar cement masonry cement designation lime sand cement sand sand with plasticiser i num to num ii numnum to num num to num num to num iii num to num num num to num num num the inclusion of lime in mortar designation i is optional .
the proportions of lime given in table num are for lime putty conforming to bs en num .
if the lime is measured as the dry hydrate the amount may be increased up to num volumes for each volume of lime putty .
where a range of sand contents is given in table num the higher shall be used for sand that is well graded and the lower for coarse or uniformly fine sand .
num mortar shall be mixed thoroughly either by hand or mechanically until its colour and consistency are uniform .
the constituent materials shall be accurately gauged allowance being made for bulking of sand .
mortar shall be made in small quantities only as and when required .
mortar which has begun to set or which has been mixed for a period of more than one hour in the case of a mortar designation i or more than two hours in the case of other designations shall be discarded .
num num a set of mortar prisms shall be made for each type of mortar designated to be used and shall be tested in accordance with subclause num .
num lime mortar num num lime mortar shall consist of one part by volume of hydrated lime conforming to bs en num to num parts by volume of sand .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works brickwork blockwork and stonework num num masonry units bricks num brick work other than unreinforced masonry arch bridges num num clay masonry units bricks shall conform to the particular requirements of bs en num as described in appendix num .
the determination of sulfate content for the soluble salt content test shall be in accordance with test no .
num in trl report num .
num num calcium silicate bricks sand lime and flint lime shall comply with bs en num .
num num bricks beneath frames for chambers and gullies and for the construction of brick chambers shall unless otherwise described in appendix num be hd type class b clay engineering bricks conforming to bs en num and the performance characteristics given in table num table num num performance characteristic requirements performance characteristic reference clay engineering bricks class b compressive strength n mmnum bs en num num water absorption by mass and also when used as dpc units and net dry density kgmnum bs en num and bs en num num and dpcnum and num freezethaw resistance category bs en num fnum active soluble salts content category bs en num snum or concrete bricks or blocks conforming to bs en num and bs en num having an average crushing strength value of not less than num nmm when used for surface water drainage or special purpose concrete bricks having a minimum cement content of num kgmnum when used for foul drainage .
num blocks num num concrete blocks shall comply with the particular requirements of bs en num and bs en num as described in appendix num .
amendment may num num num reconstructed stone num num reconstructed stone shall be used only in blockwork and shall comply with bs en num and any particular requirements described in appendix num .
num natural stone num building stone shall be of the type and quality described in appendix num .
num reinforcement num num wire or fabric laid between brickwork or blockwork shall be stainless steel to bs en num designation num num or num softened condition excluding free machining specifications .
num num steel bars laid between brickwork or blockwork shall be stainless steel to bs num designation num or num softened condition excluding free machining specifications .
num anchorages dowels fixings and ties num num anchorages dowels fixings and ties shall be stainless steel designation num num or num softened condition excluding free machining specifications complying with the requirements given in the british standards listed in table num .
table num num austenitic stainless steel form standard to be complied with strip bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num rod bs en num bar bs num tube bs en num wire bs en num num brickwork and blockwork num brickwork and blockwork shall be laid on a full bed of mortar and bonded as described in appendix num .
single frogged bricks shall be laid with the frog uppermost .
perpends between bricks and blocks shall be filled with mortar before the next mortar bed is laid .
whole bricks and blocks shall be used except where it is necessary to cut closers .
num brickwork and blockwork shall be built uniformly .
corners and other advanced work shall be stepped back and not raised above the general level more than volume num series num specification for highway works brickwork blockwork and stonework num mm .
courses shall be kept horizontal and matching perpends shall be in vertical alignment .
num unless stated in appendix num overhand work shall not be permitted .
num bedjoint reinforcement shall have a num mm minimum of mortar cover to each masonry face .
it shall not be laid dry on a bed face but shall be embedded within the mortar bed thickness .
num where pointing is required in appendix num the joint shall be raked out to a depth of num mm and after the completion of the entire facework pointed in mortar as described in appendix num .
num where jointing is required in appendix num it shall be done as the work proceeds to the finish described in appendix num .
num stonework general num except where otherwise described in appendix num the length of any stone shall not exceed three times its height .
the breadth on the bed shall be not less than num mm nor greater than threequarters of the thickness of the wall .
num all stratified stone possessing bedding planes shall be laid with its natural bed as nearly as possible at right angles to the direction of load .
in the case of arch rings the natural bed shall be radial .
num facework quoins shall be built to a height not exceeding num mm in advance of the main body of the work and adjacent walling stepped down on either side .
num stone facework between the quoins shall then be built to a height not exceeding num mm above the backing which shall then be brought up level with the completed facework .
at no time shall the backing be built up higher than the facework .
num except for dry rubble walling all joints shall be sufficiently thick to prevent stonetostone contact and shall be completely filled with mortar .
ashlar num all stones shall be dressed to accurate planes on the beds and joints and they shall be fair and neatly or fine tooled on the face as described in appendix num .
blockincourse num beds and joints shall be squared and dressed for a distance of at least num mm from the exposed face .
bond stones shall form not less than one sixth of the area of the exposed face and shall extend at least num mm into the wall or for the full thickness of the wall if the latter is less than num mm .
unless described in appendix num as tooled or worked the exposed face of all stone shall be blocked and left rough .
arrises shall be dressed square at all beds and joints .
squared random rubble coursed and uncoursed num all stones shall be truly squared and dressed on the beds and joints for a distance of at least num mm from the exposed face .
bond stones shall be provided at the rate of not less than one to every square metre of exposed face and shall measure not less than num mm x num mm on the face and not less than num mm or the full thickness of the wall if the latter is less than num mm .
sneck stones shall be not less than num mm in any dimension .
vertical joints shall not include more than three consecutive stones and the horizontal lapping of the stones shall be not less than num mm .
random rubble coursed and uncoursed num all stones shall be carefully set with a bond stone provided at the rate of not less than one to every square metre of exposed face .
bond stones shall measure not less than num mm x num mm on the exposed face and not less than num mm in length or the full thickness of the wall if the latter is less than num mm unless otherwise described in appendix num .
for coursed work the joints shall be levelled as described in appendix num and the backing flushed up in mortar .
dry rubble num dry rubble stonework shall be constructed generally to the requirements of uncoursed random rubble stonework as specified in subclause num of this clause but without mortar .
all stones shall be carefully shaped to obtain a close fit at all beds and joints any interstices between the stones being filled with selected stone chippings or spalls .
the exposed tops or copings of dry rubble walls shall be formed as shown on the drawings .
special stonework including quoins copings plinths voussoirs etc num special stonework shall consist of selected stones dressed to the shapes and dimensions and where required their faces worked all as shown on the drawings .
num cold weather working num num no bricks blocks or stones shall be laid when the air temperature in the shade is below numc unless precautions are taken either in accordance with amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works brickwork blockwork and stonework bs num or to ensure that all materials when used are free from snow ice and frost .
num protection of new work num immediately after laying and for num days thereafter brickwork blockwork and stonework shall be protected against the harmful effects of weather .
the upper surface of newly laid brickwork blockwork and stonework shall be protected against rain as the work proceeds until such time as the work is completed and the upper dampcourse coping or other finishing feature is laid .
num num all visible brickwork blockwork and stonework and any surface below such work which is visible at the completion of the works shall be clean and free from damage and spillage .
all purposemade open joints shall be free from debris of any description .
num brick block and stone facework fixed to concrete num any loose material shall be removed from the concrete and its surface washed with clean water before any bricks blocks or masonry is laid .
num the portion of the stainless steel fixing projecting from the concrete shall be completely embedded in the mortar of the facework and shall be kept back a minimum of num mm from the face of the brickwork and blockwork or num mm from the face of the masonry .
num the cavity between brick and block facework and the concrete shall be completely filled as the work proceeds with mortar of the same mix as that specified for the facework .
num num the variation in depth front to back of stones for natural stone facework shall not exceed that described in appendix num and the space between the facework and the backing shall be completely filled as the work proceeds with concrete strength class cnum and a maximum aggregate size of num mm conforming to series num .
num brick and other works for unreinforced masonry arch bridges num num unreinforced masonry arch bridges general num the masonry and associated work requirements for unreinforced masonry arch bridges shall conform to this series .
brick work num num unless otherwise described in appendix num masonry units bricks shall be hd type class a or class b clay engineering bricks conforming to the particular requirements of bs en num and the performance characteristics given in table num .
the determination of sulfate content for the soluble salt content test shall be in accordance with test no .
num in trl report num .
amendment may num num table num num performance characteristic requirements performance characteristic reference clay engineering bricks class a class b compressive strength nmmnum bs en num num num water absorption by mass and also when used as dpc units and net dry density kgmnum bs en num and bs en num num and dpcnum and num num and dpcnum and num freezethaw resistance category bs en num fnum fnum active soluble salts content category bs en num snum snum volume num series num specification for highway works brickwork blockwork and stonework num num concrete bricks and blocks shall conform to bs en num and bs en num having an average crushing strength value of not less than num nmm and a minimum cement content of num kgmnum .
num natural stone shall conform to bs num and shall be selected on the basis of proven durability and weather resistance as described in appendix num .
num num reconstructed stone shall conform to bs en num and the requirements stated in appendix num .
num calcium silicate units shall not be permitted for use in unreinforced masonry arch bridge construction .
mortar work num mortar shall be in accordance with clause num and the following .
num num mortar designation shall be in accordance with table num .
materials and mix proportions shall be in accordance with subclauses num to num and num as appropriate .
table num num mortar designation locationelement mortar designation below a level of nummm above finished ground level i or ii above a level of nummm above finished ground level abutments spandrelwing walls piers parapets arch rings ii or iii iii num num a set of mortar prisms shall be made for each type of mortar designation used on each arch structure .
the mortar used shall be representative of the mortar used in the structure .
the prisms shall be made and tested for compressive strength in accordance with bs en num .
each set comprises three prisms each divided in two to give six individual tests .
the mean of the six tests shall be within the limits shown in table num table num num mortar compressive strengths mortar designation numday mean compressive strength in nmmnum minimum maximum i num num ii num num iii num num num in cases such as where an existing arch with lime mortar is being widened or where additional tolerance of movement is considered desirable lime mortar may be used .
in such cases the mortar shall comply with the recommendations of best practice guide for hydraulic lime mortar for stone brick and block masonry .
workmanship for brickwork blockwork and stonework num workmanship shall be in accordance with clauses num num num and num and annex a of bs num .
num forms of bonding in which the rings of masonry are jointed by mortar alone as with concentric rings in stretcher bond shall not be used unless stated in appendix num .
num clay bricks shall not be used within num days of firing .
num masonry in an arch ring shall be flush jointed .
num exposed surfaces of masonry shall be regular clean and have an acceptable appearance .
num finished surfaces of buried masonry to be waterproofed shall have no abrupt irregularities greater than num mm .
num masonry shall not be subjected to loading including its own weight within num days of construction which will induce a stress exceeding num of its strength at the time of loading .
num removal of centring to the arch ring shall only take place after the material has gained sufficient strength .
the centring shall not be removed until at least num days after completion of the arch ring .
waterproofing num unless otherwise described in appendix num the waterproofing system shall be a permitted system conforming to clauses num and num .
protection of waterproofing num waterproofing systems shall be protected with a single leaf of masonry or insitu concrete when unbound materials are used as a permeable backing .
amendment may num num volume num specification for highway works series num brickwork blockwork and stonework num waterproofing systems with a permeable backing of porous no fines concrete or precast hollow concrete blocks in accordance with subclauses numii and iii shall require no further protection .
permeable backing to structures num permeable backing to spandrelwing walls and abutments shall comply with clause num .
where foamed concrete fill to clause num is used subclause num shall apply .
num where class numn or nump fill is used permeable backing to the arch ring shall be a granular material or porous nofines concrete in accordance with clause num .
num where class numa numb or foamed concrete fill is used permeable backing to the arch ring shall conform to subclause num .
fill num fill shall be class numn nump numa or numb conforming to clause num or foamed concrete conforming to clause num .
num fill shall be placed and compacted in accordance with clause num .
num plant for compaction of material within num metre or within one fifth of the span if greater of the arch ring shall conform to subclause num .
num for bridges carrying public highways a minimum depth of fill of num mm shall be provided between the crown of the arch and the underside of the pavement as described in appendix num .
num unless otherwise described in appendix num fill shall be drained by a num mm minimum diameter pipe with rodding facilities provided at springing .
drainage pipes and rodding facilities shall conform to series num .
amendment may num numf amendment may num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works series num special structures contents clause title page num corrugated steel buried structures num num reinforced soil and anchored earth structures num num reinforced clay brickwork retaining walls of pockettype and groutedcavity construction num num environmental barriers num num num drainage structures num num num buried rigid pipes for drainage structures num num volume num specification for highway works series num special structures special structures num num corrugated steel buried structures general num corrugated steel buried structures of clear span or internal diameter exceeding num mm shall comply with this clause .
num num the contractor shall design the corrugated steel buried structures listed in appendix num in accordance with standard bd num dmrb num and the design requirements given in appendix num .
earthworks num earthworks shall comply with series num .
steel components num all helically wound systems and all bolted segmental systems to be incorporated in the works shall have a current type approval certificate .
all the individual components and materials making up the system shall comply with the properties listed in the current type approval certificate .
num helically wound systems shall additionally have a current british board of agrment roads and bridges certificate .
num the lockseams of helically wound systems shall be able to withstand tensile forces across the seam according to steel sheet thickness as tabulated below nominal sheet minimum tensile force thickness across seam mm knm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num for intermediate sheet thicknesses the minimum tensile force required may be determined by linear interpolation .
num after forming the depth of the corrugations shall be within a tolerance of num and the pitch of the corrugations within a tolerance of num of the nominal dimensions .
plates shall have a minimum lip of num mm beyond each end crest .
cut edges shall be free from notches gouges rust or burrs .
num when all the plates of a bolted segmental structure have been assembled the nuts shall be tightened by applying a torque within the range stated on the type approval certificate .
the tightening shall be repeated if necessary to achieve the required torque .
bolts nuts and washers if provided shall be of such a design that no damage is caused to metal coatings when the nuts are tightened as described above .
hot dip galvanizing of steel components num num all surfaces of steel components shall be hot dip galvanized in compliance with the standards listed in the appropriate type approval certificate and british board of agrment roads and bridges certificate .
plates for bolted segmental structures shall be galvanized after forming the corrugations and completing all necessary cutting punching and drilling .
units in which the galvanized coating has been burned by welding or otherwise damaged in fabrication transport cutting or handling at site shall be made good in compliance with clauses num and num .
num bolts and nuts shall be hot dip galvanized in compliance with the standards listed in the appropriate type approval certificate and british board of agrment roads and bridges certificate .
concrete foundations of arch profile structures num concrete foundations shall be constructed as described in appendix num with concrete complying with series num .
concrete invert pavings num num where described in appendix num concrete invert pavings shall be constructed in compliance with that appendix using strength class cnum concrete and a maximum aggregate size of nummm complying with series num .
num concrete invert pavings shall be reinforced with a steel fabric complying with series num having mesh dimensions not greater than num mm x num mm and a nominal wire size not less than num mm .
all laps in the mesh shall be at least num mm .
the steel fabric shall be securely fixed to the structure by means of fixings at the bolt positions .
it shall extend to within a distance not greater than num mm nor less than num mm inside the amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num special structures num edges of the concrete on each side .
a nominal cover of num mm shall be provided to all other faces including that to the crest of the corrugations in the structural steel .
num concrete invert pavings shall be cast in lengths not exceeding num metres with the provision of a water bar between adjacent panels and the joints sealed with a joint sealant to clause num .
num at each end of the structure the concrete invert paving shall be either i num terminated with a toe that returns at least num mm under the structural steel forming the structure .
the steel fabric shall be folded under the lips of the structure to suit .
the toe shall be detailed with a thickness of not less than that required for the paving in standard bd num dmrb num or ii detailed to suit any headwall arrangement eg paving reinforcement lapped with headwall reinforcement .
num all foreign matter but not any secondary proprietary protective coating unless indicated otherwise in the type approval certificate or british board of agrment roads and bridges certificate referred to in subclauses num and num of this clause and free standing water shall be removed from the steel surfaces to be paved before commencing work .
proprietary invert pavings num any proposed proprietary invert paving system shall have a current british board of agrment roads and bridges certificate .
proprietary secondary protective coatings applied above hot dip galvanized coating num any proposed proprietary protective coating system shall have a current british board of agrment roads and bridges certificate .
additional protective coatings num where described in appendix num exposed galvanized steel surfaces shall be prepared and protected after erection in compliance with that appendix .
the additional protective coating may be factory or site applied and shall have a service life of at least six years in aggressive conditions .
num reinforced soil and anchored earth structures general num num reinforced soil or anchored earth structures shall comply with this clause .
the contractor shall design the reinforced soil or anchored earth structures listed in appendix num in accordance with standard bd num dmrb num and the design requirements and procedures described in appendix num .
earthworks num earthworks for reinforced soil and anchored earth structures shall comply with series num .
reinforcing elements for reinforced soil and anchor elements for anchored earth num num carbon steel strip to be hot dip galvanized shall comply with bs en num and bs en num either grade snum jr or snum jr or bs num part num either quality khr nump or quality khr nump each having a silicon content of not less than num and not more than num .
the fabricated element shall be hot dip galvanized in compliance with clause num except that the average zinc coating weight for any individual test area shall be not less than num gm .
num stainless steel strip shall comply with i num bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num designation num or num except that the material shall be cold rolled to provide a num proof stress of not less than num n mm and the tensile strength shall be not less than num nmm or ii num bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num designation num cr temper rolled to a minimum num proof stress of num nmm .
num proprietary reinforcing elements and systems using such elements shall have a current british board of agrment roads and bridges certificate .
num num anchor elements for anchored earth shall be made of cold worked steel reinforcing bar conforming to bs en num and bs num grade bnumb except that no bar shall contain a flash weld .
welding of steel reinforcement bars to form anchors shall comply with clause num .
the fabricated elements shall be hot dip galvanized in compliance with clause num except that the average zinc coating weight for any individual test area shall be not less than num gm .
amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num special structures num num reinforcing and anchor elements shall be prefabricated and delivered to site ready for installation into the works .
the elements shall be i loaded unloaded and handled in such a manner that a no permanent set or other structural damage is caused b thenum protective coating is not damaged .
ii stored flat and clearly marked to identify items having different lengths and cross sectional dimensions .
fasteners num num bolts screws and nuts complying with bs en iso num property classes a and b shall comply with bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num and shall be made from one of the following i num steel property class num complying with bs en iso num and hot dip galvanized in compliance with series num. ii num stainless steel to bs en num designation num or num except that the num proof stress of the bolt shall be not less than num nmm and the tensile strength shall be not less than num nmm .
num num bolts screws and nuts shall comply with one of the following i num bs en iso num and bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num hot dip galvanized in compliance with clause num .
the property class of the bolts and screws shall be not less than num while the property class of the nuts shall not be less than num. ii num stainless steel to bs en iso num and bs en iso num grade anum .
num num plain washers shall be of either form a or form e complying with bs num and shall be made from one of the following i num cold rolled carbon steel strip csnum complying with bs num part num hot dip galvanized in compliance with clause num. ii num stainless steel strip designation num or num complying with bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en num .
num num dowels and rods shall be made from one of the following i num steel bar conforming to bs en num and bs num grade bnumb hot dip galvanized in compliance with clause num. ii steel of grade s num jr complying with bs en num num hot dip galvanized in compliance with clause num. iii num stainless steel to bs en num designation num or num except that the num proof stress shall be not less than num nmm and the tensile strength shall be not less than num nmm .
prefabricated and precast facing and capping units num num carbon steel strip or sheet to be hot dip galvanized shall comply with bs num part num either quality khr nump or quality khr nump each having a silicon content of not less than num and not more than num .
following fabrication the units shall be hot dip galvanized in compliance with clause num except that the average zinc coating weight for any individual test area shall be not less than num gm .
num num stainless steel strip or sheet shall comply with bs en num bs en num bs en num bs en num and bs en num designation num or num .
num reinforced concrete shall comply with series num .
num proprietary facing units and systems using such units shall have a current british board of agrment roads and bridges certificate .
metal components material compatibility num all metallic components buried in the soil ie reinforcing elements connections facing lugs and facing units shall be of electrolytically compatible material .
where this is not possible effective insulation shall be provided between different materials .
num reinforced clay brickwork retaining walls of pockettype and groutedcavity construction materials num cement aggregates water and mortars for reinforced brickwork retaining wall structures shall comply with the relevant clauses of series num except where different requirements are given in this clause .
masonry cement or high alumina cement shall not be used .
amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num special structures num num num unless otherwise described in appendix num masonry units bricks shall be hd type class b clay engineering bricks conforming to the particular requirements of bs en num and the performance characteristics given in table num .
the equivalent strength grades of bs en num as compared to bs num see bd num dmrb num shall be given in appendix num .
the determination of sulfate content for the soluble salt content test shall be in accordance with test no .
num in trl report num .
selection of bricks shall follow the recommendations contained in bs num in respect of durability and other considerations .
second hand masonry units shall not be used .
num num unless otherwise described in appendix num concrete shall be a designed concrete and shall be either ordinary structural concrete or special structural concrete .
it shall comply with the requirements of series num .
num num reinforcement types shall comply with series num and num clauses except that all stainless steel shall be designation num .
bedjoint reinforcement shall not exceed num mm diameter .
no bimetallic contact is permitted .
num wall ties shall be as described in appendix num .
dovetail wall ties shall not be used .
num damp proof courses shall be as described in appendix num .
storage of materials num num the handling storage and mixture of materials shall follow the recommendations of bs num .
num bricks shall be unloaded with due care to minimize damage placed on site in different stacks according to strength and type and be marked clearly .
they shall be stacked on prepared level areas avoiding ground contamination and be protected from rain or snow .
num cement lime and limesand mix shall be stored off the ground in dry areas and used in the sequence of delivery .
different types of cements shall be stored separately and clearly identified .
lime and limesand mix shall be protected from drying out .
num reinforcement shall be stored on site in a safe manner and be free from loose rust scale dirt paint oil grease or any other harmful material prior to fixing .
laying of bricks num brickwork shall be laid in accordance with clause num .
jointing is preferable to pointing and shall be used unless there is a specific need for pointing .
joints shall be tooled as the work progresses to either a flush or bucket handle profile .
bricks shall not be used within num days of firing .
num the maximum height of brickwork to be built in a day shall be limited to num m and num hours shall elapse before recommencing bricklaying .
num cutting of bricks shall be kept to a minimum .
when cutting is necessary cutting discs shall be used .
num where sleeves chases or holes are required they shall be provided during the erection of brickwork .
mixing of mortar num mortar shall be mixed mechanically until its colour and consistency are uniform .
the constituent material shall be accurately measured .
num num where ready mixed mortars are specified their use shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and bs en num and bs en num .
num mortar shall be made in small quantities only as and when required .
mortar which has begun to set or which has been mixed for a period of more than one hour shall be discarded .
num when additives or admixtures are specified in appendix num their use shall strictly follow the manufacturers instructions and shall be demonstrated in the trial panel .
num num mortars shall be tested in accordance with annex a of bs num .
concrete general num batching and mixing of concrete shall comply with clause num .
num num concrete compliance shall be in accordance with clauses num to num and num .
num transporting placing compacting and finishing of concrete shall be in accordance with clauses num and num .
the rate of placing of concrete with respect to the rate of brickwork construction shall be as required by appendix num .
the placing and compaction of concrete shall not disrupt either the masonry or the reinforcement .
cold weather working num num cold weather working shall be in accordance with clauses num and num .
hot weather working num during hot weather the contractor shall ensure that the constituent materials of mortar and concrete are sufficiently cool to prevent stiffening before placement in amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num special structures num their final position .
cement shall not be allowed to come into contact with water at a temperature greater than numc .
protection of new work num protection of newly laid brickwork shall be in accordance with clause num .
num in addition during freezing conditions brickwork shall be covered with an insulating layer followed by a waterproofing material .
covers shall be held clear of the brickwork and be well secured .
num side protection shall be provided in exposed site conditions .
weatherproofing backfill and drainage num the retaining face of the wall shall be flushjointed and tooled and shall be subsequently painted with a waterproofing material in accordance with clauses num num and num .
num backfilling shall be in accordance with clause num .
before commencing backfilling a period of num days or longer if required by appendix num shall elapse after the completion of the wall .
num permeable backing to the retaining wall shall be in accordance with clause num .
num when used weepholes shall not be allowed to drain freely across footways or carriageways .
trial panel num the contractor shall construct a trial panel of pocket type or groutedcavity reinforced brickwork retaining wall of dimensions specified in appendix num prior to commencement of permanent work .
the trial panel shall be used to demonstrate the colour of mortar workability of mortar formation of pockets and infilling of concrete .
where required in appendix num the panel shall be dismantled in such a manner that the effectiveness of each element can be examined .
num where required in appendix num the contractor shall construct additional panels to comply with the appearance requirements of bs num .
num environmental barriers general num num environmental barriers shall be constructed from the quality of materials and be erected to standards described in the following subclauses unless otherwise specified in appendix num .
num where an environmental barrier is erected on ground or any other surface which follows the longitudinal profile of the adjacent road or on existing ground or earthwork environmental bund which has a gradient of not greater than num in num along the line of the barrier the top of the barrier shall follow a flowing vertical alignment .
where the earthwork environmental bund or original ground has a slope exceeding num in num the top of the barrier may be stepped where permitted in appendix num .
the minimum height of the barrier and the maximum step increments where steps are permitted shall be as specified in appendix num .
where necessary the ground shall be excavated or filled and compacted in compliance with the appropriate clauses in series num .
any excavation required shall not affect the minimum height of the barrier as shown in appendix num .
the gravel board or bottom edge of the barrier shall be buried to a depth of at least num mm .
num num where the environmental barrier is combined with a safety barrier the safety barrier shall comply with the current standards issued by the overseeing organisation .
num num where the environmental barrier is to be erected on an earthwork environmental bund the bund shall comply with clause num .
tolerances num tolerances shall be as follows i an environmental barrier shall be erected along a line or smooth curve as indicated on the contract drawings within a tolerance of num mm normal to the plane of the barrier in addition the horizontal deviation from the required positions at adjacent panels or posts shall not vary by more than num mm .
ii the top edge of the barrier shall be at the specified height above the road surface existing ground or finished ground level of the earthwork environmental bund within a tolerance of num mm and the deviation from the required levels at adjacent panels or posts shall not vary by more than num mm .
iii barriers shall be vertical unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
timber num timber shall comply with clause num .
non structural timber shall be acceptable if it complies with hcd drawing number hnum and hnum .
for checking compliance the rejection numbers shall be num num num num num and num respectively instead of num num num num num and num .
num timber surfaces shall be sawn unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
num timber within panels shall not be butt jointed .
the thickness of panel boards shall be sufficient to ensure the specified acoustic requirements and their width amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num special structures num shall not be more than num mm measured at num moisture content .
exposed ends of vertical boards shall be protected against weathering by a top or capping rail .
fittings num num fittings shall comply with clause num unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
nails in timber preserved with copperchromiumarsenic cca treatment shall be austenitic stainless steel designation num to bs en num .
concrete num num reinforced concrete components shall comply with the requirements of annex a of bs num part num .
combination of timber and concrete num num timber cladding used to screen concrete panel barriers shall comply with bs num part num and clause num .
steel num num steel posts and environmental barrier members shall comply with the requirements in series num and shall i be hot dip galvanized to comply with clause num and either be a num painted with the following paint system to comply with series num table numb system iv num coat of item num num coat of item num or item num num coat of item num or item num num coat of item num or item num to achieve a minimum total dry film thickness of the paint system of num microns or b plastic coated to comply with clause num ii have improved atmospheric corrosion resistance complying with clauses num and num .
brickwork num brickwork shall comply with series num .
other materials num other materials or combination of materials shall comply with appendix num .
design num where required the contractor shall design the environmental barriers listed in appendix num in accordance with the design specification and procedures in appendix num .
in addition if required in appendix num he shall design foundations posts andor other supports .
the contractor shall submit his design to the overseeing organisation for aesthetic approval .
the contractor shall also take account of the following i num the contractor shall when required in appendix num erect num sample panels of barrier not less than num weeks before starting construction .
one section shall show the horizontal elevation the other a sloping elevation .
spacing of barrier posts shall be as described in appendix num .
when appendix num requires a safety barrier to be attached to the environmental barrier the safety barrier shall be supplied and fixed to the sample panels of the environmental barrier .
the sample panels shall be used as the standard which must be maintained throughout the contract .
ii the contractor shall provide working drawings of the design and details of fabrication .
iii the contractor shall supply the overseeing organisation with the following a design calculations .
b details of materials and components used in the barrier .
c details of gates and methods of fixing where applicable .
d details of fixing to adjoining structures and parapets where applicable .
iv fixings shall be fitted so that bolts either do not protrude on the traffic side or only do so with a coach bolt head a cup square head or with a dome headed nut .
v fixings and fastenings used shall be designed to prevent wilful damage .
the design and materials used shall also enable damaged components to be replaced .
vi stepping of panels shall only be permitted as specified in appendix num to be compatible with aesthetic requirements .
vii the design shall be such that movement due to change in moisture content thermal effects or weathering will not reduce the acoustic attenuation of the barrier .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num special structures num viii all joints shall be sufficiently masked by cover strips or rebated to ensure acoustic integrity .
ix the design shall ensure that all members of the barrier can drain freely and do not allow water to stand on their surfaces or within joints .
x where access gates are required in appendix num their design shall be such that they blend unobtrusively into the barrier .
they shall open away from the nearest carriageway and leave no gap when closed .
the gates shall be selfclosing by the provision of a heavy duty spring and be secured as described in appendix num .
in barriers up to and including num m high the top edge of the gate shall be at the specified height of the barrier .
gates in barriers over num m high shall be num m high and provided with a header panel to align with the top of the barrier .
where a gate is not to be provided but a gap is to be left for access as described in appendix num a length of barrier shall be erected behind the gap or an overlap provided sufficient to maintain the acoustic properties of the barrier .
xi when timber is used in the barrier the following shall apply a one or two gravel boards not less than num mm deep shall be provided having a total thickness of not less than num mm .
concrete gravel boards or edging will be acceptable .
b fixings shall be such as to allow timber movement due to change in moisture content to be accommodated without inducing splitting .
testing of acoustic performance num num where required in appendix num the complete form of construction proposed for an environment barrier shall have been tested by an appropriate organisation accredited in accordance with subclauses num and num for acoustic testing in accordance with bs en num .
insulation requirements num the overall performance characteristic dlr determined in accordance with bs en num part num shall meet the requirements stated in appendix num .
absorption requirements num the performance characteristic dl determined in accordance with bs en num part num shall meet the requirements stated in appendix num .
post foundation test num i where stated in appendix num the contractor shall provide test equipment and carry out loading tests on post foundations as described in appendix num .
the results shall be available at least one week prior to installation of the relevant length of fence unless otherwise stated in appendix num. ii the contractor shall install foundations for testing after completion of the finished ground .
iii on completion of loading tests the contractor shall remove the test posts and foundations and make good the finished ground unless the posts and foundations have not exhibited failure and can be incorporated into the permanent works .
iv the contractor shall establish and maintain appropriate traffic safety and management measures complying with clause num during installation loading and removal of the test posts and foundations .
num num drainage structures general num all drains piped and box culverts sewers and drainage structures other than bridges that have a diameter or clear span exceeding num mm shall comply with this clause and any additional requirements described in appendices num and num .
where the term drain is used in this series it shall be deemed to include the terms sewer and piped culvert .
num the contractor shall design the piped and box culverts and other drainage structures listed in appendix num in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
unless otherwise described in appendices num and num only one type of pipe shall be used within any individual drain between consecutive chambers .
num pipes for drains shall be selected from the alternatives in table num and shall comply with the standards and particular requirements therein .
the contractor shall show that the pipes which have been selected have an hydraulic flow capacity equal to that adopted in the hydraulic design of the system as amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num special structures num described in appendices num and num .
on completion of the whole of the drainage works the contractor shall provide the overseeing organisation with a schedule showing details of all pipe types used including quality joints and name of manufacturer .
table num num pipes for drains and culverts having diameter or clear span exceeding num mm material usage standard particular requirements vitrified clay surface foul bs en num shall comply with water drains clause num concrete with surface foul bs num pipes having a cement types water drains and bs en concrete mix meeting cem i or srpc num or the following as defined in bs num requirement .
testing table a.num of in accordance with the bs num when relevant bs and required in sampling in appendix num. accordance with supersulfated subclause num of cement shall not clause num be used a total chloride content not exceeding the values in table num shall comply with clause num iron surface foul bs en num water drains ductile iron corrugated steel surface water bd num type approval drains dmrb certificate and bba num roads and bridges certificate shall comply with clause num num num buried rigid pipes for drainage structures scope num for the purposes of this clause rigid pipes include vitrified clay pipes and plain reinforced and prestressed concrete pipes as set out in table num .
the maximum length of pipe between flexible joints shall comply with the requirements of appendix num .
excavation for pipes and chambers num excavation shall comply with clause num and with subclause num .
trenches shall not exceed the maximum widths scheduled in appendix num .
num unless otherwise described in appendix num all pipes in or under new embankments shall be laid only when the embankment has been formed and compacted to formation level under paved areas to finished earthworks level in other areas or to a level which will give a minimum cover of num m to the pipes whichever is the lowest .
bedding laying and surrounding of pipes num immediately following the excavation of the trench the pipes shall be laid and jointed on the pipe bed in accordance with subclause num .
where described in appendix num limestone aggregates shall not be used as bedding .
num drainage pipe and bedding combinations shall be selected from the alternatives described in appendix num .
pipe bedding haunching and surrounding material shall be as shown on hcd drawing numbers fnum and fnum and shall comply with subclause numi ii iii iv and vi .
num completion of the bedding haunching and surrounding of the pipes shall be carried out immediately after jointing in accordance with sub clause num .
num precautions shall be taken to minimise water flows through the granular beddings surrounding rigid pipes as required in appendix num .
jointing of pipes num rigid joints shall mean joints made solid by caulking the sockets or bolting together flanges integral with the pipes .
flexible joints shall mean joints made with deformable rings or gaskets held between pipe spigots and sockets sleeves or collars .
num joints in surface water drains and foul sewers shall be watertight and comply with the appropriate british standards and the manufacturers instructions .
rigid joints shall be used only where permitted in appendix num .
spigots and sockets of rigid joints may be caulked with tarred rope yarn or equivalent and the socket completely filled with mortar designation i complying with clause num but excluding lime a fillet of mortar shall be worked around the socket extending for a length of not less than num mm from the face of the socket .
num where a concrete bed cradle arch or surround is used with rigid pipes having flexible joints joint filler board complying with clause num shall be placed in contact with the end of the socket at all pipe joints and shall extend through the full thickness of the concrete bed haunch and surround in contact with the pipe .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num special structures num backfilling of trenches num backfilling shall be undertaken immediately after the required operations preceding it have been completed .
num except where otherwise described in appendix num trenches shall be backfilled above the pipe surround material described in clause num with class num num or num general fill material complying with series num .
num backfilling shall be deposited and compacted in compliance with clause num .
the material used for backfilling shall be deposited in even layers and shall not be heaped in the trench before being spread .
spreading and compaction shall be carried out evenly without dislodging distorting or damaging the pipe .
power rammers shall not be used within num mm of any part of the pipe or joint .
num except in carriageways and other paved areas and locations described in appendix num backfill of trenches shall be brought up to ground level .
where topsoil is at the surface on the line of the trench the upper section of the backfill shall be topsoil of the thickness described in appendix num or of the same thickness and quality of topsoil as on the surrounding ground where no thickness is specified .
for trenches in carriageways or other paved areas the backfill shall be brought up to formation level or subformation level where capping is required unless a lower level is described in appendix num .
sheeting and other excavation supports shall be removed as the filling proceeds unless otherwise described in appendix num .
connecting to existing drains chambers and channels num connections to existing drains chambers and channels shall be carried out in accordance with clause num with the exception that where appendix num is mentioned in subclauses num and num it shall be altered to read appendix num .
chambers num chambers other than those used in motorway communications installations shall include manholes catchpits inspection chambers draw pits and walled soakaways .
chambers shall be one of the types specified in appendix num .
num num foundations to chambers shall be of stnum concrete complying with clause num .
channels for chambers shall be formed and finished smooth in the foundation concrete or constructed of preformed half circle channels with sides benched in the same mix of concrete or mortar designation i complying with clause num but excluding lime .
num brickwork shall comply with series num and be built with mortar designation i in english bond .
the joints of brickwork where exposed shall be finished as specified for unpointed joints in clause num .
the ends of all pipes shall be neatly built into the brickwork and finished flush with mortar designation i complying with clause num .
num num precast concrete chambers shall comply with bs num and bs en num .
cast in situ concrete chambers shall be constructed of stnum concrete complying with clause num unless otherwise described in appendix num .
num num manhole steps complying with bs en num shall be built in accordance with relevant series f hcd drawings .
steelwork used for ladders handholds and other fittings shall comply with bs num part num and be galvanized in compliance with clause num after fabrication .
threaded components shall be galvanized in compliance with clause num .
num num excavation around chambers shall be backfilled with class numa wet cohesive fill material table num with the plasticity and grading requirements set out in appendix num this material shall be compacted in accordance with clause num .
where mechanical compaction is impracticable the excavation shall be backfilled with stnum concrete complying with clause num .
where there are precast concrete access shafts to precast concrete chambers the shafts shall be surrounded by a minimum thickness of num mm of stnum concrete complying with clause num and the remaining excavation backfilled with general fill material as described in table num compacted in accordance with clause num .
num chambers for foul drains shall be tested for watertightness as scheduled in appendix num .
num chamber covers gratings and frames shall be as described in appendix num. and shall comply with bs en num and subclauses num num num num and num of clause num they shall be set in cement mortar or quick setting mortar complying with subclause num .
num for rigid pipelines the nearest joint to any chamber shall be not more than num mm from the inner face of the wall and shall not be restricted by any concrete surround .
between this and the next joint the length of the articulated pipe rocker pipe shall be not less than num mm .
num where the adjustment or replacement of existing frames and covers or gratings is required the units shall be taken up and refixed or replaced with new units in accordance with subclause num of this clause or such other specification as agreed with the overseeing organisation .
the finished thickness of the mortar bed shall be between num mm and num mm .
unless otherwise amendment november num volume num specification for highway works series num special structures numf described in appendix num adjusted or replaced chamber frames and covers or gratings shall be set flush with the new surface .
any additional adjustments shall be by modifying the brickwork in compliance with subclause num of this clause or by using a frame of a suitable depth .
pipe junctions num junction pipes shall be manufactured of the same type and class of material as the remainder of the pipes in the run .
junction pipes which are laid but not immediately connected shall be fitted with temporary stoppers or seals and the position of all such junctions shall be clearly defined by means of stakes or tracing wires properly marked or labelled .
num num saddles may be used to form junctions only where permitted in appendix num .
no internal projections greater than num mm shall be permitted .
saddles for rigid pipes shall be jointed with mortar designation i complying with clause num but excluding lime .
saddles and pipes shall be surrounded with stnum concrete complying with clause num .
pipe quality num for rigid pipes the contractor shall obtain test certificates provided by the manufacturer based on the following sampling rates i for the hydraulic or hydrostatic test and for the works proof load test samples shall be taken at random from each batch of consecutively manufactured pipes of each diameter joint type and strength class as described in table num. ii for the maximum load test one pipe shall be taken at random from those which have been selected for and have passed the proof load test .
if this pipe fails a further two pipes taken from those which have been selected for and have passed the proof load test shall be tested and if either pipe then fails the whole batch shall be rejected .
testing and cleaning num drainage structures shall be visually examined before backfilling is commenced and after backfilling is completed .
where such installations are subsequently subjected to heavy construction plant loads they shall be inspected again when the construction work has finished and before handover of the completed works .
num drainage structures shall at all times be left clean and free from silt and obstruction .
table num sampling rates number of pipes sample size if all pass if num or more fail if num fails take a if num or more of the in batch further sample of further sample fails num or less num reject or test num reject or test all all remaining pipes remaining pipes in num num in batch failing pipes num batch failing pipes to to be rejected be rejected num num accept num num num num more than num num per batch of num num amendment november num march num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works series num miscellaneous contents clause title page num bedding mortar num num concrete for ancillary purposes num num porous no fines concrete num num plastic coating to fencing posts gates and ancillaries num num plastic coated high tensile wire num num cored thermoplastic node markers num num granolithic concrete rendering and screed num num volume num specification for highway works series num miscellaneous miscellaneous num bedding mortar general num bedding mortar shall satisfy the following performance requirements i unless otherwise described in appendix num bedding mortar shall have a compressive strength not less than num nmm when tested in accordance with subclause numiv or numv of this clause .
ii the flow characteristics shall be such that the volume of the bed or plinth as shown on the drawings is completely filled with homogeneous material when placed within the range of ambient temperature between numc and numc or as otherwise described in appendix num. iii the physical and chemical properties shall be compatible with those of all adjoining surfaces .
the stress in the mortar shall not exceed that defined in appendix num for bridge bearings and appendix num for other applications .
where the mortar is required to resist stress before attaining its numday strength the compressive strength shall be confirmed by tests on mortar cubes stored under conditions that simulate the field conditions .
materials num i num the maximum aggregate size in bedding mortar shall be num mm .
ii proprietary materials shall be stored as follows a the materials shall be stored in a dry environment at a temperature of between numc and numc .
b the containers shall be dampproof leak proof and readily emptied of their contents .
c containers shall be marked with the batch reference number component identification manufacturers name net weight and such warnings or precautions concerning the contents as are required .
iii the material shall not be removed from the store for use in the works until immediately prior to mixing .
iv material shall not be used more than six months after the date of manufacture or any lesser period specified by the manufacturer or supplier .
v the contractor shall supply with each batch or part of a batch of the material delivered to the site certificates furnished by the supplier or manufacturer stating the following a manufacturers name and address .
b manufacturers agents name and address where applicable .
c description of material and brand name .
d batch reference number size of batch and number of containers in the delivery order .
e date of manufacture .
f the chloride ion content expressed as a percentage by mass of cement .
vi calcium chloride or admixtures containing chloride salts shall not be used and the total chloride ion content shall not exceed num of the mass of cement .
vii num portland cement cem i shall comply with bs en num. viiinum the total acidsoluble sulfate content of the mortar mix as sonum shall not exceed num of the mass of cement in the mix .
the acid soluble sulfate as shall be determined in accordance with test no .
num in trl report num .
the sulfate content shall be calculated as the total from the various constituents of the mix .
ix num if water for the works is not available from a water companys supply the contractor shall ensure that the water complies with the guidance given in bs en num .
water from a water company supply may be used without testing .
where testing is required the sulfate content of the water shall be tested in accordance with test no .
num in trl report num .
the water shall not be used amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num miscellaneous if the sulfate content exceeds num g of sulfate as sonum per litre .
water from the sea or tidal rivers shall not be used .
x resinous bedding mortars shall be based on thermosetting organic polymers consisting of stable fluid andor solid components which on mixing react chemically to form a hardened solid mass .
products shall be formulated from epoxide polyester polyurethane or acrylic resin systems .
fillers or aggregates to be incorporated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to extend or modify the properties of the resinous composition shall be prebagged dry and factory proportioned .
the addition of other fillers or aggregates shall not be permitted .
site mixing placing and curing num i mixing placing and curing of proprietary bedding mortar shall be carried out in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions together with the following a the material shall not be mixed or placed in the works at ambient temperatures of less than numc .
if for num hours before during or after placing the ambient temperature falls below numc the contractor shall maintain the temperature of the substrate and other adjoining surfaces at not less than numc for the duration of the curing period recommended by the manufacturer .
b for cementitious bedding mortars the watercement ratio shall not exceed num .
the water content shall be confirmed during the approval tests and maintained within a tolerance of num per cent in mortars placed in the works .
c only full packs of mortar as supplied shall be mixed .
onsite proportioning shall not be permitted .
d the temperature of the mortar on completion of mixing shall be between numc and numc .
ii for cementitious bedding mortars the substrate shall be flushed clean with water two hours before placing and maintained wet until placing commences .
any free water on the surface of the substrate shall be removed before placing the mortar .
the underside of the base plate shall be clean and free from loose rust and loose mill scale at the time of bedding .
the mortar shall be placed in its final position within num minutes of commencement of mixing .
immediately after casting the mortar shall be protected to prevent evaporation for at least three days .
iii for resinous bedding mortars the substrate shall be dry free from loose dirt and dust and shall meet the conditions specified by the manufacturer .
the underside of the base plate shall be clean and free from loose rust and loose mill scale at the time of bedding .
the mortar shall be placed in its final position within one hour or lesser period specified by the manufacturer of commencement of mixing .
iv the mortar shall be poured in one corner of the plinth .
the addition of mortar to the sides of the plinth shall only be permitted after the mortar has flowed completely under the plinth .
v no internal metal shims shall be allowed to remain in the hardened bedding mortar except where described in appendix num .
laboratory approval tests num i general every batch of mortar to be used in the works shall be tested by the contractor .
where more than one batch of mortar is to be used in the works the elastic stability test may be omitted from the testing regime subsequent to the initial laboratory approval tests .
the contractor shall state the water content to be used expressed as a percentage by weight of the material .
mixing shall be carried out in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
ii flow cone test calibration of flow a num the flow characteristics of the mortar shall be determined by the flow cone test method described in astm standard cnum .
b tests shall be conducted at ambient temperatures of numc and numc within num minutes of commencement of mixing .
c for the test at numc the temperature of the flow cone and the mixer shall be numc the temperature of the dry material numc and the temperature of the water where required numc .
d for the test at numc the temperature of the flow cone the mixer the dry material and the water where required shall be numc .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num miscellaneous e for each temperature at least two tests having times of efflux within num shall be made and the average time of efflux to the nearest num second shall be reported .
iii flow between glass plates a the flow characteristics of the mortar between glass plates shall be determined using the apparatus shown in hcd drawing number knum .
b tests shall be conducted at ambient temperatures of numc and numc .
c the temperature of the apparatus dry material and water for each test shall comply with subclause numiic and d of this clause .
d the mortar shall be poured in one corner of the apparatus commencing between num minutes and num minutes after commencement of mixing .
e a satisfactory flow shall be achieved when the mortar flows under the glass plate and rises at least num mm above the underside of the top plate at all positions without signs of segregation bleeding effervescence or air inclusions .
iv compressive strength cementitious a the compressive strength of cementitious bedding mortars shall be carried out on six num mm cubes at an age of num days .
b the temperature of the mixer the dry material the water and the moulds shall be numc .
c num the num mm cube moulds shall comply with bs en num .
test specimens shall be made by filling the moulds carefully through a funnel to produce a voidfree mortar .
the moulds shall be covered by a steel plate to prevent expansion of the mortar .
d num there shall be no compaction .
specimens shall be dampcured for the first num hours removed from the moulds and then water cured .
curing shall comply with bs en num. e num testing shall comply with bs en num. f the strength requirement shall be satisfied if none of the compressive strengths obtained is lower than num nmm and the difference between the highest and lowest values is not more than num of the average .
all results shall be reported .
v compressive strength resinous a the compressive strength for resinous bedding mortars shall be carried out on six num mm cubes at an age of num hours .
b the num mm cube moulds shall comply with bs num part num and shall be carefully filled using a funnel to ensure voidfree cubes .
there shall be no compaction .
c testing shall comply with bs num part num. d the strength requirement shall be satisfied if none of the compressive strengths obtained is lower than num nmm and the difference between the highest and lowest values is not more than num of the average .
all results shall be reported .
vi expansion test a num short term expansion shall be determined by the method described in astm standard cnuma .
results shall be determined from the mean of two tests .
b the expansion of cementitious bedding mortars at num hours shall be less than num and greater than num. c the volume change of resinous bedding mortars at num hours shall be between num and num. vii water absorption test a num absorption of water by resinous bedding mortars shall be determined by the method described in astm standard cnum .
the absorption shall be not more than num. viiielastic stability tests for cementitious bedding mortars shall be carried out on one set of three cubes made at numc as described in sub clause numiv of this clause .
a num curing shall comply with bs en num .
after a minimum of num days the cubes shall be placed in water at numc heated at a uniform rate to numc in num hours .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num miscellaneous b upon attaining numc the cubes shall be sealed in a plastic bag and then loaded at a compressive stress of num nmm maintained for six hours at numc and the strain measured .
c the total compressive strain shall not exceed num on each cube .
ix elastic stability tests for resinous bedding mortars shall be carried out on one set of two num mm cubes complying with bs num part num. a on removing the cubes from the moulds after num hours they shall be heated at a uniform rate to numc in a further num hours .
b upon attaining numc the cubes shall be loaded at a compressive stress of num nmm maintained for six hours at numc and the strain measured .
c the total compressive strain shall not exceed num on each cube .
site control tests num i if the efflux times at numc and numc determined as described in subclause numii of this clause are within num or two seconds of each other whichever is the greater then site control tests for flow shall be carried out as described in a below .
in other cases when the air temperature is less than numc site control tests for flow shall be carried out as described in b below and when the air temperature is greater than numc site control tests for flow shall be carried out as described in a below .
a each load of mortar mixed for placing in the works shall be tested at ambient temperature by the flow cone test method as described in subclause numii of this clause .
the results shall agree within num or two seconds whichever is the greater of the values obtained in the approval tests at numc .
b each load of mortar mixed for placing in the works shall be tested at ambient temperature by the flow cone test method as described in subclause numii of this clause .
the results shall agree within num or two seconds whichever is the greater of the values obtained in the approval tests at numc .
ii compressive strength .
three cubes from each load of mortar mixed for placing in the works shall be tested for compressive strength as described in subclause numiv or numv of this clause as appropriate .
tolerances num the following tolerances shall apply to all temperatures referred to in this clause numc numc numc numc numc numc numc numc numc numc numc numc numc numc numc the tolerances applying to all linear dimensions unless otherwise shown on the drawings shall be num .
num concrete for ancillary purposes general num concrete mixes referred to in the contract as st followed by a number shall mean concrete for ancillary purposes which shall comply with this clause and any additional requirements in appendix num .
num num concrete for ancillary purposes shall be a standardised prescribed concrete complying with bs en num and bs num and with the additional requirements of this clause .
cement num num cement types as defined in bs num see table a.num of bs num or table num of bs num shall comprise one of the following cem i cem iiav cem iibv biiia or where required in appendix num srpc sulfateresisting portland cement .
aggregates num num aggregates shall comply with bs en num and unless otherwise described in appendix num the maximum size shall be num mm .
the total acidsoluble sulfate content of the concrete mix as sonum shall not exceed num of the mass of cement in the mix .
the acid soluble sulfate as shall be determined in accordance with test no .
num in trl report num .
amendment november num num volume num specification for highway works series num miscellaneous num consistence num num the consistence of the concrete shall be defined by its consistence class slump and be within either consistence class snum or consistence class snum of bs en num bs num as appropriate to the purpose .
num standardised prescribed concrete num num the standardised prescribed concrete used for each purpose shall be as described in table num unless otherwise described in appendix num .
table num num concrete for ancillary purposes purpose standardised prescribed concrete numfootings for fence posts and augered stnum foundations for traffic sign posts numfoundations for environmental barrier posts stnum and planted lighting columns numblinding concrete backfill for structural stnum foundations overdig of post holes and preparation of formation to clause num numbedding and backing to precast concrete stnum kerbs channels edgings and quadrants numbed to drains type a .
foundations channels stnum and benching to chambers numbed haunch and surround to drains other stnum than type a .
surround to chambers and gullies unless otherwise described in appendix num refer to hcd drawing number fnum and fnum transporting placing and compacting concrete num num concrete shall be transported and placed so that contamination segregation and loss of materials does not occur .
the maximum temperature of the concrete at any time between mixing and placing shall be no greater than numc .
concrete shall be placed and compacted within two hours of mixing .
after compaction it shall not be disturbed within num hours .
num num concrete shall be compacted by tamping or vibrating until it is thoroughly worked around any embedded metal and into corners of formwork or excavations until a solid mass substantially free from voids is obtained without segregation and with no free water on the surface .
the contractor shall select the consistence as described in subclause num of this clause to achieve this .
num surface finishes shall comply with clause num and unless otherwise described in appendix num the following buried surfaces unformed surfaces shall be class unum formed surfaces shall be class fnum exposed surfaces unformed surfaces shall be class unum except benching to chambers which shall be class unum formed surfaces shall be class fnum num formwork shall be struck without damage to the concrete not less than two days after placing the concrete and exposed surfaces shall be cured as described in clause num or by covering them with an opaque impermeable membrane or with hessian or sand which shall be kept damp .
such covering shall not be removed for two days after placing .
num num this clause shall be complied with where standardised prescribed concrete to bs en num and bs en num are shown on the drawings for purposes other than those in table num .
num porous no fines concrete num num no fines concrete shall consist of portland cement cem i to bs en num and num mm single size aggregate complying with bs en num .
num the ratio of aggregate to cement shall be num by volume or num by mass .
num the concrete shall be mixed by machine or by hand to a uniform colour and consistency before placing .
the quantity of water used shall not exceed that required to coat all of the aggregate particles without forming excess grout .
num the concrete shall be compacted by hand only .
num plastic coating to fencing posts gates and ancillaries num num plastic coating to steel or galvanized steel fence posts gates and ancillaries shall comply with bs num part num .
preparation of steel and galvanizing shall comply with series num .
num plastic coated high tensile wire num num wire shall be num mm diameter high tensile drawn carbon steel wire with a minimum tensile strength of num nmm zinc coated to class a to comply with bs en num and plastic coated to amendment may num num volume num specification for highway works series num miscellaneous joining the centres of the markers shall be perpendicular to the centre line of the lane in which the markers are installed .
ii num the base of the pockets shall be cleaned and dried ensuring that all loose material is removed .
iii num thermoplastic road marking material or paint shall be in accordance with bs en num shall then be poured into the pockets until the material projects slightly above the level of the road surface but the material must not be allowed to spread onto the surrounding carriageway surface .
num the completed markers shall be free from raggedness at their edges and free from streaks and be flush ie not more than num mm above with the surface of the adjacent carriageway .
num granolithic concrete rendering and screed num num granolithic concrete shall be designed concrete to clause num and shall be strength class cnum with maximum aggregate size num mm to clause num .
it shall conform to clauses num num num num and num .
num num aggregate shall be crushed granite complying with bs en num for heavy duty concrete floor finishes .
the aggregate shall comply with either the grading requirements in table num for num ganum or num ganum maximum size allin aggregate or the coarse aggregate grading in table num for num gcnum single sized aggregate and the sand within the limits of num cp or num mp of bs en num .
num num granolithic concrete to this clause shall be laid on base concrete which has been prepared in the following manner .
the laitance on the base concrete shall be removed by wire brushing and by hosing with water .
this shall be done after the initial set of the base concrete but before hardening and without disturbing the aggregate .
granolithic concrete to this clause shall be laid not later than three days after placing the base concrete .
num num after compaction the surface of the render or screed shall be trowelled to a smooth finish to the required levels profiles and contours and shall present a surface finish class unum to clause num .
numf comply with the following subclauses and shall be grade designated grade a .
num plastic coatings shall be applied to wire by extrusion using a compound complying with bs num type enuma and with the following additional requirements i to iii i the vinyl chloride homopolymer shall be mixed with appropriate primary plasticizers heat and light stabilizers lubricants and pigments .
no extender or filler other than stabilizers or pigments shall be used .
no other material shall be added to the compound .
ii not more than num of clean once reworked material which shall be of the same composition shall be added to the virgin material from which the compound is to be manufactured .
iii the softness number of the compound shall be not less than five nor greater than num when tested as described in bs num part num method numa .
num the surface of extruded plastic coatings shall be smooth continuous and free from discolouration .
the colour of the coating shall be as required by appendix num either green or black in accordance with bs num .
num the overall nominal diameter of the plastic coated wire shall be num mm .
when two diameter measurements are made at right angles to each other at a crosssection the average of the two measurements shall not differ from the specified nominal diameter by more than num mm .
num cored thermoplastic node markers general num cored thermoplastic node markers shall be white and installed in pairs or sets of three at the locations described in appendix num .
node markers num the node markers shall be constructed as follows i num mm diameter pockets num mm num mm deep shall be cored in the finished road surface at num mm num mm centres within a longitudinal tolerance of num m. the pockets shall be cored using a drill consisting of central pilot bit surrounded by a num mm annular bit .
the material within the annulus shall be carefully broken out leaving a rough surface to the base of the pocket .
the line amendment november num amendment may num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works series num num landscape and ecology contents clause title page num general num num weed control num num control of rabbits and deer num num ground preparation num num grass seeding wildflower seeding and turfing num num planting num num grass bulbs and wildflower maintenance num num watering num num establishment maintenance for planting num num maintenance of established trees and shrubs num num management of waterbodies num num special ecological measures num num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology landscape and ecology num num general num quality management schemes num num organizations providing landscape and ecology works for highway schemes shall comply with this series and the associated quality management schemes detailed in appendix a .
notice and liaison num num if required in appendix num the contractor shall give at least num hours notice to the overseeing organisation of the intention to commence any of the following operations or other operations stated in appendix num i subsoil treatment .
ii topsoil cultivations .
iii grass or wildflower seeding or turfing .
iv planting .
v mulching .
vi tree felling .
vii arboricultural works .
viii application of pesticides .
ix works outside the road boundary .
x any works within adjacent to or which may affect any site of nature conservation or archaeological interest stated in appendix num .
this notice shall be repeated subsequent to periods when the operations have been temporarily suspended .
if required in appendix num the contractor shall liaise directly with other landowners to give notice and arrange precise access dates for works outside the road boundary .
peat num num peat or peatbased products shall not be used except i where peat is excavated on site or ii where peat is required in appendix num or iii in wales where reduced peat products are acceptable provided proof that the peat is extracted from areas of little conservation value as defined in the report of the working group on peat extraction and related matters published by detr .
the contractor shall provide such proof to the overseeing organisation of wales in the manner stated in appendix num .
pesticide application num num a pesticide shall be any agent exerting biological control over living organisms and as such shall include herbicides pesticides lumbricides fungicides algaecides moss killers and all such similar products or materials .
num num all pesticides methods of application materials and tank mixes methods of working transportation storage and records shall be strictly in accordance with current legislation and codes of practice .
the contractor shall make available to the overseeing organisation evidence of competency in the use of pesticides .
num num the pesticides shall be fit for the purpose for which they are intended .
only pesticides intended for horticultural applications not agricultural applications shall be used .
all pesticides shall be used in strict accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num num the method of application and the undertaking of the work shall not lead to the pollution of any watercourse or water supply .
the contractor shall comply with current advice pertaining to the overseeing organisations of england scotland wales or northern ireland as appropriate for pesticides application near watercourses .
such advice is given as follows in england and wales the contractor shall comply with current department for environment food and rural affairs defra and environment agency guidelines for pesticides application near watercourses .
before each pesticide application near a watercourse the contractor shall notify the environment agency and obtain any necessary consent forms .
the contractor shall be responsible for the return of completed consent forms to the environment agency .
in scotland the contractor shall comply with current environment and rural affairs department scottish executive and scottish environment protection agency guidelines for pesticides application near watercourses .
before each pesticide application near a watercourse the contractor shall notify the scottish environment protection agency and obtain any necessary consent amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology num forms .
the contractor shall be responsible for the return of completed consent forms to the scottish environment protection agency .
in northern ireland the contractor shall comply with current department of agriculture and rural development and environment and heritage service guidelines for pesticides application near watercourses .
before each pesticide application near a watercourse the contractor shall notify the environment and heritage service and obtain any necessary consent forms .
the contractor shall be responsible for the return of completed consent forms to the environment and heritage service .
num num all pesticides shall be securely and safely stored and transported .
all used or partly used containers shall be removed from site immediately after use .
application equipment and containers shall not be rinsed out on site under any circumstances .
num num the contractor shall ensure that all machinery and equipment used in the application of all pesticides is properly cleaned maintained serviced and repaired in accordance with the manufacturers instructions to ensure correct application and to prevent malfunction and leakage at all times .
num num water used for dilution of pesticides shall be from a clean supply .
num num the pesticide is to be applied during the season and weather conditions favourable to the effective control of the targeted species .
the method of application shall minimise spray drift .
no pesticide shall be applied when wind speeds are high enough to cause spray drift .
the contractor shall postpone cancel or suspend the application of pesticides at any time when it is considered that conditions have become unsuitable .
num num prior to commencement the contractor shall publicise in accordance with current regulations that pesticides applications are to be undertaken .
num num a record of all pesticide use shall be maintained by the contractor on a form as detailed in appendix num .
it shall contain such information as the pesticide name of operative location of site and weather conditions .
a copy of the record form shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation at intervals to be stated in appendix num .
bird nesting season num num for the purposes of this specification the bird nesting season shall be the period stated in appendix num .
inspection reports num num if required in appendix num the contractor shall provide inspection reports for the activities carried out under clauses num num and num .
the reports shall identify the level of work activities undertaken for each operation on a form as detailed in appendix num .
num weed control general num weed control shall be required in the locations and at the frequencies given in appendix num for infestations of injurious weeds as follows i broad leafed dock .
ii curled dock .
iii common ragwort .
iv creeping thistle .
v spear thistle .
vi himalayan balsam .
vii giant hogweed .
viii japanese knotweed .
other species which may be a nuisance locally that require control in accordance with this subclause shall be stated in appendix num .
num weed killing shall achieve total dieback of weeds and in the case of total weed control shall not allow any significant regrowth less than num within num months of application .
in the case of selective weed control there shall be not more than num regrowth during the season .
total weed control num on hardstandings gravelled or paved areas and around street furniture contact translocated and residual herbicides approved for total weed control shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions at the locations and frequency stated in appendix num .
num for site preparation on topsoil heaps and in planted beds a translocated nonresidual herbicide approved for total weed control shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions at the locations and frequency stated in appendix num .
num in open ditches lagoons watercourses and filter drains a contact or translocated herbicide approved for use in or near water shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions at the locations and frequency stated in appendix num .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology num selective weed control in grass num at the locations and frequency stated in appendix num weeds in verges central reserves planted areas and other grassed areas shall be controlled using a selective translocated herbicide .
the herbicide shall be applied during a period of active growth in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
weed control by spot application of herbicide num where described in appendix num weed control shall be carried out to control the target species listed using spot treatment with a translocated herbicide ie applied with a device that ensures that the herbicide touches weed species only .
the herbicide shall be applied in accordance with clause num at the season and frequency stated in appendix num .
weed control by pullinghandweeding num handweeding shall be carried out at the locations and frequency stated in appendix num .
handweeding shall consist of the removal of the entire weed including roots by digging forking hoeing or pulling .
weeds shall be removed prior to flowering and the arisings removed in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
weed control by cutting num weeds shall be cut at the locations and frequency stated in appendix num .
the weeds shall be cut prior to flowering to a height of between num and num mm or as otherwise stated in appendix num .
arisings from weed control operations num where described in appendix num all arisings from weed control operations shall be removed from site .
injurious weed arisings shall be destroyed .
num control of rabbits and deer general num in the locations and for the period of time stated in appendix num or when instructed by the overseeing organisation the contractor shall carry out rabbit control .
prior to instructing rabbit control the overseeing organisation will have contacted adjacent landowners regarding their obligation to control infestations on their own land .
thereafter the contractor shall liaise as necessary with adjacent landowners for access to control coordination and report any further complaints to the overseeing organisation .
num the contractor shall comply with current legislation in relation to pest control and make available to the overseeing organisation evidence of suitable formal training of operatives as competent for the procedures and pesticides to be employed .
num a register shall be maintained by the contractor detailing persons employed pesticides used weather site observations made e.g .
badger setts vehicle damage or vandalism together with confirmation that the areas are satisfactorily controlled .
control operations num badger setts and fox earths shall be clearly identified and marked in an inconspicuous manner using a method to be agreed with the overseeing organisation .
the location shall be recorded and reported to the overseeing organisation .
sett and earth markers shall be removed immediately after rabbit control operations have been completed .
as required under the wildlife and countryside act num and the protection of badgers act numin northern ireland the wildlife northern ireland order num the contractor shall not divulge the location of badger setts to any other party or parties .
num after treatment the ground shall be left clear with rabbit holes filled in .
where stated in appendix num any bramble and herbage that will interfere with the control of rabbits shall be cut and the arisings dealt with in accordance with subclauses num and num .
rabbit control within the road boundary num initial clearance and thereafter effective control of rabbit infestations shall be undertaken within the road boundary .
num effective control is defined as i no damage to verges embankmentscuttings site furniture or drains .
ii no fresh signs of bark stripping on woody plants .
iii few fresh droppings seen .
iv no new appreciable grazing seen .
v no complaints from adjoining landowners .
num the area where control is required shall be visited a sufficient number of times during the first month to keep the rabbits controlled and substantially eliminated .
thereafter the contractor shall ensure effective control for the period stated in appendix num or instructed by the overseeing organisation .
num if required in appendix num the overseeing organisation will inspect the site together with a representative of the contractor at monthly intervals to agree whether effective control has been achieved .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology num clearance of rabbits and deer in fenced areas to be planted num any rabbit burrows located within fenced enclosures for planting shall be cleared of all rabbits and all exitentry holes effectively blocked immediately after completing the fencing of each enclosure in accordance with the requirements described in series num .
num unless otherwise instructed by the overseeing organisation the contractor shall not plant any area until all rabbits and deer have been cleared from the fenced enclosure .
num the contractor shall maintain the enclosure free of rabbits rabbit burrows including exitentry holes and deer for the period stated in appendix num or instructed by the overseeing organisation .
replacement of plants damaged by animals num the contractor shall replace any plant material damaged by rabbits or deer due to the failure of the contractor to effectively block entry points burrows and nests or failure of the contractor to maintain the fences shelters or guards as described in the contract .
num the contractor shall replace the damaged plants in accordance with clause num and maintain them in accordance with clause num and clause num for the period stated in appendix num or instructed by the overseeing organisation .
num ground preparation vegetation clearance num where stated in appendix num all grass and other herbaceous vegetation shall be cut in accordance with subclause num to a height of between num mm and num mm and the arisings removed off site .
num where stated in appendix num the contractor shall apply a nonresidual translocated herbicide in accordance with subclause num to all areas to be planted between num and num days prior to planting .
num where the area to be treated with herbicide has been cut in accordance with subclause num the contractor shall await active vegetative regrowth sufficient for the herbicide to be at its most effective before applying the herbicide .
num the treatment for total herbicide control shall kill all treated growth including their root systems .
the contractor shall not commence any excavation or cultivation of the areas where herbicide has been applied until the vegetation has been effectively controlled .
subsoil treatment num where stated in appendix num planting areas shall be ripped using a ripping tine or subsoil plough .
the minimum depth of treatment shall be num mm unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
num the spacing between the tine furrows shall be as stated in appendix num .
if no dimension is stated the spacing shall be close enough to cause the uplifting and fracturing of the soil throughout the profile to the minimum treated depth and shall be determined by the soil type and conditions and the type of subsoiler used .
approximate spacings shall be as follows i conventional subsoiler alone num mm ii winged subsoiler alone num mm iii winged subsoiler with leading tines num m. final preparation of soils num where stated in appendix num the requirements of subclauses num to num shall apply to subsoil to be seeded or topsoil spread under the contract .
num any consolidated material is to be broken up to num mm depth and the top num mm of all soil reduced to a tilth suitable for final shaping with a grading blade particle size num mm and below .
all undesirable material brought to the surface including stones larger than num mm in any dimension roots tufts of grass and foreign matter is to be removed off site unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
num when material is reasonably dry and workable it shall be graded in accordance with the drawings .
num finished levels of material after settlement shall be i as shown on the drawings adjoining pavings kerbs or grass areas ii not less than num mm below damp proof course of adjoining buildings iii at the same level as adjoining soil areas .
num once material has been spread andor graded the area shall not be traversed by machinery or used for storage purposes .
soil contaminated during the contract num where the contractor has contaminated the ground with cement slurry oil tar or any material harmful to plant life soil shall be excavated to a depth of num m and removed off site .
uncontaminated subsoil and topsoil shall be used for backfilling to the finished profiles required under the contract .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology num num grass seeding wildflower seeding and turfing season num grass seed shall be sown during the period num march to num may or num september to num october unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
wildflower seed shall be sown during the period stated in appendix num .
final cultivations num where stated in appendix num immediately prior to sowing or hydraulic seeding or laying turf the upper num mm of soil shall be reduced to a fine tilth by use of a chain harrow or other suitable plant .
num if required in appendix num fertiliser or other soil ameliorants shall be evenly incorporated into the upper num mm of soil during final cultivations at the rate stated in appendix num .
seed num seed shall comprise the mixtures stated in appendix num .
num grass seed shall comply with bs num .
num grass seed shall be a tested mixture and certificates of germination and purity obtained from an official seed testing station not more than six months prior to sowing shall be provided to the overseeing organisation before sowing together with the names of the varieties used in the mixture .
the information on seed certificates and seed bag labels shall correspond .
num the contractor shall provide written evidence that seeds comply with any provenance requirements described in appendix num .
conventional sowing num unless otherwise stated in appendix num sowing shall be carried out by evenly distributing the seed at a rate of not less than num gmnum for side slopes of embankments and cuttings and not less than num gmnum elsewhere .
num sowing shall be immediately followed by lightly raking the surface of the soil to cover the seeds by use of a chain harrow or other suitable plant .
hydraulic seeding num hydraulic seeding shall be applied in the locations stated in appendix num .
the hydraulic seeding mixture any special process requirements and the rate of application shall be as described in appendix num .
the mixture shall be kept constantly stirred during application to maintain a homogenous slurry .
grass seed germination num the seeding shall be repeated as necessary until an evenly distributed dense sward is established over the seeded area .
the contractor shall allow for maintenance of all grass areas in accordance with clause num until this has been achieved .
establishment shall be regarded as achieved when at least num of quadrant subdivisions are recorded as filled when tested in accordance with annex anum of bs num .
turf num turfing shall be carried out in accordance with bs num and bs num .
num when it is stated in appendix num that turf arising on site shall be used such turf shall be stripped as follows or as otherwise described in appendix num i grass shall be mown before lifting to no more than num mm high .
ii turves shall be cut using plant or tools designed for the purpose .
iii turves shall not be cut from soil that is frozen waterlogged as defined in clause num or excessively dry .
iv turves shall be of uniform thickness in accordance with bs num. v turves shall be rectangular with the shorter sides not less than num mm .
num where stated in appendix num imported turf shall be used .
all imported turf shall comply with bs num and bs num .
imported turf shall contain the grass and or herb mixture stated in appendix num .
num the source of turf shall be notified in writing to the overseeing organisation and a sample of not less than num no .
num mm x num mm turves provided for approval in accordance with clause num not less than one week prior to commencing turfing .
num imported turf shall be delivered to the site within num hours of lifting .
care shall be taken in transport to avoid deterioration due to inadequate covering or overheating .
num turf shall be laid within num hours of delivery between num april and num september and within num hours of delivery between num october and num march .
if this is not possible turf shall be temporarily laid flat on topsoil and kept moist .
num turves shall not be stored in stacks over num m in height .
amendment may num volume num series num specification for highway works landscape and ecology num turf shall be laid on soil that is moist but not frozen or waterlogged as defined in clause num .
turf shall not be laid during periods of drought or onto soil that is excessively dry or during heavy rainfall .
num turf shall be placed working from planks laid on previously laid turves .
num turf shall be laid to a bond with broken joints butted up with joints no wider than num mm .
when laid on slopes the bond shall be laid diagonally across the slope .
num levels shall be adjusted by raking out or infilling with fine soil under the turves .
when laid turf shall be lightly tamped in place with clean wooden beaters .
the use of rollers shall not be permitted .
num after laying turf the surface shall be dressed with finely sifted topsoilsand which shall be brushed in to completely fill all joints .
num whole turves shall be used at edges and trimmed to a clean line .
turf shall be neatly cut away to a diameter of num mm around individual trees .
num if required in appendix num turf shall be secured in position using either i softwood pegs num mm long x num mm square or ii galvanised wire pins num mm long x num mm diameter bent or hairpin pattern .
num where stated in appendix num immediately after laying turfed areas shall be watered at a rate of num lmnum .
num newly sown or turfed grass shall be watered as necessary to ensure establishment .
when grassed areas require irrigation water shall be applied at the rate of num lmnum using low pressure hose sprinkler or spray evenly over the entire area .
establishment cuts num any opening of joints or uneven levels in turf areas caused by shrinkage of turves or settlement shall be made good by topdressing with num sieved topsoilnum fine sand mix .
num for the number of cuts stated in appendix num newlyestablished grass whether newlysown or turfed shall be mown to leave a nominal num mm height .
the first mowing shall be carried out once the grass has reached a height of num mm the second and any subsequent establishment cuts when it has regrown to num mm .
the plant used for mowing shall comply with any requirements of appendix num .
any turves disturbed by mowing shall be refirmed into their original position and watered to their full depth .
amendment may num num num unless permitted otherwise in appendix num all areas shall be left clear of grass cuttings following each mowing by raking or other suitable method and arisings disposed of off site .
num planting num all planting works shall be carried out in accordance with bs num bs num and bs num .
num on completion of planting operations all disturbed accesses to and ground around the planted areas shall be completely reinstated to their former condition as at the commencement of planting .
plants num all plants to be supplied shall be as scheduled in appendix num and shall comply with bs num parts num to num as relevant bs num the national plant specification published by the horticultural trades association andor as otherwise required in appendix num .
if plants grown in cells are required the cells shall be designed for tree or shrub use and the plants shall be grown in open conditions for one growing season .
num no grafted stock shall be supplied unless it is stated in appendix num that grafted plants are permitted .
num if required in appendix num plants shall be supplied in a planting medium containing specified mycorrhiza .
num where the seed origin of native plant species is required to be of specific provenance the provenance shall be determined and described in accordance with forestry commission practice note num using local stock for planting native trees and shrubs .
written evidence of its provenance shall be provided to the overseeing organisation prior to planting using the provenance certificate proforma in appendix num .
plant material shall comply with any other special provenance requirements stated in appendix num .
num the contractor shall provide the overseeing organisation with written evidence that the supply of bulbs and wildflower plants is from a cultivated source .
the contractor shall inform the overseeing organisation in writing of the proposed source of supply of all plant materials at least num days prior to delivery so as to enable the plants to be inspected at the nursery before delivery to site .
if required in appendix num the contractor shall make arrangements for the overseeing organisation to select individual trees of standard size and larger at the nursery .
volume num series num specification for highway works landscape and ecology num num plants shall be lifted packed and handled in accordance with bs num bs num and the horticultural trades association publication the national plant specification section num handling and establishing landscape plants .
num during the period subsequent to the receipt of the plants and prior to planting the contractor shall comply with the treatment of nursery stock specified below i bareroot plants .
prior to despatch or on arrival at site plants may be stored up to num days in bundles with a covering of freely draining moistureretentive material such as wet sacking or straw which is moistened periodically .
for a storage period of more than three days bundles shall be opened and the plants spread out and heeled into trenches in topsoil minimum depth num mm with the roots fully in contact with the soil .
ii bareroot plants transported in plastic bags .
plants in bags shall be stored no more than one layer deep and be protected from direct sunlight at all times .
where delay of more than one day occurs the bags shall be stored upright not stacked in a cool shady position or shed or placed in a cold store .
if cold store facilities are not available plants shall be removed from bags and heeled into soil with all roots covered .
iii container or cell grown plants .
containers shall be maintained upright watered as required sheltered and protected from frost and shall not be packaged or stored more than one layer deep .
degradable pots cells or roottrainers that may disintegrate in transit shall be enclosed in polythene film num gauge and firmly secured .
iv rootballed plants .
permeable wrappings shall be kept moist by watering and plants in polythene wrappings protected from direct sunlight .
for longer periods of storage rootballs with permeable wrappings shall be placed on a well drained surface and covered with a deep layer of sand pulverised bark wood shavings or other suitable material .
v protection from frost .
when necessary additional measures shall be undertaken to protect plants from frost .
vi the location for temporary storage shall be sheltered from winds and well drained .
vii all containers shall remain completely filled with compost .
if up to num compost has been lost from containers at any stage then further suitable moistened compost shall be added to completely cover the root systems and fill the containers .
any containers which have lost more than num compost shall be replaced .
all containerised plants shall be thoroughly soaked prior to planting and all containers removed .
viii any plants damaged by frost desiccation or in any other way prior to planting shall be removed from site and replaced with new plants .
num unless otherwise stated in appendix num all labels canes and ties shall be retained on the plant for num months unless they prove restrictive to growth .
num all other arisings from the planting including containers wrappings paddings fastenings and bags shall be collected immediately by the contractor and removed off site .
topsoil compost fertiliser and antidessicants num unless otherwise stated in appendix num topsoil for tree pits shall be general purpose grade conforming to bs num .
num where stated in appendix num compost or fertiliser shall be deposited over planting areas for incorporation into the soil during ground cultivation or incorporated into soil during pit preparation and backfilling .
num compost shall be peatfree organic composted material graded less than num mm particle size and free from any non biodegradable material weed material or plant pathogens .
it shall have an organic matter content greater than num on a dry matter basis and readily available trace elements .
the ph conductivity and nutrient composition shall be as required in appendix num .
the compost shall be supplied with a volume tolerance of less than num .
num where specified in appendix num slowrelease fertiliser shall be used .
the fertiliser shall be thoroughly and evenly mixed with the pit backfill or into the top num mm of planting bed soil or scattered over an area num mm in diameter around the planting position at the rates specified in appendix num .
num where stated in appendix num antitranspiration sprays root dips antidesiccant soil additives or other forms of antidesiccant shall be used .
where such antidesiccant measures are specified these shall be applied in strict accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
time of planting num planting of barerooted rootballed or cellgrown trees shrubs nonaquatic perennials and wildflowers amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works landscape and ecology shall take place during favourable weather and soil conditions during the season stated in appendix num .
bare rooted or root balled conifers or evergreens shall be planted during november or march .
num containergrown plants of the types listed above may be planted at any time during favourable weather and soil conditions .
num bulbs shall be planted between num september and num november unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
num the planting season for reeds and other marginal aquatic plants shall be march to april .
num no planting or preparatory operations shall take place when the ground is frost bound covered by snow excessively wet or waterlogged as defined in clause num or in excessively dry or windy conditions .
planting depth num cellgrown plants shall be planted with the top of the root plug covered by num mm of planting medium .
planting depth for all other plants shall be to the original nursery soil mark on the plant unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
notch planting of trees shrubs and hedges num where pits beds or trenches are not used plants shall be notchplanted upright by one of the following methods as directed in appendix num i into a tshaped opening of sufficient size for the roots of bareroot plants to be fully spread out or to accommodate a cellgrown plant without breaking the rootplug or ii into a tshaped opening size as directed in i above through upturned turf which has been dug from the planting location .
for individual plants turfs shall be cut num mm square and num mm deep for single row hedges a strip of turf shall be cut num mm wide and for doublerow hedges a strip of turf shall be cut num mm wide .
all existing vegetation on turf to be inverted shall be cut to a height of not more than num mm before the turf is cut or iii cellgrown plants may be planted using a proprietary tool for the purpose or iv as directed in appendix num .
surrounding soil shall be firmed back after planting .
planting pits beds and trenches num planting pits for feathered trees light standard trees and all larger trees shall be excavated to the dimensions given in table num .
the subsoil in the pit base shall be broken up to a further depth as given in table num .
if required in appendix num pits shall be excavated for whips transplants and shrubs and trenches excavated for hedges to the dimensions given in table num .
the subsoil in the pit base shall be broken up to a further depth as given in table num .
arisings from planting pits and trenches shall be disposed of as directed in appendix num .
table num num planting pits beds and trenches type dimension of excavation w x w x d mm depth of cultivation at the base of pits or trenches mm semimature trees measurement of rootball plus num in each direction num extra heavy standard and heavy standard trees num x num x num num selected standard trees tall standard trees standard trees num x num x num num light standard trees half standard trees feathered trees num x num x num num whips where pit transplants planting is shrubs specified num x num x num num hedging where specified x num x num num cellgrown plants num mm greater than w and d of rootplug length of hedging num on sloping ground pits shall be dug with vertical sides and horizontal base and shall maintain the specified minimum depth throughout .
when backfilled planting pits shall be finished to existing contours .
num for pits for standard trees and larger trees any excavated topsoil shall be set aside to be used as backfill .
the contractor shall import topsoil in accordance with subclause num to make up for any deficiencies caused by the removal of subsoil or fill material .
num num unless otherwise stated in appendix num or where the soil is naturally free draining prior to backfilling num mm x num mm x num mm pits a num mm thick layer of riverwashed gravel or crushed stone num mm shall be laid in the base to facilitate drainage .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works landscape and ecology planting in cultivated beds and hedges num where required in appendix num hedgetrenches excavated in accordance with table num shall be backfilled with topsoil or with a premixed num topsoil num compost mixture or other mixture as stated in appendix num .
num where required in appendix num the ground shall be cultivated to a minimum depth of num mm removing all live injurious weed roots and growth to a tip off site .
any stones or other rubbish over num mm in any direction shall be removed from the surface and disposed of in accordance with subclause num .
root disturbance of adjacent plants shall be avoided and the surface left with a medium tilth .
any ameliorants specified in appendix num shall be incorporated in a second pass following initial cultivation .
num if required in appendix num a num mm wide strip along hedgelines shall be cultivated in accordance with subclause num .
num in planting beds the extent of the area to be planted shall first be defined by plants spaced around the perimeter .
the remaining plants shall then be used to fill in the centre of the area in an informal manner avoiding straight lines and regular geometric patterns .
num at each planting position sufficient soil shall be excavated from the bed to allow num mm clearance between either the rootball or the rootends when fully spread and the sides and bottom of the planting hole .
the plant shall be set in the centre of the plant position showing its best side to the front .
num finely broken backfill material shall be packed around the roots .
the plants shall be gently shaken to allow fine soil to surround the roots .
as soil is returned it shall be lightly consolidated and firmly heeled around the rootcollar .
immediately after planting the soil surface shall be evenly graded .
where required in appendix num the soil shall then be watered at the rate stated in appendix num .
planting of whips transplants and shrubs into pits or trenches num each plant shall be placed upright in the centre of the pit or where required in appendix num the hedge trench with the roots spread evenly outwards and downwards without restriction .
where necessary any badly damaged roots shall be carefully pruned before being planted .
num the pit or trench shall be backfilled with a pre mixed num topsoil num compost mixture or other mixture stated in appendix num and the backfill lightly firmed .
stakes and ties num unless otherwise stated in appendix num stakes shall be round timber peeled of bark straight in length and free of snags pests and diseases .
stakes shall have a top diameter of num mm .
num unless otherwise stated in appendix num adjustable tree ties strapping or spacers shall be made of black pvc or reinforced rubber .
the width of the belt shall be num mm .
planting of trees num where required in appendix num root barriers shall be provided at the time of planting in order to constrain the growth of tree roots .
root barriers shall be supplied and installed in accordance with appendix num and the manufacturers instructions .
num all wrappings insulation and padding shall be removed from rootballs immediately before backfilling .
no wire or plastic mesh containers may be left in position .
any damaged or torn roots shall be cut back cleanly to sound wood prior to planting .
num stakes for all standards and feathered trees shall be firmly driven and positioned into the tree planting pit before planting to a minimum depth of num mm below the bottom of the pit .
the stake shall be positioned off centre on the prevailing windward side of the tree as near to the tree as possible but shall not interfere with the free movement of the branches and shall cause no rubbing .
num unless otherwise stated in appendix num the contractor shall use the shortest possible stake to support the tree when the stake has been driven into the ground there shall be not more than one third of the height of the clear stem of the tree above ground .
num unless otherwise stated in appendix num for all standards and feathered trees one tie shall be used for each tree fixed within num mm of the top of the stake and secured to the stake with a num mm galvanised clout nail .
ties shall be of a size appropriate to the size of the tree and stake and equipped with spacers of a size that will ensure that the tree and stake remain vertical .
num for extra heavy standards and heavy standards the staking shall be undertaken after the tree has been positioned .
unless otherwise stated in appendix num three stakes each of num m length shall be driven down the side of the rootball and into the pit to a depth of num mm below the bottom of the pit .
the stakes shall be angled outwards to between num and num at the top and pulled in moderately by tensioning all the supporting bands equally .
the stakes shall be equally spaced and shall not pass through the rootball .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works landscape and ecology num unless otherwise stated in appendix num for extra heavy standards and heavy standards with above ground staking the tree shall be secured centrally between the stakes with two sets of supporting bands of fire hose or equivalent webbing of minimum width num mm .
the upper set shall be positioned as near to the tops of the stakes as possible and the lower set shall be positioned num mm above ground level .
each band shall take the form of a loop around the tree stem nailed to the stake and shall be equally tensioned so as to hold the tree centrally between the stakes .
num where stated in appendix num semimature trees shall be planted as shown on hcd drawing number knum .
three proprietary anchors per pit shall be provided at angles of num around the pit ensuring that they are securely locked in position with their cable eyes num mm above the layer of coarse gravel and num mm from the side of the rootball position .
the rootball surface shall be protected with a triangular timber frame formed from three pieces of num mm x num mm x num mm timber securely fastened by nails at each corner .
galvanised cable shall be threaded using a ratchet tensioner .
wires shall not cut across the rootball .
num unless otherwise stated in appendix num backfill to tree pits shall comprise any excavated topsoil and imported topsoil as necessary with compost in accordance with subclause num in a num topsoilnum compost mixture thoroughly mixed .
num for bare root trees each tree shall be planted upright in the centre of the hole and the root system fully spread outwards and downwards in the pit at the correct level so that the stake passes through the root system as closely to the trunk as possible with minimal disturbance to the roots themselves .
once the tree has been correctly positioned the pit shall be backfilled with the premixed soilcompost mixture .
num during backfilling the tree shall be gently shaken at regular intervals to settle the mixture closely around the roots .
the backfill mixture shall be firmed in layers not exceeding num mm to a finished level equivalent to the nursery soil mark on the tree .
num where required in appendix num each tree shall be watered in on the same day as planting at the rate stated in appendix num .
the water shall be delivered by means of a low pressure hose to avoid any washing out of the soil into a depression made in the planting medium around the base of the stem to ensure that the water goes to the root system .
the planting medium shall then be returned to its previous level .
num where stated in appendix num a num mm or num mm diameter perforated flexible plastic irrigation pipe shall be inserted around the rootball during planting at a depth of num mm below the ground surface .
the pipe shall be of sufficient length to coil completely around the root system or rootball and shall be provided with two tpiece connections with aeration caps which shall be located opposite each other .
num where trees are to be situated within mown grass areas two additional posts of a diameter similar to that of the stake shall be driven firmly into the ground to leave a finished height of approximately num mm above soil level .
these posts shall be sited clear of the tree roots in a triangular relationship to the stake such that the combined effect with the weedfree circle will prevent accidental damage by mowing machinery .
tubes guards and ties num in the locations stated in appendix num individual plant protectors as described in appendix num shall be provided .
plant protectors shall be green brown or black and if formed of solid sheet material this shall be translucent .
the top edge of plant protectors shall be formed to prevent abrasion damage to the enclosed plants .
plant protectors shall be fixed with releasable ratchet ties to softwood or hardwood stakes num mm x num mm in cross section .
the length of the stakes and the number of stakes and releasable ratchet ties to be used shall be as stated in appendix num .
where two stakes are used they shall be placed opposite each other within the plant protector .
mulches ground preparation num before application of any mulch the planting areas andor tree positions which are to be mulched shall be free of grass and weed growth .
where required in appendix num the planting areas andor tree positions shall be watered at the rate stated in appendix num .
organic mulches num where it is stated in appendix num that compost shall be applied as a surface mulch it shall comply with subclause num or other composition as specified in appendix num .
num num where it is stated in appendix num that timber mulch is to be used it should be a product certified under the forest stewardship council fsc as an appropriate grade for the site .
two types may be used i chipped conifer bark size range num mm maximum num fines composted for a minimum of six weeks prior to delivery or ii an organic mulch comprising composted wood chips or bark free of fungi and diseases methyl bromide contamination or foreign material .
it shall be matured for a minimum of num weeks naturally heated by the process of decomposition to temperatures amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works landscape and ecology exceeding numc for a minimum period of num days followed by a period of stabilisation .
num where organic mulch is to be used as a mulch it shall be spread evenly over the planting bed or over a num m diameter circle around trees to a depth of num mm after settlement .
num organic mulch shall be hollowed out where necessary to ensure low branches and foliage are not covered .
the mulch surface shall be left even tidy and sloping down at bed edges .
individual mulch mats num where it is stated in appendix num that mulch mats are to be used they may be square or round .
unless otherwise specified in appendix num mulch mats shall be not less than num mm x num mm or num mm diameter or greater than num mm x num mm or num mm diameter .
mulch mats shall be manufactured from the material specified in appendix num .
num the mulch mat shall be placed over or split and placed around the plant stem and shall be spread out over the ground ensuring that the plant is in the centre of the mat .
num edges of mulch mats shall be secured as directed in appendix num by either i num mm x num mm diameter wire pegs or proprietary plastic pegs manufactured for this purpose driven through the mat to their full depth at the corners of square mats or at six equally spaced points around circular mats plus a peg to secure the overlapped slit .
pegs shall not be used to secure polythene or bituminous felt mats or ii burying a strip num mm wide around the edges of the mat vertically into the ground .
all cut edges of woven polypropylene mulch mats shall be so buried to prevent fraying or iii placing pieces of turf at least num x num mm in size or other materials of equal weight on at least eight positions around the mat or iv as specified in appendix num .
sheet mulch num where it is stated in appendix num that sheet mulch shall be used it shall be black olive green or brown in colour .
unless otherwise specified in appendix num sheet mulch shall be manufactured from at least num gauge tear resistant polythene or from woven or spunbonded polypropylene weighing num to num gmnum and shall contain an ultraviolet inhibitor .
num as directed in appendix num where sheet mulch is used for hedges it shall be laid either in i num strips of sheet mulch shall be laid along numrow hedges one between each planted row and one on each side to cover an area extending num mm beyond both sides of the lines of hedge plants or ii one strip of sheet mulch shall be laid to extend at least num mm beyond both sides of the lines of hedge plants and an l shaped slit measuring num mm x num mm shall be made to accommodate the planting of hedging plants .
num sheet mulch strips shall be overlapped at joins .
strips used for hedges or over planting beds shall be secured by one of the following methods as directed in appendix num i num mm x num mm diameter wire pegs or proprietary plastic pegs manufactured for this purpose driven through the mat to their full depth at num mm intervals along all edges and overlapping joins .
pegs shall not be used to secure polythene or bituminous felt mulches or ii burying a strip num mm wide along the edges of the mat vertically into the ground .
all cut edges of woven polypropylene sheet mulch shall be so buried to prevent fraying or iii placing pieces of turf minimum num mm x num mm in size laid at num mm intervals along the outer edges and laid at num mm intervals along overlapping joins .
sheet mulch collars num if required in appendix num where mulch mats or sheet mulch is used collars shall be fitted around the stem or trunk of each plant to secure the planting slit and shall be securely stapled in place .
planting of bulbs num bulbs shall comply with bs num part num .
all bulbs must be commercially grown not collected from the wild .
num the number of bulbs per unit area shall be as described in appendix num .
bulbs shall be thrown onto the ground to ensure natural spacing and planted where they fall .
num bulbs shall be planted with the base of the bulb at the depth stated in appendix num .
bulbs shall have their base in contact with the soil at the base of the hole .
where bulbs are to be planted in formal grass areas a amendment may num num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology num plug of turf shall be neatly removed to form the planting hole and replaced after planting .
wildflower plant preparation and planting num where it is stated in appendix num that areas are to be planted with wildflowers the contractor shall prepare the ground by one of the following methods or otherwise as stated in appendix num i create an area free of all live plant growth not less than num mm and not more than num mm in diameter at each plant station using a translocated herbicide to subclause num .
where spacing is very close plant stations shall be merged or ii cultivate an area at each plant station to the following dimensions diameter width of plant rootball x num depth depth of plant rootball x num .
num wildflower plants shall be distributed in natural informal groups or as shown on the drawings .
where required in appendix num the planting positions or areas shall be marked out prior to planting for approval by the overseeing organisation .
the density of plants mnum shall be as stated in appendix num .
num a hole shall be formed in the cultivated plant station of a sufficient depth and width to allow roots to be spread without cutting or bending .
friable topsoil shall be replaced over the roots to bring the surface level with that of adjacent areas .
plants shall only be removed from their protective covering or packing immediately before planting and the roots shall not be allowed to dry .
num where stated in appendix num wildflowers shall be planted through mulch mats .
no more than five plants per mnum of mat shall be planted .
the contractor shall lay the mat above the planting station after the cultivation is complete and cut the mat so that the hole created will be no greater than num times the surface area of the plug .
the sides of the mat must be buried sufficiently and securely to prevent rodents or other such vermin entering beneath the mat .
the planting station shall be sufficiently concave to encourage positive runin of rainwater .
num each plant shall be watered in its container not less than num hours or more than num hours before planting .
num litres of water shall be applied to each plant immediately after planting unless heavy rain is falling at the time .
planting of reeds rushes marginal emergent and aquatic plants num where it is stated in appendix num reeds rushes marginal emergent or aquatic plants shall be planted in or adjacent to ponds rivers ditches lakes and other areas of impeded drainage .
num reeds and rushes shall be clumps of minimum size num x num x num mm excluding top growth excavated from an approved source of established material and free of pests diseases weed species or pollutant chemicals or metals .
num emergent marginal and aquatic plants shall be containergrown in pots of minimum num litre size and shall have been rooted and grown within the pot for at least six months .
aquatic plants may be supplied in plastic or wire basket pots .
num all plant material shall be kept fully watered up until time of planting and the soil or rooting zone prevented from drying out .
num planting positions above the water level shall be formed by excavating and setting aside sufficient material to allow num mm between the rootrhizome ends and the sides of the pit when the roots are fully spread for backfilling .
the sides and bottom of the excavated position shall be cultivated to a depth of num mm .
excavated material from plant clump positions shall be disposed of in locations stated in appendix num .
num when the clump has been set in the centre of the position fine material selected from the excavated material shall be packed and shaken around the roots and thoroughly firmed .
excavated material shall be backfilled in layers not exceeding num mm .
following planting the area of backfilling around each clump shall be left tidy .
num for planting positions below the water level clumps of plant material shall be pushed into the ground to sufficient depth to cover rootsrhizomes .
plants shall be firmed by treading .
aquatic plants shall be securely pegged or wired down into the bed .
marker posts for planted areas num where stated in appendix num the contractor shall insert marker posts to mark out the boundary of each planting or wildflower seeding area which is not otherwise protected by fencing or other structures .
num marker posts shall be of timber complying with clause num and shall be at least num mm long and have a diameter of num mm .
the top num mm of each marker post shall be painted with a white waterproof paint .
where unpeeled stakes are used the top num mm shall be peeled before painting .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology num num marker posts shall be driven at least num mm into the ground leaving num mm above ground .
num posts shall be spaced at not more than num m apart around the perimeter of the planted area and shall be located at all corners of over num .
num where a cable or underground service is adjacent to or within a planted area then any posts shall not be closer than num m to the cable and painted red .
num the pegs shall be maintained in good condition .
replacement of failed or defective plants num the contractor shall maintain all planting undertaken under the contract in accordance with clauses num num and num until all planting works are certified as completed .
num for the duration of the period stated in appendix num the contractor shall replace all plants which are missing have died or which in the opinion of the overseeing organisation are failing to make satisfactory extension growth .
num in early september of each year following completion of the initial planting of woody plants the contractor shall arrange an inspection of each area of new planting works with a representative of the overseeing organisation .
where bulbs perennials wildflowers or aquatic plants have been planted the contractor shall also arrange an inspection of each area of new planting works with a representative of the overseeing organisation in the april following completion of the initial planting .
num all plants which are missing are damaged have died or in the opinion of the overseeing organisation are failing to make satisfactory extension growth shall be replaced in the next planting season as stated in sub clauses num to num immediately following the inspection .
replacement plants shall in all aspects be the same as the original stock at the time of planting except that it shall be an additional year older for each year that has elapsed since the original stock was first planted unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
all replacement planting work shall be carried out in accordance with clause num .
the contractor shall bear the cost of all plant replacements unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
num when replacement planting is undertaken ground and pit preparation and planting shall be undertaken in accordance with this clause .
all plants removed shall be taken to a tip off site .
diseased plants shall be disposed of in accordance with subclause num .
num following replacement planting any stakes ties tubes or guards shall be refixedreplaced and any mulch or mulch mats shall be reinstated to the original specification .
where required in appendix num plants shall be watered at the rate stated in appendix num .
watering shall be carried out prior to any mulch reinstatement .
postplanting maintenance num for the duration of the period stated in appendix num which shall run concurrently with the period stated under subclause num the contractor shall carry out maintenance of new planting in accordance with clauses num and num as appropriate .
num grass bulbs and wildflower maintenance general grass maintenance num the grass and wildflower areas to be maintained are scheduled in appendix num .
prior to any cutting operation all stones or other harmful material from whatever source which may damage grass cutting plant or create a possible hazard to persons or property shall be removed off site .
all litter from grass cutting areas shall be removed off site prior to grass cutting .
any movable obstructions such as seats and litterbins shall be removed to facilitate cutting and replaced prior to leaving the site .
num tractors mounted with grass cutting equipment shall comply with manufacturers recommendations regarding the fitting and operation of attachments .
grass cutting equipment fitted to tractors shall comply with manufacturers recommendations regarding the fitting and operation of such attachments .
all dedicated grasscutting machines shall have an effective silencer of the type originally fitted on manufacture .
all grass cutting equipment whether selfpropelled or attached to a tractor shall comply with the following i all cutters and blades shall be sharpened and set according to the manufacturers recommendations to ensure a consistent cleanly mown sward and the height of cut determined as the height above ground level to the cutting blade measured with the machine standing on a hard level surface .
ii all guards shall be in place and in good condition and all safety devices shall be operational and of a type originally fitted on manufacture .
iii for grass and vegetation cutting on slopes the grasscutting equipment manufacturers recommendations relating to safe gradients for cutting shall be observed .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology num num grass shall be cut cleanly and evenly at the frequencies and to the heights specified in this clause without damage to the existing surface .
soft vegetative growth such as clover and other broadleaved vegetation shall be deemed to be part of the cutting operation where it falls within areas of grass .
num mowing shall take place over the whole grass area up to its boundaries which may be fencing paving or similar leaving no areas uncut and producing an even sward height across the whole area .
num the grass cutting operation shall include cutting around all obstacles such as trees posts and signs .
strimmers may be used where appropriate .
areas around obstacles shall be cut to the same height as specified for the surrounding grassed areas but no cutting shall be carried out within the distance from individual plants given in appendix num .
num mowing operations shall avoid spillage of debris such as stones onto carriageways or footways .
grass clippings and arisings lying on roads footpaths car parks drains and other hard surfaces shall be immediately swept up and removed off site .
grass clippings and arisings on all other areas shall be dispersed evenly over the sward unless specified otherwise in this clause or in appendix num .
num during periods when ground conditions are so wet as to prevent grass cutting without causing damage to the surface or producing divots operations shall cease and shall recommence only when ground and weather conditions are suitable .
num bulb foliage in areas where grass is cut shall not be cut down as a separate operation .
the first cut of grass areas containing bulbs shall as far as is possible be timed to coincide with the commencement of bulb foliage dieback not earlier than six weeks after flowering and normally early june for narcissus spp .
grass cutting high frequency num in the locations stated in appendix num cutting requirements for close mown grass shall be as follows or as otherwise stated in appendix num i first cut after winterspring .
the areas shall be cut when the grass reaches a height of num num mm to a height between num num mm and the cuttings removed off site .
ii subsequent cuts .
the areas shall be cut to a height between num num mm at least num times per year during the growing season .
num the edges of planted areas adjoining kerbs hard surfaces and structures shall be cut with edging shears or a mechanical equivalent at least num times per year during the growing season .
clean straight or curved lines as determined by the original shape of the grass area or the adjacent structure or hard surface shall be produced .
herbicide treatment in lieu of edging will not be permitted .
num the edges of planted areas adjoining kerbs hard surfaces and structures shall be reformed at least twice per year to produce clean straight or curved lines as determined by the original shape and dimension of the grass area .
where edges abut planted areas reforming shall include drawing back the soil from the edges so that edging shears can be used .
num where edges abut hard surfaces reforming shall include the removal of any soil or vegetation growing on or through the hard surface .
grass cutting medium frequency num in the locations stated in appendix num cutting requirements for parkway and other grass areas shall be as follows or as otherwise stated in appendix num i first cut after winterspring .
the areas shall be cut when the grass reaches a height of num num mm to a height between num num mm and the cuttings removed off site .
ii subsequent cuts .
the areas shall be cut to a height between num num mm at least num times per year during the growing season and the cuttings evenly dispersed .
num the edges to ornamental planting areas adjoining kerbs hard surfaces and structures shall be trimmed with edging shears or mechanical equivalent at least twice per year during the growing season .
clean straight or curved lines shall be produced as determined by the original shape of the grass area .
herbicide treatment in lieu of edging will not be permitted .
num the edges of ornamental planting areas adjoining kerbs hard surfaces and structures shall be reformed with a half moon edging iron or a mechanical equivalent once per year to produce clean straight or curved lines as determined by the original shape of the grass area .
num where edges abut hard surfaces reforming shall include the removal of any soil or vegetation growing on or through the hard surface .
grass cutting low frequency num in the locations stated in appendix num cutting requirements for amenity and other grass areas shall be as follows or as otherwise stated in appendix num i first cut after winterspring .
the areas shall be cut when the grass reaches a height of num num mm to a height between num num mm and the cuttings removed off site .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology num ii subsequent cuts .
the areas shall be cut to a height between num num mm at least num times per year during the growing season and the cuttings evenly dispersed .
grass cutting minimal frequency num in the locations stated in appendix num a single cut shall be undertaken once per year on swathe cuts visibility areas and other areas as required in appendix num .
the cut shall be to a height not exceeding num mm and the cuttings evenly dispersed to leave a neat and uniform appearance .
the timing of the cutting shall be as stated in appendix num .
where the areas contain injurious weeds as listed in subclause num the first cut shall be undertaken prior to the weeds flowering .
additional selective cuts shall be undertaken within these areas as required in appendix num or instructed by the overseeing organisation .
num a single cut of num m width from the edge of the carriageway shall be undertaken once per year .
additional selective full width cuts shall be undertaken within sight lines at hazardous bends junctions roundabouts some central reservations major accesses bus stops and laybys and any other areas as required in appendix num or instructed by the overseeing organisation .
num a single cut shall be undertaken once per year in the visibility splay in front of road signs .
the cut shall extend from the edge of the carriageway at a point num m from the sign and be splayed to meet the full width of the sign .
additional selective cuts shall be undertaken within these areas as required in appendix num or instructed by the overseeing organisation .
num all vehicles involved in verge and visibility area cutting shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
grass cutting banks and ditches num in the locations stated in appendix num banks and ditches shall be cut to a height of between num and num mm at a frequency of once per year or as otherwise stated in appendix num .
the arisings shall either be dispersed evenly over the sward avoiding blockage of drains and ditches or removed off site as required in appendix num .
grass cutting areas of planting num in the locations stated in appendix num grass and herbaceous groundcover in uncultivated planted areas plantations shall be cut to a height of between num and num mm after the seeding of desirable wildflower species every alternate year or at a frequency stated in appendix num .
unless otherwise stated in appendix num the cutting shall include bramble and tree and shrub seedlings with stems of less than num mm diameter but exclude trees and shrubs of less than num mm diameter which form part of the plantation .
num unless otherwise stated in appendix num arisings shall be raked off and removed off site by such means that avoids pulling tearing or causing other damage to the soil surface and retained vegetation .
num where it is stated in appendix num that grass and herbaceous plants shall be cut in planted areas plantations the contractor shall cut between the woody plants over the whole area up to the boundaries of the planted areaplantation whilst avoiding damage to the trees and shrubs leaving no areas uncut and producing an even sward height across the whole area .
wildflower areas and areas of nature conservation value num where cutting of wildflower areas or areas of nature conservation value is required one or more of the following operations or any other operations shall be carried out as directed in appendix num i annual springsummer cut areas shall be cut to a height of between num and num mm after the seeding of desirable species in late springearly summer or as directed in appendix num .
arisings shall be raked off and removed off site avoiding any pulling tearing or causing other damage to the soil surface and retained vegetation .
ii annual summerautumn cut areas shall be cut to a height of between num and num mm after the seeding of desirable species in late summerearly autumn or as directed in appendix num .
arisings shall be raked off and removed off site by such means that avoids pulling tearing or causing other damage to the soil surface and retained vegetation .
iii topping cut areas shall be cut to a height of between num and num mm after the seeding of desirable species in late autumn or as directed in appendix num with the cuttings being finely chopped and evenly dispersed over the area .
iv biennial cut areas shall be cut to a height of between num and num mm after the seeding of desirable species every alternate year .
arisings shall be raked off and removed off site .
amendment may num volume num series num specification for highway works landscape and ecology num within the wildflower areas or areas of nature conservation value stated in appendix num the cutting shall include areas of bramble tree and shrub saplings of less than num mm diameter .
cutting shall be timed to allow for prior seeding of desirable species listed in appendix num .
num where directed in appendix num to improve the potential for wildflower colonisation in wildflower areas or areas of conservation value identified by the overseeing organisation the ground shall be scarified by mechanical means to a depth of num mm so that the thatch is broken up creating a proportion of exposed soil of num .
arisings shall be removed off site .
the method employed shall avoid the uprooting of desirable vegetation such as fine grasses .
a sample area treatment shall be carried out to the overseeing organisations approval prior to the remainder being scarified .
num where directed in appendix num weed control in wildflower areas shall be carried out using spot treatment with a translocated herbicide applied in accordance with subclause num at the frequency stated in appendix num .
herbicide shall be applied to undesirable broadleaved species such as the thistles listed in clause num nettle and bramble unless they are stated in appendix num to be of nature conservation value .
num where directed in appendix num any weed growth that can not effectively be controlled by chemical means without risk of damage to wildflowers shall be hand weeded in accordance with subclause num at the frequency stated in appendix num .
molehills num if required in appendix num molehills in grass areas shall be removed before grasscutting and the soil distributed widely over surrounding grass or on nearby cultivated areas .
bulbs and perennials num where required in appendix num bulb foliage within ornamental planting areas shall be cut down when leaves have died back naturally not earlier than six weeks after flowering and normally early june for narcissus spp .
bluebell stands shall not be cut .
arisings shall be raked up and removed off site .
num watering general num the contractor shall ensure that there is no delay in the execution of watering by obtaining all necessary licences and permissions from water companies for the efficient execution of watering on any particular site including stand pipes pressure reducing valves hoses bowsers pumps sprinklers and ascertaining the availability of second class water from sewage works or other approved sources in the event of a hose pipe ban .
num watering of grass shrubs hedges and trees shall be temporarily suspended in areas where ponding occurs or where there is a risk of surface runoff .
once any surface water has soaked away repeated applications shall be applied until the watering operation has been completed .
num water to individual trees shall be applied either by low pressure hose or through irrigation hoses to the base of the plants ensuring thorough soaking of the ground occupied by the root system of the plant .
where necessary a depression shall be formed around the stem base of the plant to ensure that water reaches the root zone and does not run off at the surface onto the surrounding ground .
num any damage caused as a result of watering operations shall be reinstated including the replacement of any soil lost from pits or beds due to washing off .
following watering bed and pit surfaces shall be left even and all plants firm and root systems not exposed .
particular care shall be taken not to damage plants when handling hoses in planted areas .
establishment watering num the contractor shall water all planting undertaken under the contract in accordance with this clause at the frequency necessary to ensure establishment and survival until all planting works are completed .
num for the establishment period stated in appendix num the contractor shall water all planting undertaken under the contract in accordance with this clause at the frequency necessary to ensure establishment and survival .
additional watering num where required in appendix num additional watering shall be instructed by the overseeing organisation in the locations stated in appendix num during periods of abnormally dry weather .
when instructed water shall be applied at the following rates or as stated in appendix num i grassed areas water shall be applied at the rate of num lmnum using low pressure hose sprinkler or spray evenly over the entire area .
ii shrubs hedges and ornamental beds water shall be applied at the rate of num lmnum to shrub beds and num litres per linear metre to amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works landscape and ecology hedgerows by low pressure hose sprinkler or spray evenly over the entire area .
careful forking of sealed or compacted surfaces shall be carried out to facilitate percolation .
iii trees the minimum quantity of water specified in appendix num shall be applied by low pressure hose to each tree .
before the first application of water and after any break of more than five weeks the ground surface around the tree for a radius of num mm shall be loosened with a fork to aid penetration into the soil .
the water shall be applied at a steady rate to avoid runoff to and erosion of the surrounding area .
num establishment maintenance for planting num plants and planting areas shall be maintained in accordance with this clause in the locations and over the time periods stated in appendix num .
firming num plants shall be inspected during each visit to undertake maintenance operations and any which have been subject to frost heave or wind rock shall be straightened to an upright position and the ground refirmed .
stakes tubes guards and their ties num stakes tubes guards and their ties shall be inspected twice per year in october and march and adjusted to allow for the growth of each plant .
any damaged items shall be removed off site and replaced with new items in accordance with clause num .
num stakes tubes guards and ties shall be removed from plants where they are no longer required and either disposed of off site or returned to the overseeing organisation for reuse as required in appendix num .
pruning num num all pruning shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of clause num using secateurs and handsaws .
stems shall only be removed so as to retain the natural appearance of the individual plant species in accordance with the guidance in bs num part num .
arisings from pruning shall be disposed of in accordance with clause num .
num num all broken and badly damaged branches from the plants shall be pruned by cutting back to within num mm of the parent branch or trunk or to a suitable budnode .
the cut shall be angled correctly in accordance with bs num part num .
num at the edges of planted areas branches and stems shall be cut back to a minimum of num mm behind the kerbline fence wall or other edge demarcation .
organic mulch num any mulch which has fallen onto adjoining hard surfaces and grassed areas shall be swept up and if not contaminated by weeds or rubbish returned to the planted area and spread to original depth .
any mulch which has been contaminated by weeds or rubbish shall be removed off site .
weed control young trees and shrubs in grass plots num plant circles shall be defined as the area within a num mm radius of an individual tree or shrub within which weed control operations are carried out .
num at the locations and frequency stated in appendix num where mulch mats are not used translocated herbicides shall be applied to the plant circles around individual trees and shrubs in accordance with clause num and subclause num using a shield to protect the plants from the herbicide .
the operation shall include the clearance of vegetation by hand from within shelters and guards .
num at the locations and frequency stated in appendix num where mulch mats are not used a residual herbicide shall be applied to the plant circles around individual trees and shrubs in accordance with clause num and subclause num whilst protecting the trees and shrubs from the herbicide .
prior to application the ground surface shall either be free of grass or weeds or any grass present shall be no more than num mm height .
num where directed in appendix num the depth of mulch in individual plant circles and overall plant areas shall be inspected once per year in march and if less than an even depth of num mm new mulch to subclause num shall be laid to restore the depth to num mm .
num where directed in appendix num mulch mats shall be inspected three times per year .
any mats and pegs which are not secure shall be refixed .
damaged items shall be replaced with mulch mats to match the originals in accordance with subclauses num num and num .
num five years after planting any nonbiodegradable mulch mats and any pegs shall be removed off site and the soil surface made good .
amendment may num num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology num weed control young trees and shrubs in cultivated beds num ornamental planted areas shall be cleared of all litter and debris prior to weed control operations and the arisings removed off site .
num where required in appendix num planting areas shall be visited monthly to carry out specified weed control operations .
any grass and weed growth within the planted beds shall be removed by hand or chemical means as stated in appendix num .
herbicides shall be used in accordance with clause num .
the roots and foliage of weeds and grass shall be removed off site once die back is complete .
num the use of herbicide will not be permitted in planting beds containing perennial plants even when the leaves of these plants have died down and they are dormant .
num where organic mulch has been applied the depth shall be maintained at an even depth of num mm by the addition of fresh mulch in accordance with subclause num at least once a year .
num where required in appendix num in ornamental planted beds in urban areas where the bed is not mulched the soil surface shall be cultivated in may and july or at the frequency stated in appendix num using a hoe or light rake to create a finetomedium tilth evenly graded without damage to plants or roots .
weed control hedges num where required in appendix num the hedge base and an area of num mm width on either side of the hedge plants shall be kept free of weeds by herbicide treatment or handweeding .
herbicides shall be applied in accordance with clause num .
num where organic mulch was applied after planting the contractor shall inspect the depth of mulch once per year in march .
if the mulch is less than an even depth of num mm new mulch to subclause num shall be laid to restore the depth to num mm .
num where sheet mulch has been laid it shall be inspected three times per year .
any sheet mulch or pegs which are not secure shall be refixed .
damaged items shall be replaced with materials to match the original in accordance with subclauses num num and num .
num five years after planting any nonbiodegradable sheet mulch and any pegs shall be removed off site and the soil surface made good .
individual trees in urban streets num individual trees shall be defined as feathered standard and extra heavy standard trees planted as single specimens rather than as part of a planted group .
street trees in pavements tree grilles and those planted as specimens within a plot are defined as individual trees as well as any other existing young or semi mature trees identified in appendix num or by the overseeing organisation .
num the individual trees in the locations stated in appendix num shall be inspected annually during the growing season and maintained as follows i irrigation systems shall be maintained in working order .
any irrigation pipes shall be checked and repaired if necessary .
ii all weeds around the base of the tree shall be removed to a radius of num mm in grass or to a whole tree station if in the pavement or a tree grille .
removal shall be by hand andor chemical means as directed in appendix num .
when using herbicide the requirements of clause num and subclause num shall apply .
iii where organic mulch has been applied to a weedfree circle it shall be topped up to a depth of num mm with bark mulch to subclause num. iv tree supports stakes ties and anchoring systems shall be inspected and adjusted .
v rabbit guards tree guards and grilles shall be inspected and adjusted .
vi the levels of aggregate mulch and soil beneath grilles shall be made up to the same level as the surrounding surface .
vii when trees can stand unsupported stakes andor ties shall be removed backfilling stake holes with topsoil and compacting topsoil .
viii formative pruning shall be carried out in accordance with clause num including removal of epicormic shoots and the removal of deadwood .
competing secondary leader shoots and closely spaced duplicated branches with potentially weak or tight forks shall be removed .
ix the contractor shall report to the overseeing organisation any defects requiring further action .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology num num maintenance of established trees and shrubs num plants shall be maintained in accordance with this clause in the locations and over the time periods stated in appendix num .
weed control trees and shrubs in cultivated beds num cultivated beds shall receive weed control treatment four times per year during the growing season or at the frequency stated in appendix num .
any grass and weed growth within the bed shall be removed by hand or chemical means as required in appendix num .
herbicides shall be used in accordance with clause num and clause num .
the roots and foliage of weeds and grass shall be removed off site when die back is complete .
arisings from pruning cutting or felling of woody plants num num any infected diseased or pest prunings or timber arisings shall be removed off site immediately after cutting and burned or buried at a depth of no less than num m in a location to be approved in writing by the overseeing organisation except diseased arisings affected by diseases described in arboriculture research notes or arboriculture research and information notes issued by the arboricultural advisory and information service which shall be dealt with in accordance with the advice published in these notes .
in the event of a plant disease epidemic diseased arising shall be disposed of in accordance with the current recommendations of the department for environment food and rural affairs defra or the forestry commission or in scotland the environment and rural affairs department scottish executive or forestry commission or in wales the welsh assembly government or forestry commission or in northern ireland the department of agriculture and rural development forest service .
num healthy arisings shall be dealt with in one or more of the following ways as required in appendix num i removed off site without chipping first .
ii chipping .
all arisings shall be processed immediately using a woodchipper .
all remaining arisings from thinningcoppicing that can not be chipped shall be removed off site .
iii all arisings from chipping shall be removed off site .
iv where chippings are to be retained on the site the chipper shall produce chippings in the size range num mm .
v where chippings are to be spread back onto the site within areas of existing vegetation without intending to suppress or kill the existing ground vegetation the chippings shall be returned to within the boundary of the areas stated in appendix num and spread to an even consolidated depth of num mm maximum .
vi where chippings are intended to act as a weedsuppressant mulch they shall be spread over the pruned or coppiced plantations stated in appendix num to a depth of num mm .
vii chippings which are excess to the requirements specified in appendix num shall be removed off site .
viii arisings of greater than num mm diameter shall be securely placed on site in the locations stated in appendix num for nature conservation purposes .
ix where directed in appendix num the arisings from thinning and coppicing shall be windrowed on the centre of embankments or cuttings within the boundary of the area in which the work has taken place .
material shall not be dragged from one area to another .
with crosscutting and cut branches only the timber shall be windrowed .
all side branches from the cut timber shall be removed and the timber reduced to num m lengths .
windrows shall be formed in one of the following patterns as required in appendix num keeping the arisings at least num mm away from the retained trees and shrubs a for younger plantations windrows shall be num m apart and a minimum of num m from the edges of the plantation .
the windrows shall be secure with the material tightly packed and stacked to a height and width of between num and num m. b for older plantations windrows shall be num m apart and a minimum of num m from the edges of the plantation .
the windrows shall be secure with the material tightly packed and stacked to a height and width of between num and num m. amendment november num volume num series num specification for highway works landscape and ecology shrub pruning num num all pruning cuts shall be made in accordance with bs num part num .
num pruning shall be undertaken using secateurs and handsaws .
mechanical hedgecutters may only be used on compact smallleafed species which have dense foliage .
pruning shall be undertaken to promote flowering and fruiting in accordance with the species and age of the plant .
stems shall only be removed so as to retain the natural appearance of the individual plant species .
num all broken and badly damaged branches shall be pruned from the plants .
num species shall be pruned in accordance with the following categories i shrubs grown for coloured stems all stems shall be cut down to num mm above ground level or to num mm above the coppice stool if cut down previously at a frequency to maintain a succession of coloured stems as stated in appendix num .
this shall be carried out during the dormant season but outside the bird nesting season .
ii shrubs which flower on current season wood all wood which has borne flowers shall be removed immediately after flowering and all young wood retained to bear flowers in the following year .
iii shrubs which flower on previous season wood all the previous season wood shall be cut back to within two or three buds of the old wood .
iv shrubs which flower on old wood one or two of the oldest stems from each plant shall be removed completely crowded and weak growth shall be thinned out and the young shoots shall be cut back to fresh growth on the main stems .
v roses for modern varieties of groundcover and bush roses all growth shall be pruned back to the point of the previous cut .
hedge trimmers may be used on these modern varieties .
for other varieties of groundcover and floribunda roses all growth shall be pruned back to an outward facing bud num buds from the base of the previous season wood in march .
for hybrid teas all growth shall be pruned back to an outward facing bud num buds from the base of the previous season wood in march .
for rugosa cultivars all growth shall be pruned back to an outward facing bud num buds from the base every five years in march .
vi shrubs which require trimming pruning shall be undertaken back to the flowering heads but not into the old wood immediately after flowering .
vii overgrown shrubs where stated in appendix num shrubs shall be coppiced back to within num mm of the base in late winter .
the final wound surface shall be smooth and angled to allow water runoff .
num all growth which extends over the footway or carriageway which is dead dying or hazardous shall be removed .
all shrubs that are encroaching upon or obscuring visibility of adjacent signs structures electrical equipment gates or visibility splays shall be pruned .
all suckers shall be removed from rootstocks .
climbing plants num climber growth which extends over the footway or carriageway which is dead diseased dying or hazardous shall be removed .
species which are encroaching onto adjacent trees and shrubs shall be pruned .
the climbers shall be inspected at regular intervals during the growing season and any branches which are not secure shall be reattached to the supporting netting or wires .
any repairs or replacements to the supporting structures for the climbers shall be undertaken as necessary .
hedge maintenance num the contractor shall liaise with adjacent landowners regarding the access arrangements and working hours described in appendices num and num in order to carry out hedge maintenance .
all arisings shall be disposed of by the contractor .
num no trimming laying or clipping shall take place during the bird nesting season .
the frequency and timing of cutting shall be as given in appendix num .
num all cutters and blades shall be sharpened and set according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num where growth to be cut is up to two years old highway hedgerow planting may be maintained with tractor mounted side arm flails provided that they cut cleanly without leaving ragged ends .
for ornamental amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works landscape and ecology hedges and hedges where hard growth over two years old is to be cut only reciprocating blade cutting machinery shall be used .
large leafed evergreen hedges shall be pruned with secateurs to avoid half cut leaves .
num growth shall be reduced to the point of the previous cut and on completion both sides of the hedge shall be perpendicular and the top shall be level and at right angles to the sides .
exceptions to this shall be as described in appendix num .
num all clippings lodged in the top or sides of the hedge shall be removed off site .
during the cutting operation all litter and debris within the structure of the hedge shall be removed off site .
num all hedge laying works shall be carried out in a manner to ensure that the newly laid hedge possesses a neat uniform appearance of even density .
the work shall be carried out ensuring that the cut hedge plants are able to regrow vigorously .
num all hedge laying work shall only be carried out during the dormant season but not during periods of extreme frost .
num the terms for the component parts of a cut and laid hedge are as follows i stakes pointed greenwood stems or hardwood cleft driven vertically into the ground to provide support to the laid hedge plants .
ii binders flexible greenwood stems woven together along the top of the hedge to hold it down and provide support to the stakes applicable to midland hedge only see subclause num. iii cutside the side of the hedge from which the hedge plants are cut applicable to midland hedge only see subclause num. iv brash side the side facing the adjoining field or forestry plantation through which the hedge brash protrudes applicable to midland hedge only see subclause num. v stoving the exposed stump of a laid hedge plant .
vi coppice stool the cut stump of a hedge plant .
vii pleacher a live hedge plant which has been cut and laid to form the body of the hedge .
num if required in appendix num that hedges are to be laid the work shall be carried out in one of the following styles as described in appendix num i midland hedge all the pleachers shall be cut from one side of the hedge and laid diagonally across the line of the hedge so that all the brash protrudes on the opposite side .
the hedge shall be supported by greenwood stakes and binders .
ii straight hedge all the pleachers shall be cut and laid along the line of the hedge and interwoven between hardwood cleft stakes spaced at num m intervals .
iii any other regional variation described in appendix num .
num all cutting tools used on the hedge laying works shall be maintained in a sharp condition to ensure that cut surfaces are smooth and made cleanly without tearing the wood grain .
the cuts which facilitate the laying of a pleacher shall be made with an axe or billhook only .
chainsaws shall only be used in the preparation of the hedge and the trimming of hedge stovings .
num when a mixed species hedge is to be laid the individual species shall be treated in one of the following ways as required in appendix num i cutting and laying or ii coppicing hedge plants shall be felled at a height not exceeding num mm above ground level leaving their stumps with an angled surface to shed water and in a form to promote vigorous regrowth or iii removal unwanted hedge plants shall be felled to ground level and their stumps either physically grubbed out or chemically treated to prevent regrowth or iv retention certain young hedge plants which are either self set seedlings or growing from a healthy coppice stump may be selected to be retained to grow on as hedgerow trees .
num unless otherwise stated in appendix num the following materials shall be used for staking andor binding i midland hedge a stakes shall be obtained from broadleaved species such as castanea sativa quercus robur fraxinus excelsior or acer pseudoplatanus .
stakes from any salix or populus species shall not be used .
the stakes shall be pointed and cut from live greenwood stems not more than twelve weeks prior to being used .
they shall be at least num m in length and of num mm to num mm diameter throughout .
amendment may num num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology b binders shall be cut from live greenwood stems of corylus avellana fraxinus excelsior or salix viminalis not more than six weeks prior to being used and shall be at least num m in length and num mm to num mm diameter throughout .
binders shall not be trimmed until immediately prior to use .
ii straight hedges a stakes shall be cleft and of a hardwood species stated in appendix num pointed at one end num m in length and num mm to num mm in width throughout .
num all side branches from any hedge plants which may impede or obstruct the laying operation or detract from the style and appearance of the completed hedge shall be removed .
num any branches which are tangled or interwoven with other hedge plants shall be removed to ensure that the hedge plant to be laid is free to be guided into position .
any dead damaged or diseased wood along with any other foreign objects and debris shall also be removed before the plant is laid .
num all plants shall be laid in the same direction unless a gap is likely to occur .
all laid hedge plants shall as far as possible be interwoven into each other and the supporting hedge stakes to ensure maximum stability .
on sloping ground all hedge plants shall be laid in an uphill direction except when back laying is required to fill a gap .
on level ground the direction of laying shall be in the direction of traffic flow on that side of the carriageway except when back laying is required to fill a gap .
num stakes shall be driven centrally down the line of the hedge to offer support to the newly laid hedge plants in accordance with the following staking requirements specific to the two different styles of hedge described in subclause num or as required in appendix num i midland hedges greenwood stakes of sufficient length to ensure that at least num mm protrudes above the top of the laid hedge shall be driven in to a minimum depth of num mm at num m intervals along an even straight line .
when the binders have been fitted along the top of the hedge the stakes shall be cut off num mm above the binders with a sloping cut which shall face the cut side of the hedge .
ii straight hedges cleft stakes of sufficient length to ensure that num mm protrudes above the top of the laid hedge shall be driven in to a minimum depth of num mm at num m intervals along a straight line .
num only greenwood binders shall be used along the top of the hedge .
these shall be tightly twisted around themselves and each stake in order to hold the laid hedge down and offer support to the line of stakes .
a minimum of four binders shall be included at any one point and additional binders introduced at each stake in order to maintain the required number .
num when the hedge laying works at any location are complete any loose branch or twig ends shall be trimmed from the cut side and top of midland hedges and also from the brash side if necessary and from both sides and the top of straight hedges to leave a neat and compact appearance .
num all cut material and other arisings shall be removed off site by the end of each working day unless otherwise required in appendix num .
num where any significant gap exists in the hedge after it has been laid it shall be planted up with new hedge plants in accordance with clause num .
the size of the plants species and planting densitypattern shall be as specified in appendix num .
individual established trees in urban streets num individual trees shall be defined as feathered standard and extra heavy standard trees planted as single specimens rather than as part of a planted group .
street trees in footways tree grilles and those planted as specimens within a group shall be defined as individual trees as well as any other young or semi mature trees identified in appendix num .
num the individual trees shall be inspected annually during the growing season and maintained as follows i all weeds around the base of the tree shall be removed to a radius of num mm in grass or to a whole tree station if in the footway or a tree grille .
removal shall be by hand and or chemical means as appropriate .
when using herbicide the requirements of clause num and subclause num shall apply .
ii tree supports stakes ties and anchoring systems shall be inspected and adjusted .
iii when trees can stand unsupported stakes andor ties shall be removed stake holes shall be backfilled with topsoil which shall be lightly firmed .
iv tree guards and grilles shall be inspected and adjusted .
num amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology v the levels of aggregate mulch and soil beneath grilles shall be made up to the same level as the surrounding surface .
vi pruning shall be carried out in accordance with subclauses num num and num including removal of epicormic shoots and the removal of deadwood .
competing secondary leader shoots and closely spaced duplicated branches with potentially weak or tight forks shall be removed .
vii the contractor shall report to the overseeing organisation any defects requiring further action .
arboriculture general num all work specified in this clause shall be undertaken in accordance with bs num except that cuts and wounds shall not be treated with a fungicidal sealant bitumen or latex paint unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
num where permission has been obtained to carry out any work under this contract on trees covered by a tree preservation order or in a conservation area this shall be noted in appendix num .
num the contractor shall comply with the current forestry and arboriculture safety training council fastco recommendations in relation to all aspects of the arboricultural works .
num if any defect is found within a tree during the course of carrying out work which would render the specified work inappropriate or inadequate the contractor shall cease work and notify the overseeing organisation who shall agree any appropriate alternative action which is to be taken .
where such a defect constitutes an imminent threat to public safety or property the contractor shall take appropriate action to exclude the public from the area of danger notify the overseeing organisation immediately and protect the location until the overseeing organisation issues further instructions .
num no tree work shall be carried out during periods of extreme weather except in emergency situations .
except in an emergency incident the removal of live wood from any species shall not be undertaken during periods of severe frosts .
in such cases the work carried out shall be the minimum required to render the tree safe or to allow removal from the carriageway .
num except in an emergency incident tree surgery felling thinning and coppicing operations shall only be undertaken within the dormant season and outside the bird nesting season .
num all mature trees shall be checked for bat roosts in any cavities before arboricultural works are carried out .
any bat roosts shall be reported to the overseeing organisation and no works shall be carried out on any tree in which bat roosts are located without further written instructions from the overseeing organisation .
the inspection for bat roosts and any subsequent action thereon must be carried out by appropriately licensed personnel .
num all tools shall be surface sterilised with methylated spirits after use on trees which are known or suspected to be diseased .
num when using tower wagons or cranes the contractor shall ensure that manufacturers safety limits are not exceeded .
demountable towers shall have all fastening brackets secured and shall only be used on the appropriate vehicle .
num climbing irons shall not be used in the pruning of live trees and shall only be used during felling or dismantling operations when this is necessary during emergency works .
num no trees are to be used as winch anchors without the prior consent of the overseeing organisation and these shall be protected .
alternative types of winch anchor may be used provided they are appropriate for the conditions prevailing at the site and the task to be undertaken and are of a recognised arboricultural type .
tree surgery num tree size categories reflecting the extent to which tree surgery and felling works shall be carried out are stated in appendix num .
num each tree shall be individually considered and the general description of work to be undertaken shall be interpreted in relation to the species shape size character and condition of each individual tree .
num all operations shall be carried out so as to leave a wellbalanced tree crown .
num the contractor shall prune back all dead damaged or diseased wood to its point of origin .
the cutting of the branch shall not damage the branch collar if taken off at a main limb or on the bole .
the triple cut method shall be used when carrying out the pruning operation and the final wound shall be smooth and free of snags .
num all damage to main limbs or boles shall be cleaned to remove damaged or diseased tissue back to but not into live wood or bark .
the final wound shall be smooth and free of snags .
num the repair of major bark wounds over num mm in diameter or length shall consist of the removal of dead damaged and loose bark and in addition any splintered num amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology wood back to the line of newly forming callus growth ensuring that no live tissue is damaged .
the size of the wound shall be kept to a minimum and its final shape shall be as far as possible rounded and free from sharp corners .
num both wet and dry cavities shall be inspected and probed to determine the extent of decay and ascertain their significance in relation to the structure and safety of the tree or branch .
where possible all accumulated debris and loose decayed wood shall be removed from such cavities and where specified in appendix num the opening of the cavity covered with a fine mesh wire netting to prevent a further build up of debris .
this covering shall be secured with felt tacks in such a way that it does not prevent natural callus formation but allows easy removal for future inspection .
num regulative pruning shall be carried out in accordance with the arboriculture research note numpath and arboriculture research note num as issued by the arboricultural advisory and information service .
pruning cuts shall wherever possible be made at a fork or at the main stem .
all wounds shall be kept as small as possible .
the final pruning cut shall be made so that both the branch branch bark ridge and branch collar remain intact .
num the contractor shall carry out as part of tree pruning operations any of the following works as may be necessary on an individual tree i removal of basal sucker growths and epicormic growth from the trunk at ground level up to the base of the trees natural crown .
ii repair of minor bark wounds on the trunk and main branches by the removal of any dead damaged or loose bark back to undamaged tissue or to the line of newly forming callus growth .
in either case the size of wound shall be kept to a minimum .
iii removal of any foreign objects from the tree where this can be done without inflicting any undue damage to the tree concerned .
iv removal of reverted branches from cultivars of tree species .
v severance of undesirable climbing plants at base of trunk .
num where crown lifting is directed in appendix num the lower branches and branchlets of the tree shall be removed to the height stated in appendix num in order to increase the clearance under the canopy of the tree .
num where crown thinning is required in appendix num a proportion of secondary and small live branch growth throughout the crown shall be removed to produce as far as possible an even density of foliage around a well spread and balanced branch structure .
crossing weak duplicated and damaged branches shall be removed where this will not spoil the overall shape .
num where crown reduction or reshaping is required in appendix num the crown shall be reduced in size whilst preserving as far as possible a natural shape .
this may involve cutting back both main and subsidiary branches to a side bud or branch to leave a flowing line without stumps .
tree felling num where straight felling is required in appendix num the whole tree shall be felled to within num mm of ground level where necessary with the assistance of a powered or hand winch .
num where sectional felling is required in appendix num the tree shall be felled in sections of a size appropriate to the location using ropes where necessary to lower the sections .
num the height at which the stump shall be cut shall be as stated in appendix num either i as close to the ground level as possible or ii where the tree is growing in a hedge or fence line the stump shall be left level with the top of the hedge or fence or iii at any other height stated in appendix num .
the final cut shall leave the stump with a smooth level surface .
num where required in appendix num stump treatment shall be carried out within num hours of felling .
a stumpkilling herbicide with colouring agent used in accordance with clause num shall be applied by means of drilling or frill girdling in the cambium zone of the cut stump .
num any regrowth from the cut stump shall be treated during the following season in accordance with sub clause num and clause num .
num where required in appendix num the complete root including buttress and surface roots arising from or near to its base shall be removed either by i stump grinding to a minimum depth of num mm or ii stump grubbing by means of excavation or winching .
num following removal of stumps by any means the void shall be filled with topsoil to match existing levels in grassed areas .
in paved areas the material shall be removed down to formation level to allow full num amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology reinstatement of the paved area .
all arisings shall be disposed of as required in appendix num .
thinning and coppicing num thinning operations shall be undertaken by means that avoid the need for pruning or crown lifting of retained plants particularly to those on the outer edges .
num thinning shall be carried out throughout the planted areas identified in appendix num .
unless otherwise stated in appendix num thinning shall favour the retention of the strongest trees and those that offer the longest future useful life .
adequate spacing shall be created between the trees and shrubs to promote healthy future development of the crowns of the remaining trees .
edge treatment shall favour the maximum retention of lower branches and an understorey of younger trees or shrubs where these are present .
all plants to be thinned shall be cut down to between num num mm of ground level parallel with the slope of the ground .
num plants to be coppiced shall be cut down to num mm above ground level if being coppiced for the first time .
if coppiced previously the plants shall be cut back to the previous point of coppicing but with the cuts positioned outside the branch collar .
the final wound surface shall be smooth and angled to allow water run off .
cut surfaces shall not be treated with herbicide .
scrub control in grass num no scrub control shall be carried out during the bird nesting season .
num where required in appendix num control of scrub species shall be carried out .
species to be controlled shall be as specified in appendix num .
num the tree and shrub species to be controlled shall have a stem diameter and maximum height or sizes as stated in appendix num .
num where required in appendix num scrub control is required on rock ledges and scree .
num the following operations shall be carried out on specified species as required in appendix num i where there are large areas of scrub to be controlled a translocated herbicide shall be applied to the specified species during a period of active growth in accordance with clause num .
after the herbicide application has been effective all dead vegetation shall be cut down to ground level and removed off site .
ii specified species shall be cut down to between num and num mm above ground level .
for stumps of sufficient diameter the contractor shall furrow or frill girth num of the stump and bark and apply a stumpkilling herbicide in accordance with clause num .
an approved vegetable dye shall be included to clearly indicate the stumps have been treated .
iii specified species shall be cut down to num mm above ground level and the plants allowed to regrow .
the contractor shall then apply a translocated herbicide during a period of active growth in accordance with clause num .
this regrowth treatment is likely to be in the year following initial cutting .
iv specified species shall be cut down to num mm above ground level and removed off site .
the plants will be allowed to regrow .
num management of waterbodies num the following operations shall be undertaken where required in appendix num .
num all rubbish and debris shall be removed from the entire surface of the waterbody including any partially submerged items .
num inlets and outlets as detailed in appendix num shall be inspected twice per year usually in february and october and their condition reported to the overseeing organisation .
weed control num undesirable species or areas of vegetation to be subject to weed control shall be as described in appendix num .
num herbicide applied to weeds in or near waterbodies including banks adjacent to ditches shall be used in accordance with clause num and subclause num .
num where required in appendix num weeds in the waterbodies shall be removed by handweeding in accordance with subclause num or by mechanical means .
silt num silt depth shall be inspected once per year in april and the depth and condition reported to the overseeing organisation .
num where required in appendix num silt shall be removed .
the depth of silt to be removed available deposition areas for dryingout requirements for disposal and access shall be as stated in appendix num .
num amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num landscape and ecology reedbeds and marginal plants num where required in appendix num reedbeds shall be inspected twice per year in february and october or at other times stated in appendix num and their condition reported to the overseeing organisation .
num the timing and methodology of inspection and operations shall avoid affecting habitats of birds fish and invertebrates .
the presence of protected or rare species shall be reported to the overseeing organisation .
num special ecological measures num the maintenance works specified under clause num shall be carried out for the period of time stated in appendix num .
num special ecological measures works shall be carried out in the seasons stated in appendix num .
tunnels fencing and underpasses for wildlife num tunnels ledges fencing and underpasses for wildlife shall be installed in the manner and locations detailed in appendix num .
num wildlife grilles shall be installed on the entrances to drains in the manner and locations detailed in appendix num .
num tunnels fencing underpasses ledges and grilles in the locations stated in appendix num shall be inspected twice per year in february and october and their condition reported to the overseeing organisation .
any obstructions shall be removed from tunnels underpasses and ledges and the arisings removed off site .
any areas of standing water or poorly drained areas at the entrances to tunnels or underpasses shall be reported to the overseeing organisation and work carried out if necessary as instructed by the overseeing organisation .
reflectors num reflectors shall be installed in the manner and locations detailed in appendix num .
num reflectors in the locations stated in appendix num shall be inspected once per month cleaned and repaired as necessary and any obstructing vegetation removed .
artificial nests boxes perches and other wildlife shelters num in the locations stated in appendix num bat boxes dormice or bird nesting boxes or roosting perches shall be installed as detailed in appendix num .
num bat boxes or roosts dormice or bird nesting boxes and roosting perches in the locations stated in appendix num shall be inspected as specified in appendix num and their condition reported to the overseeing organisation .
the inspection shall include clearing out of any abandoned nests and the arisings removed off site .
only experienced operatives are to carry out this work and only licensed operatives are to work with the legallyprotected species listed in appendix num .
num bat boxes dormice or bird nesting boxes and roosting perches shall be repaired when necessary as detailed in appendix num or as instructed by the overseeing organisation .
other habitat creation measures num other habitat creation measures in the locations stated in appendix num shall be inspected as detailed in appendix num and their condition reported to the overseeing organisation .
num the known locations of protected species or their habitats are noted in appendix num .
this information is confidential .
num where stated in appendix num the contractor shall obtain a licence or use only licensed operatives for works in the vicinity of protected species .
numf amendment may num series num maintenance painting of steelwork contents clause title page num introduction num num surface preparation general requirements num num surface preparation materials and methods num num surface preparation workmanship standards num num metal coatings num num testing of metal spray coatings num num paint and similar protective coatings num num surface preparation and protective systems num num testing of paints num num storage requirements and keeping periods for paints num num procedure trials num num application of paint num num form hapnum maintenance paint system sheet appendix num num form hapnum paint data sheet appendix num num num access containment and lighting num num num additional requirements for the protection of cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendment may num num national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland scotland clause title page numse paint and similar protective coatings snum denotes a clause which has a substitute national clause for one or more of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales or northern ireland .
volume num series num specification for highway works maintenance painting of steelwork maintenance painting of steelwork num introduction num surface preparation and the maintenance painting of steelwork shall be carried out in compliance with clauses num to num using systems appropriate to the information given in appendix num form hapnum maintenance paint system sheet parts num to num and appendix num if applicable as appropriate to the design accessibility and condition of the components .
num num the manual of paints for structural steelwork which is included in standard bd num dmrb num provides data on paints and similar materials for use in the overseeing organisations contracts .
the manual contains item numbers and a summary is also given in table num .
num subject and without prejudice to the conditions of contract the contractor shall comply with any measures to contain people plant materials dust and debris described in appendix num .
num compliance with subclause num of this clause does not confer immunity from relevant legal requirements .
num the appropriate level of surface preparation and the suitable protective system shall depend on reported results from the assessment of the existing protective system which is determined as described in clause num of bd num dmrb num .
num num corrosion protection of steelwork shall comply with national highways sector scheme numa for corrosion protection of ferrous metals by industrial coatings described in appendix a and be undertaken by a contractor registered to the scheme by an approved ukas accredited certification body .
num surface preparation general requirements num the general requirements are specified in subclauses num to num .
the various materials and methods are specified in clause num .
the standards to be achieved are specified in clause num .
definitions of terms used are given in clause num .
the particular requirements for surface preparation for the structures included in the contract are specified in appendix num .
num num areas contaminated by oil or grease shall be prepared by wet cleaning the affected areas as described in subclause num prior to surface preparation by other specified methods .
unless otherwise described in appendix num solvents shall not be used .
num clean water which does not leave any harmful residues on the surface shall be used for cleaning and rinsing .
num only cleaning agents which do not leave harmful residues on the surface after final rinsing shall be used for cleaning .
num num surface preparation shall be continued until the required standard has been achieved .
the surfaces are required to be free from condensation oil grease dust residues and detrimental contamination such as chlorides and sulphides .
these shall be tested using the procedures of dd env iso num num bs en iso num bs en iso num bs en iso num bs en iso num and bs en iso num bs numbnum .
num after dry surface preparation of internal surfaces and before any wet cleaning all dust and debris shall be removed from accessible areas by sweeping and vacuum cleaning .
num immediately before application of each coat of paint the contractor shall ensure that the surfaces i meet the required standard of preparation ii are free from harmful residues including mortar concrete dust grit and paint degradation products iii are free from detrimental contamination iv are free from moisture detrimental to the coating to be applied .
num the edges of existing coatings adjacent to abraded or blast cleaned areas shall be bevelled back where practicable into sound and firmly adhering material .
num num unless otherwise specified in appendix num fasteners shall be prepared and painted to the same standard as adjacent main surfaces .
num after surface preparation by methods using water or when the steelwork has been exposed to the weather after surface preparation by other methods or when there are deck leaks areas containing riveted or bolted joints or built up sections shall be freed of any standing water which may be present in the nominal joint gaps compressed air or other approved methods shall be used .
when drying out has been completed or when surfaces are dry after surface preparation line gaps around the perimeter of joint or along plies shall be sealed effectively by successive applications of undercoat paint .
all wider gaps shall be sealed with a sealant compatible with the primer .
amendment november num num volume num series num specification for highway works maintenance painting of steelwork num num the use of an inhibitor during wet blast cleaning or cleaning shall not be permitted .
num surface preparation materials and methods abrading num num any encrusted rust foreign matter or paint which may be difficult to remove by abrading alone shall be dislodged by scraping aided by hand or power wire brushing .
this work shall be completed before abrading of the areas so affected .
num abrading shall be carried out using abrasive paper or other material or a flexible abrasive disc mounted on a power drive flexible pad or a power driven arbor or spindlemounted flexible abrasive flap wheel .
abrading tools may be used to remove weld spatter .
wet abrading may be employed for the preparation of finishes over sound undercoats over unsound systems over hot dip galvanizing or hot dip galvanizing .
wet abrading shall not be allowed to come into contact with exposed thermally sprayed metal coatings unless the metal coating is to be entirely removed .
num num all equipment including tools abrasive sheets abrasive discs and abrasive wheels shall be of a type capacity and in a condition appropriate for the work .
the use of hard grinding wheels for abrading shall not be permitted .
num a polished surface appearance caused by the polishing in of old paint rust or dirt shall not be acceptable .
num areas of corroded steel or unsound metal coatings which have been prepared by abrading down to stnum steel bright steel or bright metal coating as appropriate shall be protected by the primer and next coat of paint before any cleaning down or other preparation of adjacent surfaces specified in appendix num is undertaken .
num areas of unsound hot dip galvanizing which have been prepared down to bright steel by abrading shall be protected by the application of the primer and next coat of paint before cleaning down or other preparation of adjacent surfaces specified in appendix num is undertaken .
num after surface preparation by wet abrading of hot dip galvanizing but prior to any cleaning down of adjacent painted or hot dip galvanised surfaces specified in appendix num any exposed areas of steel shall be dry abraded down to bright steel and protected by the primer and the next coat of paint including the stripe coat before cleaning down or other preparation of adjacent surfaces specified in appendix num is undertaken .
amendment november num num dry or wet cleaning num wet cleaning shall be carried out by scrubbing with a stiff bristle brush using water and a cleaning agent or a pressure washer .
immediately after cleaning down the surfaces shall be thoroughly rinsed using clean cold water .
num dry cleaning shall be carried out by scrubbing with a dry stiff bristled brush .
num where the existing surfaces are affected by embedded metallic grit or other abrasive particles they shall be scraped to dislodge looser particles and then dusted off .
this work shall be carried out after any final rinsing and when the surface is dry .
dry blast cleaning using dry airabrasive system num num unless otherwise specified in appendix num chillediron grit complying with bs en iso num bs numenum high carbon cast steel grit complying with bs en iso num bs numenum with a hardness value greater than num hv fused aluminium oxide complying with bs en iso num nonmetallic abrasive such as almandite garnet to bs numfnum iso num copper slag to bs en iso num bs numfnum or recycled glass complying with bs en iso num shall be used .
grades for metallic abrasives shall comply with the following profile see subclause num grade fine gnum or snum medium gnum or snum coarse gnum or snum num the particle size of metallic abrasive in plant or equipment shall not exceed the maximum for the relevant grade as specified above .
num before the start of blast cleaning and during blast cleaning the contractor shall ensure that the abrasive is free from matter which could leave detrimental contamination as defined in subclause num vii on the surfaces to be coated .
num metallic grit or aluminium oxide abrasive shall be used for dry blast cleaning of relatively small areas on site which are to be thermally sprayed metal coated such as at areas prepared to clean steel .
the contractor shall ensure that the grade and particle shape of non metallic abrasives are adequate for the purpose intended .
excepting for aluminium oxide nonmetallic abrasives shall not be recycled .
volume num series num specification for highway works maintenance painting of steelwork wet blast cleaning using low pressure airwater abrasive system num unless otherwise specified in appendix num the airwater pressure at the nozzle shall not exceed num kgfcmnum and shall be fully adjustable below this level .
the system shall incorporate a mechanical metering device remote controlled by the operator from the nozzle to regulate from zero to maximum the quantity of nonmetallic abrasive being fed into the airwater mixture .
during abrasive blast cleaning the airwaterabrasive shall be thoroughly mixed and the mixture shall be projected onto the surface to be cleaned through a single bore nozzletube .
the use of an inhibitor during wet blast cleaning or washing shall not be permitted .
wet blast cleaning using high pressure water abrasive system or ultra high pressure water system num unless otherwise specified in appendix num the water pressure shall not exceed num kgfcmnum for high pressure or between num and num kgfcmnum for ultra high pressure .
the system shall incorporate a mechanical metering device controlled by the operator at the nozzle to regulate from zero to maximum the quantity of nonmetallic abrasive being fed into the water .
num num within num minutes of wet blast cleaning the whole of the cleaned surface shall be thoroughly washed using the blast cleaning equipment with air and water .
any further deposits of abrasive on already rinsed surfaces shall be removed in a similar manner also within num minutes of being deposited .
all accumulated deposits of abrasive and debris on other parts of the structure shall be removed by the same method before the end of the working day .
after washing the surfaces shall be free from all contamination .
tests for freedom from detrimental contamination shall be made after the washing .
combined wetdry blast cleaning num num wet blast cleaning using the low pressure airwaterabrasive system in accordance with subclause num and num shall be followed at a minimal interval by dry blast cleaning in accordance with subclauses num to num of all the previously wet blast cleaned areas .
num the specified standard of surface preparation shall have been achieved in full initially by wet blast cleaning and washing to achieve the required cleanliness before any later dry blast cleaning of the same areas to remove flash rusting or to restore the required surface profile .
other requirements num when surface preparation is to be carried out by dry blast cleaning and on adjacent surfaces by wet cleaning down andor abrading then unless otherwise dictated by traffic management requirements etc .
the wet cleaning down and any wet abrading shall be carried out first .
num when surface preparation is to be carried out by wet blast cleaning any wet cleaning down andor wet abrading of adjacent surfaces may be carried out after the wet blast cleaning .
in such cases areas to be blast cleaned andor abraded shall be cleaned down in accordance with subclause num and thoroughly rinsed using the blast cleaning equipment before any final preparation by dry blast cleaning or dry abrading is carried out .
num any prepared steel surfaces shall be protected from the effects of any further wet method of surface preparation by the application of a minimum num microns dry film thickness of paint .
grinding num grinding wheels and discs shall be of the size shape and grade of coarseness appropriate to the particular operation .
the speed of revolution shall be appropriate for the work .
num grinding shall normally be carried out after surface preparation by other methods including cleaning down has been completed except where it is necessary to achieve a blast profile and this would necessitate blast cleaning after grinding .
num surfaces prepared by grinding to bright steel shall be protected by the application of the primer and the next coat of paint including any stripe coats before cleaning down or other preparation of adjacent surfaces specified in appendix num is undertaken .
num surface preparation workmanship standards num definitions of terms in subclause num describing coatings the extent of surface preparation and chemical cleanliness of surfaces are given below i unsound paint .
paint showing signs of disruption rusting through having inadequate adhesion or covering rust scale loose rust loose mill scale or other detrimental products ii sound paint .
paint which is sound down to a metal substrate amendment may num num volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num iii unsound metal coating .
a metal coating showing signs of disruption inadequate adhesion or penetration by rust or other corrosion products iv sound metal coating .
a metal coating which complies with clause num or a metal coating restored to these requirements by blast cleaning but with a reduced thickness v visual cleanliness of a steel substrate prepared to a clean steel by blast cleaning appearance there shall be a blast cleaning pattern overall .
the surface profile shall be free from mill scale rust and foreign matter when viewed by normal vision b num sanum to bs en iso num bs numanum and bs en iso num bs numanum by blast cleaning appearance the surface shall be free from all rust scale loose rust and loose mill scale c bright steel by abrading appearance the surface shall be free from all surface rust mill scale and defects and shall have an overall bright appearance d num stnum to bs en iso num bs numanum and bs en iso num bs numanum by abrading appearance the surface shall be free from all rust scale loose rust and loose mill scale e bright steel by grinding appearance the surface shall be free of weld spatter shelling internal discontinuities and other surface defects leaving an overall bright appearance .
rounding of sharp edges shall be to a radius of about num mm vi visual cleanliness of a metal coating restored or prepared to a sound metal coating by blast cleaning appearance the surface shall be free from corrosion products and embedded abrasive particles and shall have a bright appearance overall b bright metal coating by abrading appearance the surface shall be free from surface corrosion and corrosion products and shall have a bright appearance overall vii freedom from harmful residues or contamination surfaces shall only be deemed to be free from harmful residues or contamination after surface preparation when any such remaining matter shall not reduce the required durability of the specified protective system .
num the following standards of surface preparation shall be achieved i areas containing existing sound finishing paint shall be freed of a any visible gloss which may prevent adequate adhesion of the next coat and b contamination ii areas of existing unsound paint coatings over a steel substrate shall be freed of a any unsound paint down to sound paint b any unsound paint down to clean steel c any unsound paint down to sanum or stnum quality steel d any unsound paint down to bright steel e all paint down to sanum or stnum quality steel f all paint down to clean steel and g contamination iii areas of existing unsound paint coatings over a metal coated steel substrate shall be freed of a any unsound paint down to sound paint or to sound metal coating b any unsound metal coating down to bright metal coating c any unsound metal coating down to clean steel d any unsound metal coating down to bright steel e all paint and unsound metal coating down to sound metal coating or to clean steel amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num f all paint and metal coating down to clean steel and g contamination iv areas of sound hot dip galvanizing exposed through a paint system during surface preparation shall be abraded to an extent necessary to ensure effectiveness of adhesion promoter andor adhesion of the primer v areas of unsound metal coating over a steel substrate shall be freed of a any unsound metal coating down to bright metal coating b any unsound metal coating down to sound metal coating c any unsound metal coating down to clean steel d any unsound metal coating down to bright steel e all metal coating down to clean steel and f contamination .
vi when either clean steel sanum or stnum quality steel or bright steel is exposed through a metal coating during surface preparation the standard shall be as defined in subclause num as appropriate except for the profile of previously blast cleaned steel surfaces .
in the case of aluminium and zinc metal spray remnants of soundly adhering and clean aluminium or zinc may be retained .
any sound metal spray which is contaminated by lead shall be completely removed .
num num the surface profile to be achieved by blast cleaning either fine medium or coarse as appropriate shall be within the limits set by the surface profile comparator for the assessment of abrasive blast cleaned surfaces conforming to bs en iso num bs numcnum .
num metal coatings hot dip galvanised coatings num unless otherwise specified in appendix num structural members which were originally hot dipped galvanised and display signs of deterioration shall be replaced by newly hot dipped galvanised members or alternatively the surface shall be cleaned to bright metal and protected by the application of coatings .
thermally sprayed metal coatings num thermally sprayed metal coatings shall unless otherwise described in the contract comply with bs en num and with the following i aluminium coating shall be of a material with minimum quality in accordance with type al num numa of iso num .
zinc coating shall have a composition in accordance with type zn num of iso num ii the thickness of either coating shall be not less than num microns iii the strength of adhesion of thermally sprayed metal coatings shall not be less than the following aluminium num kgfcmnum zinc num kgfcmnum iv thermally sprayed metal coatings shall be applied continuously over each nummnum per gun or the area of the component whichever is the lesser until the specified thickness has been achieved v the application of thermally sprayed metal in separate layers shall not be permitted vi num all surfaces to be thermally metal sprayed shall be blast cleaned and the standard shall be sanum quality to bs en iso num bs numanum medium profile vii thermally sprayed metal coatings shall be denibbed .
other requirements num when a metal coating is required on only part of a component it shall be applied before the rest of the component receives paint .
num new items that are electroplated and that are under torque or tension conditions shall be stress relieved by heat treatment at appropriate temperature and time to prevent failure by hydrogen embrittlement .
num testing of metal spray coatings num num at the start of the works and subsequently at intervals scheduled in the contract with the exception of coatings on steel in bearings curved surfaces repairs to mechanical damage local failure of thermally sprayed metal coating at site joints or areas restored on site the contractor shall demonstrate by means of a tensile test in accordance with bs en num that the minimum adhesion requirement amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num is being attained as detailed in subclause num iii .
in the excepted areas the contractor shall demonstrate that the adhesion is satisfactory by means of grid tests in accordance with bs en num .
areas affected by the tests shall be restored in accordance with clause num .
num the tensile tests shall be carried out initially on flat panels num mm x num mm x num mm which are of the same grade of steel as the parent material and which before blast cleaning had the same surface condition .
the panels shall be blast cleaned and thermally metal sprayed together with the parent material to the same standard and using the same technique .
num the contractor shall ensure that adhesion tests have been carried out satisfactorily before any further work continues .
num if the adhesion requirement on any test panel is not met the contractor shall carry out a further test on the parent material adjacent to the test panel position .
in the case of adhesion failure on the steelwork itself by either method of test unsound thermally sprayed metal coating shall be restored and the tests repeated .
num if more than two local areas of faulty adhesion occur on any one component the whole of the thermally sprayed metal coating on the component shall be considered as having failed and it shall be restored .
num paint and similar protective coatings num num the term paint shall be deemed to refer to protective coatings in general .
num num the paints permitted for use by the overseeing organisation in the works are listed in the manual of paints for structural steelwork which is included in bd num dmrb num and which also contains details of the quality assurance scheme for paints and similar protective coatings .
all paints shall have a current bba hapas roads and bridges certificate or equivalent .
num num all paints shall be supplied in sealed containers of not more than num litres capacity and these shall be used in order of manufacture and batch number .
each container shall have a completely removable lid and be clearly marked on the side to show the name of the manufacturer registered description of the material including purpose e.g .
whether primer undercoat or finish colour item no paint manufacturers reference number batch number and date of manufacture .
where date of manufacture is coded the contractor shall provide the code key .
in addition paints shall be supplied in sealed containers of no greater than num litre capacity for testing purposes in accordance with clause num for a samples .
num num the contractor shall ensure that the properties of the paints he has selected are compatible with the existing system and suitable for the atmospheric conditions on site including temperature and humidity and that he is able to apply the paints satisfactorily to all parts of the structure in these conditions .
num num unless otherwise described in appendix num all paints forming any one protective system or overlapping systems shall be obtained from the same manufacturer as named by the contractor in appendix num form hapnum maintenance paint system sheet .
num surface preparation and protective systems num the particular methods of surface preparation are to be detailed in appendix num form hapnum maintenance paint system sheet parts num to num .
num num protective systems note mdft minimum dry film thickness b apply by brush as apply by airless spray hb high build dft above num m nb normal build dft between num and num m lb low build dft below num m i num item numbers in the protective systems are listed in the manual of paints for structural steelwork which is included in bd num dmrb num and a summary is shown in table num. ii num details of protective systems for steelwork are given in table num .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num table num num bd num quality assurance scheme for paints and similar protective coatings annex a manual of paints for structural steelwork current paint item numbers item description coat type build applied by num zinc phosphate epoxy ester primerundercoat lb or nb b or as singlecomponent num mio modified phenolic undercoat lb b or as single component num mio modified phenolic undercoatfinish lb b or as single component num mio phenolic single component undercoat lb b or as num mio phenolic single component undercoatfinish lb b or as num silicone alkyd single component finish lb b or as num silicone alkyd single component undercoat lb b num zinc phosphate epoxy twopack blast primersealer nb b or as b to small areas only num zinc phosphate high build quick blast primer hb as drying epoxy twopack b to small areas only num mio high build quick drying undercoatfinish hb as epoxy twopack num water based epoxy primer for blast primer hb b or as cleaned internal surfaces twopack num water based epoxy undercoatsheen undercoatsheen finish hb b or as finish for internal use twopack num high build aluminium epoxy surface tolerant hb b or as twopack maintenance primer e.g .
for abraded surfaces num high build epoxy twopack surface tolerant hb b or as maintenance undercoat num extended cure epoxy mio twopack primer undercoat hb as andor finish b to small areas only num high build glass flake epoxy undercoat for blast hb as stripe coats and twopack cleaned steel new small repairs only by brush construction num high build glass flake polyester undercoat for blast hb as stripe coats and twopack cleaned steel new small repairs only by brush construction num vinylvinyl copolymer mio zinc primer nb or hb b phosphate singlecomponent num vinylvinyl copolymer zinc phosphate primer nb or hb b singlecomponent num vinylvinyl copolymer mio zinc primerundercoatfinish nb or hb b phosphate singlecomponent num vinylvinyl copolymer sheen finish finish nb or hb b singlecomponent num notes num colour reference shall be as per the manufacturers declared colour given with reference to bs num andor bs numc where appropriate .
num dry film thickness dft range shall be as per the manufacturers data sheet .
the minimum dry film thickness of the paint coats and paint system shall be as per the protective systems detailed in table num where given .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num table num num bd num quality assurance scheme for paints and similar protective coatings annex a manual of paints for structural steelwork current paint item numbers continued item description coat type build applied by num thixotropic bitumen singlecomponent primerfinish hb b or as num pitch epoxy twopack polyamide cured undercoatfinish hb b or as num high build epoxy twopack finish hb b or as hydrocarbon resin modified num t wash adhesion promoter for lb b hot dip galvanized steel num ultra low voc adhesion primer to promote substrate lb b or as singlecomponent adhesion properties of coating systems for hot dip galvanised steel aluminium and stainless steel surfaces num adhesion promoting singlecomponent to promote substrate lb b or as adhesion properties of coating systems for hot dip galvanised steel aluminium and stainless steel surfaces num aluminium epoxy twopack sealerprimer lb b or as num red oxide moisture cured polyurethane primerblast primer for lb b or as singlecomponent maintenance or new works num mio moisture cured polyurethane undercoatfinish nb or hb b or as num moisture cured polyurethane semigloss finish lb b singlecomponent nb as num polyurethane twopack gloss finish lb b nb as num polyurethane twopack semigloss finish nb b small areas by brush hb as num organic modified polysiloxane gloss finish for new nb b twopack works or maintenance hb as num grease paint primer b as for difficult access areas num grease paint undercoatfinish hb b or as num notes num colour reference shall be as per the manufacturers declared colour given with reference to bs num andor bs numc where appropriate .
num dry film thickness dft range shall be as per the manufacturers data sheet .
the minimum dry film thickness of the paint coats and paint system shall be as per the protective systems detailed in table num where given .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num table num num requirements for bridges parapets bearings cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms and other highway structures protective systems type substrate type surface numst coat numnd coat numrd coat minimum total dry preparation film thickness of the paint system microns i m high steel clean bright sanum or item no .
num num num build epoxy stnum quality steel twopack min dry film thickness m num num num polyurethane twopack aluminium metal spray zinc bright or sound metal item no .
num num or num num finish metal spray coating min dry film thickness m num num num existing paint coats sound finishing coat item no .
nil nil num or last undercoat min dry film thickness m num num other sound coats item no .
nil num or num num min dry film thickness m num num num stripe coats item num or num .
brush or airless spray .
one stripe coat in area prepared to clean steel or sound metal coating .
applied over numst coat patch coats nil notes num .
num when a light tint gloss finish is required an extra coat of item num shall be applied .
item num polyurethane finish may be used in lieu of item num to provide a semigloss finish alternatively item num moisture cure polyurethane finish can provide a semigloss finish and is tolerant of surface moisture but not running water and low temperatures during application and curing .
num .
num types i m and ii m can be combined to allow paint maintenance to proceed when temperature falls and relative humidity increases and for night work .
health and safety num polyurethane twopack and moisture cured polyurethane paints contain isocyanate and can be injurious to health if not used correctly .
an assessment of the risks and controls for their safe use shall be carried out before use .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num table num num requirements for bridges parapets bearings cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms and other highway structures protective systems continued type substrate type surface numst numnd numrd numth minimum total dry preparation coat coat coat coat film thickness of the paint system microns ii m mc steel clean or bright steel item no .
num num num num num polyurethanes min dry film thickness m num num num num sanum or stnum quality item no .
na na na na steel min dry film thickness m aluminium metal spray bright or sound item no .
num num num num num zinc metal spray metal coating min dry film thickness m num num num num existing paint coats sound finishing coat item no .
num num or last undercoat min dry film thickness m num num other sound coats item no .
num num num num min dry film thickness m num num num num stripe coats item num brush or airless spray .
two stripe coats the first applied over numst coat the second coat applied over numnd coat patch coats nil notes num .
item num polyurethane twopack gloss finish may be used in lieu of item num mc polyurethane semigloss finish twopack polyurethane gloss finishes are less tolerant of moisture and low temperatures during application and curing than mc polyurethanes and shall therefore only be specified when conditions preclude the formation of moisture on surfaces and when the ambient temperature is likely to remain above numoc during application and the curing period .
num .
types i m and ii m can be combined to allow paint maintenance to proceed when temperature falls and relative humidity increases and for night work .
health and safety moisture cured polyurethane and polyurethane twopack paints contain isocyanate and can be injurious to health if not used correctly .
an assessment of the risks and controls for their safe use shall be carried out before use .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num table num num requirements for bridges parapets bearings cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms and other highway structures protective systems continued type substrate type surface numst coat numnd coat numrd coat minimum total dry preparation film thickness of the paint system microns iii m hot dip galvanizing bright or sound item no .
num or other num num num extended cure metal coating adhesion or num epoxy promoter polyurethanes min dry film thickness m num num num iii m hot dip galvanizing bright or sound item no .
num num num alternative metal coating or num extended cure epoxy min dry film thickness m num num num polyurethanes stripe coats item num brush or airless spray .
one stripe coat in area prepared to clean steel or sound metal coating .
applied over numst coat patch coats nil notes num .
some item num formulations have been developed for direct application to hot dipped galvanised surfaces with excellent adhesion without the need for an adhesion promoter to be checked with and guaranteed by paint manufacturer .
num .
when a light tint gloss finish is required an extra coat of item num shall be applied .
item num moisture cured polyurethane finish may be used in lieu of item num to provide a semigloss finish tolerant of surface moisture but not running water and low temperatures during application and curing .
health and safety polyurethane twopack and moisture cured polyurethane paints contain isocyanate and can be injurious to health if not used correctly .
an assessment of the risks and controls for their safe use shall be carried out before use .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num table num num requirements for bridges parapets bearings cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms and other highway structures protective systems continued type substrate type surface numst coat numnd coat numrd coat minimum total dry preparation film thickness of the paint system microns iv m steel clean bright or sanum item no .
num num or num num or num mcepoxy or stnum quality steel polyurethane min dry film thickness m num num num stripe coats item num brush or airless spray .
one stripe coat in area prepared to clean steel or sound metal coating .
applied over numst coat patch coats nil note num .
when a light tint gloss finish is required an extra coat of item num shall be applied .
item num moisture cured polyurethane finish may be used in lieu of item num to provide a semigloss finish tolerant of surface moisture but not running water and low temperatures during application and curing .
health and safety polyurethane twopack and moisture cured polyurethane paints contain isocyanate and can be injurious to health if not used correctly .
an assessment of the risks and controls for their safe use shall be carried out before use .
amendment may num volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num amendment may num table num num requirements for bridges parapets bearings cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms and other highway structures protective systems continued type substrate type surface numst coat numnd coat numrd coat minimum total dry preparation film thickness of the paint system microns v m steel clean bright or sanum item no .
num num num grease paints or stnum quality steel min dry film thickness m num num num aluminium metal spray zinc bright or sound item no .
nil num num metal spray or hot dip metal coating galvanizing min dry film thickness m num num num existing paint coats sound finishing coat item no .
nil nil num or last undercoat or other sound coats min dry film thickness m num num stripe coats item num num m mdft .
brush one stripe coat in all areas over numnd coat patch coats item num brush over numnd coat the total dft of existing coats plus new coats including patch coats shall not be less than num m .
number of patch coats to suit .
volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num amendment may num num testing of paints provision of samples num num unless otherwise described in appendix num the contractor shall provide unopened num litre samples known as a samples for quality assurance purposes for each type of paint to be used for the works in accordance with this clause .
in addition the contractor shall supply at least num ml samples known as b samples for application control purposes .
num num a and b samples are tested for paint composition andor properties against the original formulation issued by the paint manufacturer to the certifying body .
a samples num num a samples are required where more than num litres of paint for any one coat are supplied to a single contract .
for twopack systems separate samples of the base and activator shall be despatched by the contractor to the testing authority .
num num a samples are not required for footbridge steelwork or cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms .
num num the first a samples shall be taken from the first representative batch of each type of paint delivered to site .
num num if paint is to be supplied in tins of greater than num litre capacity then for a sampling a minimum of four num litre tins of paint taken from each batch to be sampled shall be provided by the paint manufacturer .
the a samples shall be selected from these num litre tins .
num num additional a samples of paints subject to testing under subclause num of this clause shall be provided by the contractor depending on the volume of paint for each coat to be used in the contract .
additional samples shall be provided in accordance with the following i for ready or difficult access steelwork .
over num litres a further set of samples for each part or whole num litres .
the contractor shall also provide an a sample ii of any replacement batch of paint subject to testing under subclause num of this clause iii of any returned paint described in subclause num iv when the paint is showing unsatisfactory application characteristics under clause num .
num num immediately after selection the a samples shall be despatched by the contractor to the testing authority together with appendix num form hapnum .
num num paint shall be supplied in sufficient time to allow for sampling delivery to the testing authority and testing before the start of application .
num num except for procedure trails paint shall not be applied until the a sample from the paint to be applied has been tested and confirmed as being satisfactory for use .
b samples num num for single component coatings the contractor shall take b samples from painters kettles or from nozzles of airless spray guns directly into clean new num ml tins which shall be filled and then sealed prior to despatch to the testing authority .
the contractor shall take b samples for twopack systems as separate unmixed samples of the base and activator cure components .
the b samples shall be taken following the stirring of the individual components and immediately prior to mixing the two components for use in the works .
the samples shall be decanted directly into clean new numml tins which shall be filled and immediately sealed prior to despatch to the testing authority .
b samples shall be taken as site spot checks with a minimum of say one batch in three being sampled .
also for each set of a samples taken a further b set of samples is required to be submitted for testing .
b samples are required for footbridge steelwork and cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms even though a samples are not required .
num num immediately after selection the b samples shall be despatched by the contractor to the testing authority together with appendix num form hapnum .
for twopack systems separate tins containing the activator and the base shall be dispatched to the testing authority .
provision of numml tins packing and transport of a and b samples num num the contractor shall provide num ml tins with lids and lid clips for b samples at the start of painting or before any procedure trials required by clause num .
the quantity of tins supplied shall be sufficient to avoid any delay in taking b samples throughout the work .
num num the contractor shall ensure that the lids of all tins of sample paint are securely clipped down when they are despatched for testing .
volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num amendment may num num num the contractor shall be responsible for handling packing as necessary prompt despatch and transit of a and b samples including collection of samples from the testing authority for use or disposal as appropriate following satisfactory testing and reporting .
num num the overseeing organisation shall report back to the supervising firm as stated on appendix num form hapnum all results of the testing who shall then notify the contractor of the results .
num storage requirements and keeping periods for paints num num on delivery to site paint shall be unloaded directly into one or more secure paint stores which shall be located approximately within num metres of the painting area .
insulation and means of heating and ventilation shall be provided as necessary to maintain the temperature of paint stores between numc and numc .
if at any time or place paint in tins painters kettles or airless spray containers is allowed to reach temperatures outside the numc and numc limits or the paint manufacturers recommended storage temperature the paint shall be discarded and not used for the works .
two pack products which produce an exothermic reaction when mixed may be allowed to exceed the specified higher temperature limit .
the contractor shall also implement any additional storage restrictions recommended by the paint manufacturer .
num num unless excepted in subclause num of this clause paint which has not been used within the shelf life recommended by the manufacturer or within num months of the date of manufacture which ever is the lesser shall be discarded or returned to the manufacturer and not used in the works .
num chemically cured or moisture cured paints shall not be used after the expiry of the pot life stipulated by the paint manufacturer .
they shall be discarded on expiry of the pot life or at the end of each working daynight whichever is the less .
all other paints in opened tins or open containers including painters kettles shall be returned to store and kept in sealed containers with not more than num ullage .
num num exceptionally components of twopack epoxy paints may have their keeping periods extended to num months from the date of manufacture provided that the contractor returns the paints to the paint manufacturer and ascertains that the manufacturer examines the contents of each tin and reconstitutes the paints as necessary so that such paints are equal in all respects to the paints described in the contract .
the contractor shall provide a certificate of conformity confirming that such paints have been inspected and where necessary reconstituted and conform in all respects to the contract .
num num each tin of reconstituted paint returned to site by the manufacturer shall have an additional label affixed stating extended shelf life to date .
the previous date marking shall remain and not be obscured .
testing in compliance with clause num shall apply to reconstituted paints .
num procedure trials num num unless otherwise described in appendix num at the start of the works the contractor shall carry out procedure trials on areas totalling between num mnum and num mnum employing the labour and equipment to be used in the works .
the contractor shall demonstrate his ability to carry out the specified methods of surface preparation to the standard required and to apply the paints he has selected in accordance with the specification .
the contractor shall supply sufficient paint for the trials as required for the size of the test area .
the remaining surface preparation shall not be started until the first stage of the procedure trials specified in subclause num of this clause are confirmed as satisfactory .
num num immediately following the satisfactory completion of the first stage of the procedure trials the contractor shall carry out the second and third stages employing the labour and equipment to be used in the works .
in order to avoid delay the trials may be carried out in three stages i surface preparation and primer ii undercoats iii finish .
paint application of the various coats on the remaining parts of the structure shall not be started until the relevant stage of the procedure trials are confirmed as satisfactory .
num procedure trials shall be completed within a num day period .
num num any adjustment to the registered paint formulations shown to be required by the trials other than an adjustment to the solvent shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation and made at the paint manufacturers works .
num the contractor shall carry out further procedure trials whenever he employs replacement skilled labour or proposes to use equipment of a different type .
volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num amendment may num num application of paint num the application of paint shall be supervised at all stages by the contractors supervisory staff .
the companies contracted to apply protective coating systems to steel structures and their personnel shall be capable of carrying out the work properly and safely .
the personnel carrying out the work shall have the necessary skills andor qualifications .
num paint shall be supplied from the contractors paint store to the painters ready for application the only adjustment of formulation permitted being as described in subclause num .
in exceptional circumstances any addition of solvent necessary to improve application shall be advised and if possible carried out by the paint manufacturer preferably in the paint process plant with adequate equipment and controlled measurements .
num num during the application of paint surfaces to be treated shall be safely accessible and well illuminated .
when using the coating materials the manufacturers technical data sheet shall be observed .
prior to and during the application the coating materials shall be verified to ensure i conformity of the container label with the specified product description ii no skin formation iii any sediment present shall be easily redispersible with no irreversible settling iv usability under the given site conditions .
num paint shall be applied only to surfaces which have been prepared and cleaned as described in this series .
areas of adjacent surfaces which are not to be painted shall be masked before application of paints to the prepared and cleaned surfaces .
accidental overspray on adjacent unpainted surfaces shall be removed immediately .
num unless otherwise described in appendix num a coat of paint in a system shall be applied by one of the following methods i brush b ii airless spray as iii num air assisted spray s. num paint shall not be applied under the following conditions i when the ambient temperature falls below numc or the relative humidity rises above num or for types of paints in subclause num outside the temperatures and humidities recommended by the paint manufacturer ii during rain snow fog mist or in a dust laden atmosphere iii when the amount of moisture likely to be deposited on the surface by condensation or rain before or after painting may have a harmful effect on the paint iv when windborne dust may have a harmful effect on the paint .
num before starting the procedure trials described in clause num the contractor shall make available details of the overall wet film thickness for each coat he proposes to apply .
he shall also make available information as to the total amount of paint he expects to use for each coat of each system during any contract for which procedure trials are required .
the calculation of the amount of paint to be used shall be based on the volume solids plus an allowance for waste .
num the following requirements on paint film thicknesses shall apply i wet film thickness gauges shall be used where practicable to check that the wet film thickness is not less than min dry film thickness mdft x num volume solids ii during the application of a paint system the contractor shall ensure that the progressive total thickness of the applied coats shall allow the specified minimum total dft of the system to be attained without exceeding overall the proposed wet film thickness referred to in subclause num of this clause by more than num iii in no case shall the total dry film thickness of a paint system or the mdft of the last undercoat and finish be less than that specified in appendix num form hapnum maintenance paint system sheet iv the local dry film thickness for any primer shall not exceed the specified mdft by more than num and for other paints by more than num .
num each coat of paint of a specified system shall have satisfactory adhesion .
num num each applied specified paint coat shall be free from defects including cratering pinholing blistering rivelling sagging bittiness dry spray and cissing etc .
the presence of any of these defects shall be determined by unaided visual assessment .
the presence of pinholing or porosity shall be determined by low or highvoltage detectors at corners bolted joints and welds pinholing shall be exempted .
the volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork num amendment may num finished system shall have an even and uniform appearance with no defects and the finishing paint in visually sensitive areas shall be from the same batch .
num num the gloss level of the finishing paint shall be established before the procedure trials .
a painted tinplate reference panel num mm x num mm shall be provided by the contractor for this purpose .
num unless otherwise specified patch painting described in appendix num shall only be applied over areas of an existing system which have been prepared to sound paint .
num all coats in a system including the stripe coats see subclauses num to num but excepting repeat coats of the same patch paint shall be in contrasting colours to aid identification .
before starting the procedure trials described in clause num the contractor shall provide a reference panel coated with the steppedback paint system to indicate the contrast between each coat of paint .
num num twopack chemically cured and moisture cured paints shall not be applied when the steel temperature falls below numc above dew point andor numc or when the steel or ambient temperatures are below those advised by the paint manufacturer nor shall such paints be applied when the temperatures are likely to fall below the advised temperatures during the curing period .
stripe coats num num unless otherwise described in appendix num the stripe coats shall be applied by brush over all welds edges and all fasteners including washers and to all external corners except those of rhs members .
num in areas prepared down to the substrate or to a metal coating the first stripe coat using second undercoat paint shall be applied over the primer or the first undercoat when a second stripe coat is specified it shall be separated from the first stripe coat by an undercoat .
the first stripe coat on fasteners treated with item num shall be applied by brush other stripe coats may be applied by brush or airless spray as appropriate .
num in areas prepared down to sound paint the stripe coats shall be applied before the priming coat .
num num stripe coats applied on existing paint coats shall be applied by brush .
num the first stripe coat on fasteners treated with item num shall be applied by brush .
num wet cleaning as described in subclause num shall be used to remove final traces of grease from fasteners before treatment with item num .
num the contractor shall enter the details of the stripe coats he has selected in appendix num form hapnum maintenance paint system sheet giving the item no .
colour and method of application .
num square solid infill bars shall after the second undercoat has been applied be given an extra coat of the thickest undercoat in lieu of stripe coat or coats .
exposure times for prepared steel surfaces and for metal coated surfaces .
num clean steel prepared by dry blast cleaning or bright steel prepared by abrading or by grinding shall be primed within num hours .
num clean steel prepared by wet blast cleaning only shall be primed within num hours of being dry enough for painting .
num clean steel prepared by combined wetdry blast cleaning shall be primed within num hours of dry blast cleaning .
num sanum or stnum steel prepared by dry blast cleaning or abrading shall be overcoated within num hours .
num sanum steel prepared by wet blast cleaning or combined wetdry blast cleaning shall be primed within num hours of being dry enough for painting or within num hours of dry blast cleaning .
num steelwork which has been thermally metal spray coated at site shall be primed or sealed within num hours and in any case before the surfaces have been affected by moisture .
num areas prepared down to bright or sound thermally sprayed metal coating shall be sealed or primed within num hours of preparation by dry blast cleaning or abrading and in any case before the surfaces have been affected by moisture .
num hot dip galvanizing which has been abraded to bright metal prior to painting shall be primed within num hours or within num hours of being dry enough for treatment if wet abraded and overcoated within num hours of priming .
num gaps at joints or plies shall be sealed in accordance with subclause num either before or after the application of the primer as appropriate .
paint overcoating times num num unless otherwise specified in appendix num overcoating times shall be as follows i num primers on steel or sealed thermally sprayed metal coating or first coats over item num or etch primed hot dip galvanizing shall be overcoated within num hours and the next volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork numf amendment may num coat applied within num days or as recommended by the paints manufacturer ii surfaces of existing paint coats which have been prepared to sound paint cleaned down only or abraded only to remove gloss shall be overcoated within num days iii num coats following those referred to in i and ii above shall be applied within num days of each coat or as recommended by the paints manufacturer .
num form hapnum maintenance paint system sheet appendix num form hapnum paint data sheet appendix num num as soon as the contract has been awarded the contractor shall prepare and make available a copy of appendix num form hapnum maintenance paint system sheet of which he shall have completed parts num to num together with relevant copies of form hapnum paint data sheet appendix num .
num num following any relevant approvals in accordance with the contract appendix num forms hapnum maintenance paint system sheet shall be adopted for the works .
num access containment and lighting num without prejudice to the conditions of contract access for inspection shall be provided erected and maintained by the contractor .
the access shall be adequate in all respects for inspection purposes .
num num manual surface preparation and coating application work shall not be carried out when light intensity at the workface is less than num lux .
when the natural light intensity falls below this level the contractor shall install and maintain temporary lighting which shall provide a minimum light intensity of num lux over at least num m at the workface during the work and also for inspection when required num num additional requirements for the protection of cctv masts cantilever masts steel lighting columns and bracket arms applicable clauses num unless otherwise described in appendix num the work described in this clause shall be carried out in compliance with appendix num and with clauses num to num except that only one stripe coat in undercoat paint is required .
volume num specification for highway works series num maintenance painting of steelwork snumf amendment may num numse paint and similar protective coatings num the term paint in this specification shall be deemed to refer also to similar protective coatings including specialist coatings such as grease paints .
num num the paints permitted for use by the overseeing organisation in the works are listed in the manual of paints for structural steelwork which is included in bd num dmrb num and which also contains details of the quality assurance scheme for paints and similar protective coatings .
all paints shall have a current bba hapas roads and bridges certificate or equivalent .
num all paints shall be supplied in sealed containers of not more than num litre capacity and these shall be used in order of delivery .
each container shall be of the completely removable lid type and be clearly marked on the side to show the name of the manufacturer registered description of the material including purpose e.g .
whether primer undercoat or finish colour item no paint manufacturers reference number batch number and date of manufacture .
where date of manufacture is coded the contractor shall provide the code key .
num the contractor shall ensure that the properties of the paints he has selected are suitable for the conditions on site including temperature and humidity and that he is able to apply the paints satisfactorily to all parts of the structure in these conditions .
num unless otherwise described in appendix num all paints forming any one protective system or overlapping systems shall be obtained from the same manufacturer as named by the contractor in appendix num form hapnum maintenance paint system sheet .
num num the requirements of clause num and their respective tables shall apply in scotland .
national alterations of the overseeing organisation of scotland series num introduction contents clause title page num num introduction num num num national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland num num num terms and abbreviations num num num appendices num num num normative and informative reference documents num num schedule of pages and relevant publication dates num num num thickness of material and tolerances numf num num acknowledgements numf manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works introduction introduction num num introduction num num the specification for highway works is published as volume num of the manual of contract documents for highway works and in addition to this introduction contains numbered series and lettered appendices .
num num reference shall be made to the schedule of pages and relevant publication dates in the contract to determine the publication date of each page of the specification for highway works applicable to the contract .
the current schedule is included here at table num .
num num national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland num num additional and substitute specification requirements of transport scotland the welsh government and the department for regional development a department of the northern ireland executive are contained within volume num of the manual of contract documents for highway works .
these additional and substitute clauses are identified by the suffix ts naw or ni respectively and are located immediately after the end of each series or lettered appendix of the specification .
the suffix se is also used in series num for national alterations for the overseeing organisation of scotland .
unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num these clauses are deemed to be included in contracts administered by the above overseeing organisations .
clauses with suffix se ts naw or ni are deemed to replace clauses of equal number but without suffix .
num num terms and abbreviations num num unless specifically defined otherwise the definitions of terms used in the specification and associated documents are those in bs num building and civil engineering vocabulary .
the term overseeing organisation means the highways agency transport scotland the welsh government or the department for regional development depending on which is responsible for the contract .
num num unless otherwise stated systems of quantities and units are in accordance with bs iso num quantities and units .
abbreviations listed in table num have the meanings shown therein .
other abbreviations used in the specification have meanings given in the relevant clauses .
num num appendices num num appendices identified by the letters a to h contain standard information and requirements .
num num numbered appendices identified by digits e.g .
num contain contract specific information and requirements .
the contract specific numbered appendices incorporated in the contract are listed in contract specific appendix num .
num num normative and informative reference documents num num the following documents to which reference is made in the specification are listed in appendix f i british standards ii british standard drafts for development dd documents iii european standards iv international standards amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works introduction amendment may num num v publications of the department for transport and other government offices vi uk overseeing organisations publications including their predecessors publications vii transport research laboratory reports viii uk and eu legislation ix quality management schemes publications x miscellaneous .
num num where standards and other documents are incorporated into the contract by reference the respective edition used shall be that which is current at the contract reference document date unless otherwise stated in the specification .
the contract reference document date shall be as stated in the preambles to the specification or where no date is stated therein it shall be the tender invitation date .
volume num series num specification for highway works introduction amendment may num num num table num schedule of pages and relevant publication dates seriesappendix page number publication date num num num num to num num to numf num to num may num february num may num num num num to num num to num num to numf wfnum nnum to nnumf num num to num nnum may num december num num num to numf february num num num may num num num november num num num to num num to numf may num num num to numf may num num num to num num november num num numf may num num num num nnumf may num num num num num november num num num num november num num num num num to num november num num num num to num num to numf snum to snumf wnum to wnumf nnum to nnumf num february num february num num num to numf nnum to nnumf february num num num to numf february num num num to numf may num num num to numf february num num num num nnumf num num to num num to numf november num august num february num num num may num num num to num wnumf august num num num num to numf may num num num num to num num may num num num november num num num to num nnum to nnumf november num num num may num num nnumf november num num num to num november num num num num to num numf november num num num num and nnum may num num num nnumf may num num num num to numf may num num num to numf february num num num num to num num num num to num num to num num to num num num numf march num num num num to num num to num num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num november num num num num to num num november num volume num series num specification for highway works introduction amendment may num num seriesappendix page number publication date num num to numf december num num num to numf august num num num to numf snum to snumf august num num num num to numf may num num num november num num num to numf february num num num march num num num to numf may num num num num numf may num num num may num num num num to num may num num num may num num num num numf november num num num november num num num to num num may num num num may num num num to num november num num num march num num num to num november num num num november num num num may num num numf november num num num to num num num to num num num to numf may num num num november num num num to num may num num num to num num num num may num num num num to numf snumf may num num num to num november num appendix a num to numf may num appendix b num to numf may num appendix c num to numf may num appendix d numf may num appendix d ni nnumf may num appendix e numf may num appendix f num to numf may num appendix g not used appendix h num may num appendix h num november num appendix h num november num appendix h num to numf november num num table num schedule of pages and relevant publication dates cond .
volume num series num specification for highway works introduction num table num abbreviations abbreviation meaning aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aav aggregate abrasion value acec aggressive chemical environment for concrete class aisi american iron and steel institute amd amendment to british standard asr alkali silica reaction astm american society for testing and materials bba british board of agrment bre building research establishment ltd bs british standard bsi british standards institution cac calcium aluminate cement cbm cement bound material cbr california bearing ratio chs circular hollow section ciria construction industry research and information association cp british standard code of practice cpd construction products directive cpf controlled permeability formwork cpr construction products regulation dc design chemical class eea european economic area en european standard eta european technical assessment ftd flat traffic delineator eu european union hac high alumina cement hapas highway authorities product approval scheme hcd highway construction details hmsotso her majestys stationery officethe stationery office hse health and safety executive iso international organization for standardization mcv moisture condition value mdpe medium density polyethylene na national annex ng notes for guidance on the specification for highway works nhss national highway sector scheme nr no requirement pc portland cement pd published document british standards institution prd percentage refusal density psv polished stone value pvc polyvinyl chloride ra recycled aggregate rca recycled concrete aggregate rhs rectangular hollow section shw specification for highway works scc self compacting concrete amendment february num num volume num series num specification for highway works introduction amendment february num numf abbreviation meaning si statutory instrument smc saturation moisture content srpc sulfate resisting portland cement tg technical guide tr technical report trl formerly trrl transport research laboratory formerly transport and road research laboratory tsa thaumasite sulfate attack tsrgd traffic signs regulations and general directions tss highways agency traffic systems and signs ukas united kingdom accreditation service pvcu unplasticised polyvinyl chloride xlpe crosslinked polyethylene dc direct current dft dry film thickness ggbs ground granulated blast furnace slag mc moisture content mdft minimum dry film thickness of paint omc optimum moisture content pfa pulverisedfuel ash also known as fly ash num num thickness of material and tolerances num num unless stated to the contrary the thickness of material described shall mean the finished or compacted thickness .
num num the requirements for tolerances where necessary are incorporated in the specification on the drawings and by reference in the publications listed in appendix f. num num acknowledgements num num the overseeing organisations acknowledge the permission given by i the british standards institution for reprinting extracts from bs num and bs num .
series num preliminaries contents clause title page num num temporary accommodation and equipment for the overseeing organisation num num num vehicles for the overseeing organisation num num num radio communication system for the overseeing organisation num num num standards quality management and acceptance num num num goods materials sampling and testing goods and materials num num num design of works by the contractor num num num site extent and limitations on use num num num operatives for the overseeing organisation num num num control of noise and vibration num num num information boards num num num existing ground levels num num setting out num num num programme of works num num num payment applications num num num accommodation works num num num privately and publicly owned services or supplies num num num traffic safety and management num num num temporary highways for traffic num num num routeing of vehicles num num num recovery vehicles and operations for breakdowns num num num tidal flowing and standing water num manual of contract documents for highway works volume num specification for highway works amendment may num num clause title page num num progress photographs num num not used num num num health and safety restrictions precautions and monitoring num num num temporary closed circuit television cctv system for the monitoring of traffic num num num timber and products containing wood supplied under the contract num national alterations of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales and northern ireland clause title page wales numnaw num checking bar schedules wnumf numnaw num dimensional accuracy wnumf numnaw num agreement on measurements involving computer equipment wnumf northern ireland numni num standards quality management and acceptance nnum numni num setting out nnum numni num traffic safety and management nnum denotes a clause or sample appendix which has a substitute national clause or sample appendix for one or more of the overseeing organisations of scotland wales or northern ireland .
volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries preliminaries num num temporary accommodation and equipment for the overseeing organisation num num the contractor shall provide maintain service and remove all accommodation including contents access roads and hardstanding thereto as described in contract specific appendix num for the use of the overseeing organisation .
num num equipment furnishings fittings and supplies shall be located as described in contract specific appendix num .
all temporary initial accommodation shall be ready for occupation on the date for commencement of the works and all other accommodation complete with contents access roads and hardstanding shall be ready for occupation and use by the overseeing organisation within four weeks of the date for commencement of the works unless otherwise stated in appendix num .
num num where stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall furnish and service accommodation made available by the overseeing organisation .
num num the contractor shall organise the provision of all telephones mobiles andor land lines for the overseeing organisation as described in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall undertake all liaison with telecommunications companies as required .
where stated in contract specific appendix num the land lines shall be for the exclusive use of the overseeing organisation .
any provision for data connections shall also be for the exclusive use of the overseeing organisation .
num num all accommodation shall be regularly cleaned for so long as it is in use and suitable arrangements be made for the disposal of any waste arising from use of such accommodation .
num num all equipment supplied by the contractor shall be of a quality and precision appropriate to its proposed use and shall be delivered in a serviceable condition .
the contractor shall maintain all such equipment in serviceable condition and replace if necessary any that becomes unserviceable .
the contractor shall ensure that any equipment needing periodic calibration is calibrated on delivery annually andor at other times as and when required by the overseeing organisation .
unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num equipment supplied by the contractor shall comply with government buying standards minimum mandatory requirements and eu green public procurement core criteria .
num num when major components of the works are manufactured off the site the contractor shall arrange to make available adequate and secure accommodation as described in contract specific appendix num at or adjacent to the place of and during the period of manufacture and testing .
num num vehicles for the overseeing organisation num num the contractor shall provide transport as described in contract specific appendix num for the exclusive use of the overseeing organisation for any purpose in connection with the works .
the vehicles shall be delivered and maintained in good roadworthy condition .
they shall have a current mot certificate where required be licensed for use on the public highway and shall have comprehensive insurance cover for any qualified driver authorised by the overseeing organisation together with any authorised passengers and the carriage of goods or samples .
the contractor shall provide fuel oil and maintenance in conformity with the vehicle manufacturers recommendations and shall keep clean the vehicles inside and out on a regular basis as described in contract specific appendix num .
a suitable replacement shall be provided for any vehicle out of service for more than num working hours .
the choice of vehicle type engine size and transmission shall reflect the acceleration and manoeuvrability required of that vehicle during normal working conditions .
unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num all vehicles shall have all round visibility from the drivers position .
where vans are identified in appendix num additional mirrors shall be fitted to eliminate blind spots .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num all vehicles shall have sign boards reading highway maintenance or where appropriate motorway maintenance in accordance with diagram num of schedule num part v of the traffic signs regulations and general directions num on the rear of the vehicle the lettering shall be the largest x height that can be accommodated from the range nummm to nummm .
unless otherwise stated in appendix num the vehicles shall have chevron markings and a roof mounted amber flashing light bar in accordance with section onum of chapter num part num operations of the traffic signs manual .
num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num all vehicles provided for the use of the overseeing organisation shall be free from markings identifying any company associated with the contract .
num num radio communication system for the overseeing organisation num num when required in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall provide a radio communication system for the overseeing organisation as described therein within num weeks of the date for commencement of the works unless a different date for provision is required in appendix num .
this would be in addition to any telephones or telecommunications equipment provided for in contract specific appendix num .
num num the system unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num shall be entirely separate from any provision for a radio communication system provided by the contractor for his own use except that any aerial installation may be shared .
num num the system shall have an operating range which ensures reception throughout the site .
num num the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining any necessary radio licences .
num num the contractor shall maintain the system dismantling and removing it at the end of the period stated in contract specific appendix num .
if the system is inoperative for any reason it shall either be repaired or a replacement provided within num hours .
num num standards quality management and acceptance num standards and ce markings num num where there is a requirement in this specification for compliance with any part of a british standard or other technical specification that requirement may be met by compliance with a a standard or code of practice of a national standards body or equivalent body of any eea state or turkey b any international standard recognised for use as a standard or code of practice by any eea state or turkey c a technical specification recognised for use as a standard by a public authority of any eea state or turkey or d a european technical assessment issued in accordance with the procedure set out in regulation eu no num provided that the relevant standard imposes an equivalent level of performance and safety provided for by the stated standard or technical specification .
eea state means a state which is a contracting party to the european economic area agreement .
british standard means any standard published by the british standards institution including adopted european or other international standards .
num num electrical equipment to which directives numec or numec apply and which are produced for incorporation in a permanent manner in the works must have affixed to them ce marking attesting to their conformity to the provisions of the applicable directives .
declarations of conformity required by the above directives must be provided to the overseeing organisation prior to installation or use or procurement or supply of the equipment .
num num construction products which are produced for incorporation in a permanent manner in the works and are covered by a harmonised european standard or european technical approval or assessment must have the product performance required by the specification for the intended use declared under the declaration of performance and amendment december num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries be ce marked in accordance with the relevant british adopted european standard or european technical approvals or assessments and the regulation eu no num .
unless otherwise described in the specification the declared performance of the product shall meet the required performance of all the essential characteristics required by the specification .
declarations of performance required by the above regulation shall be provided to the overseeing organisation prior to installation or use or procurement or supply of the product .
num quality management num num unless otherwise indicated in contract specific appendix num or as required in the conditions of contract the contractor shall institute a quality management system complying with bs en iso num and shall prepare a quality plan .
the contractor shall demonstrate compliance with this requirement to institute a quality management system to the overseeing organisation one acceptable method for this demonstration is to evidence registration to bs en iso num .
num num the quality plan shall incorporate the requirements of contract specific appendix num and the requirements of the quality management schemes listed in appendix a applicable to the works in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
the quality plan shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation within the periods stated in contract specific appendix num for acceptance before any related work is commenced .
where any work goods or materials to be used in the works are the subject of the quality management schemes listed in appendix a the contractor shall require the supplier of such items to prepare a quality plan and the contractor shall submit it to the overseeing organisation .
such quality plans shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num and the individual requirements of the relevant sector scheme documents for quality management in highway works see subclause num .
num num quality plans shall indicate hold points as follows contractors points where no further work shall hold points proceed without the written approval of a designated person of the contractors management who shall be named in the quality plan .
overseeing points where no further work shall organisations proceed without the written approval of hold points a designated representative of the overseeing organisation .
the contractor shall ensure the quality plans and associated quality documentation are made available to all parties involved with the works .
num quality records num num for works goods or materials other than those which are ce marked the contractor shall make available contemporary quality records to the overseeing organisation when requested .
this includes quality records such as those identified in bs en iso num to demonstrate achievement of the required quality and the effectiveness of the quality system .
the contractor shall require any member of the contractors supply chain to make available such contemporary quality records when requested .
following a request copies of all quality records shall be made available immediately to the overseeing organisation .
the contractor shall report any nonconforming productservice to the overseeing organisation and shall require any member of the contractors supply chain to immediately report any nonconforming productservice to the contractor .
the contractor shall immediately pass these reports to the overseeing organisation and undertake no further related work until remedial or other measures have been undertaken .
the contractor shall submit the quality records required by this specification as indicated in appendix h to the overseeing organisation .
no item of work shall be considered complete until these records have been received by the overseeing organisation .
note quality terms used in this clause are as bs en iso num .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num quality management schemes num num except as described in subclause num where any work goods or materials to be used in the works are the subject of a quality management scheme listed in appendix a only work goods or materials conforming with such a scheme shall be used and the organisations carrying out such work shall have current registration to the relevant schemes .
the contractor shall in each case submit to the overseeing organisation a copy of the certificate of conformity affirming compliance with the scheme .
num num where any work goods or materials to be used in the works are the subject of a quality management scheme listed in appendix a and for which the goods or materials are ce marked products in accordance with the relevant standards exclusions to mandatory requirements as listed in appendix a apply .
num num where specific training and competency requirements are identified in any quality management scheme listed in appendix a the contractor shall provide copies of the relevant training andor competency assessments certificates andor registrationskill cards of the workforce to the overseeing organisation for acceptance prior to the commencement of relevant work .
num num the requirement for compliance with a registered quality management scheme listed in appendix a shall be satisfied by compliance with an equivalent quality management scheme of any member state of the european economic area or a state which is party to a relevant agreement with the european union provided that the proposed scheme is designed to ensure in use levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose equivalent to those provided for by the scheme specified .
the proposed scheme will include third party assessment by bodies accredited in accordance with bs en isoiec num by the united kingdom accreditation service ukas or equivalent european accreditation organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement mla with ukas or any equivalent international accreditation forum iaf mla signatory with a scope which includes the relevant standards .
this subclause applies also to works only in so far as the means of carrying out such works are indivisibly associated with the goods or materials for which an alternative quality management scheme is proposed .
num product certification schemes and ce marked products num num works goods and materials other than those covered by the construction products regulation falling under the standards listed in appendix b are required to have attestation or third party accreditation to demonstrate compliance with the relevant standard .
this can be satisfied by one or more of the following i compliance with a relevant product mark scheme demonstrating compliance as described in subclause num below ii demonstration of compliance as described in subclause num below iii demonstration of compliance using testing and calculation as described in subclause num below .
where works goods or materials are covered by the construction products regulation eu no .
num cpr their compliance with the specification shall be demonstrated by the product being ce marked the declared performance of the product given in the declaration of performance meeting the required performance of all the essential characteristics given in the specification and evidence being provided that demonstrates the product meets the requirements of the specification for aspects other than those covered by the essential characteristics where such evidence meets the requirements of options i or ii above .
num num where option i or ii of subclause num is used the product shall be certified as compliant with the specification and relevant standard or equivalent as described in subclause num of this clause by a certification body .
the certification body shall be accredited in accordance with bs en num or bs en isoiec num by the united kingdom accreditation service ukas or equivalent european accreditation organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement mla with ukas or any equivalent international accreditation forum iaf mla signatory with a scope which includes the relevant standards .
unless otherwise described in the specification assessment of the product shall be carried out to the level of attestation as determined in the relevant standard for the intended use of the product in the works and shall include confirmation that the product provides in use adequate levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose .
for products covered by the low voltage directive numec and the electromagnetic compatibility directive numec the safety aspects would be for aspects not covered by the relevant ce marking .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries the contractor shall provide information on the product to the overseeing organisation for acceptance .
this information shall include certification attestation details and certification body details .
num num where option iii of subclause num is used it shall be demonstrated that the product is capable of performing as required using tests calculations or other means .
such testing or other means shall have a minimum level of attestation as that determined by the relevant standard and be suitably extensive to provide information on all relevant parameters .
testing shall be carried out by laboratories accredited to ukas or equivalent accredited organisations as described in subclause num .
the testing or other means shall include confirmation that the product provides in use adequate levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose .
for products covered by the low voltage directive numec and the electromagnetic compatibility directive numec the safety aspects would be for aspects not covered by the relevant ce marking .
the contractor shall provide information on the product to the overseeing organisation for acceptance .
this information shall include testing or calculation details and results certification and attestation details .
num product acceptance schemes num num where there are references in the specification to particular industry product acceptance schemes such as british board of agrment certificates roads and bridges certificates hapas certificates cares certificate or equivalent scheme these shall be taken as references to a product acceptance scheme that has the attributes given in subclause num below .
the types of work goods or materials listed in appendix c are required to be certificated by a product acceptance scheme prior to their inclusion in the works .
num num the works goods or materials shall be assessed against a set of guidelines and criteria by a certification body .
certification to confirm the products successfully meet the guidelines and criteria shall be issued by a certification body .
the contractor shall provide information on the product to the overseeing organisation for acceptance .
this information shall include the certification and when requested details of the scheme to confirm its compliance with the criteria given below and accreditation details of the organisation issuing the certification .
the scheme shall meet the following criteria a product acceptance and certification specified in this subclause shall be structured and implemented to provide assurance to the overseeing organisation that the product when supplied for its intended use and installed or processed post manufacture in accordance with the manufacturers instructions will give the performance and level of safety required by the specification and be fit for purpose .
b the organisation certifying products and issuing the certificates must be accredited to the relevant certification body standard bs en num or bs en isoiec num for product certification or bs en isoiec num for site inspection by ukas or equivalent european accreditation organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement mla with ukas or any equivalent international accreditation forum iaf mla signatory with a scope which includes the relevant standards .
this shall include accreditation to manage and execute a certification scheme as defined in this subclause .
accreditation must cover a scope of activity relevant to the construction installation maintenance and operation of highway infrastructure .
c the scheme must cover as appropriate i manufacture and installation or post manufacture processing of those products for which a declaration of performance and consequent ce marking has not been made on the basis of any harmonised european standard hen or european technical assessment or ii only the installation of a material or post manufacture processing where the manufacturer has made a declaration of performance of the material with consequent ce marking or iii product characteristics not included in the required essential characteristics of a hen or in a european technical assessment if such characteristics provide additional protection for the consumer e.g .
road user .
d the assessment and certification requirements for a product certified under the scheme must be developed ensuring due consideration is given to the requirements of the users of the product and those responsible for the highways on which such products will be used or installed .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries e the scheme must have a technical supervisory panel that provides technical oversight on the operation of the scheme and formally consents to the issue of assessment and certification requirements of the specialist groups developing the assessment and certification requirements .
this panel must include a balanced representation of key end users recognized industry experts and those responsible for the highways on which such products will be used or installed .
f the product certification must include requirements for the audit and quality control of the production and installation processes for the product where necessary taking account of the product having its performance declared under a ce mark .
installer certification must include requirements for onsite surveillance of installation or post manufacturing processes .
g for every product it has certified under a product certification scheme an organisation must make open and publicly accessible details of the assessment and certification guidelines .
h where different organisations have certified the same generic form of product they must be able to demonstrate to the overseeing organisation equivalence of performance of products certified under the different schemes or agree a common set of guidelines for the assessment and certification of the product .
i the competences of organisations certifying products shall be as the competency requirements for technical assessment bodies given in regulation eu no num the construction products regulation annex iv table num with the additions given in table num .
num table num competency additions to construction product regulation eu no .
num annex iv table num competence description of competence requirement num .
determining the specific installation or post manufacturing control understand and evaluate the installation or post manufacturing processes of the specific product in order to identify appropriate measures ensuring consistent compliant delivery of the installed or post manufactured product .
a certification body shall have staff with appropriate technical knowledge of the relationship between the installationpost manufacturing processes and the product characteristics related to production control for installation or post manufacture .
num .
constructive engagement be prepared to engage constructively with highway infrastructure managers and other certifying bodies for resolution of issues .
be able to resolve differences in the certified performance of products of the same generic type and where appropriate agree a common set of guidelines for the assessment and certification of such products .
num european technical assessment eta num num the requirements for works goods or materials to be subject to a product certification scheme or product acceptance scheme as discussed in sub clauses num to num above may alternatively be met by a product being attested using a european technical assessment eta issued in accordance with the procedure set out in regulation num provided that the relevant attestation imposes an equivalent level of safety performance and fitness for purpose provided for by the specification .
num statutory type approval num num the requirements for statutory type approval are embodied in the traffic signs regulations and general directions num the zebra pelican and puffin pedestrian crossings regulations and general directions num and subsequent amending regulations .
traffic signs requiring such approval are listed in appendix d. the contractor shall submit written evidence to the overseeing organisation that the relevant statutory type approval has been obtained .
where the contractor has designed part of the works for which statutory type approval is required application to the secretary of state shall be made through the overseeing organisation .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num statutory authorisation num num statutory authorisation is required before any traffic signs are incorporated into the works where these are of a character andor are to be used in circumstances which have not been prescribed in the traffic signs regulations and general directions num the zebra pelican and puffin pedestrian crossings regulations and general directions num or subsequent amending regulations .
where the contractor has designed part of the works for which such authorisation is required applications in accordance with the regulations shall be made through the overseeing organisation .
num type approvalregistrationlisting num num the types of works goods or materials which are required to have type approval or registration prior to their acceptance for inclusion in the works are given in appendix e with the exception that products that are covered by the construction products regulation eu no .
num cpr do not have to be listed prior to their acceptance for inclusion in the works .
for products not covered by cpr previously obtained type approval or registration can be used .
the contractor shall submit to the overseeing organisation a copy of the type approval registration certificate .
where previously obtained type approval or registration is not available the contractor shall submit documentation to the overseeing organisation which demonstrates compliance with the relevant specification andor standards .
for products covered by the cpr the information required in clause num shall be provided by the contractor in accordance with that subclause .
num provision of information num num where information and documentation regarding works goods or materials is required to be submitted to the overseeing organisation for acceptance the contractor shall submit such documentation in a timescale to meet the requirements of the contractors programme of works .
the contractor shall liaise with the overseeing organisation to ensure that adequate time is allocated for the overseeing organisation to undertake the required assessments for acceptance .
the time allocated for acceptance shall not be less than four weeks .
num num unless otherwise specified two copies of all information and documentation including valid certificates in respect of work goods or materials proposed by the contractor shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation in english .
num num where the contractor proposes to use an equivalent standard quality management scheme product certification scheme industry product acceptance scheme or type approvalregistration to that specified the contractor shall provide relevant information to enable the overseeing organisation to ascertain whether or not the proposal is equivalent to the specified requirement .
the information provided by the contractor shall provide full disclosure and appropriate evidence regarding the works goods or materials concerned in order to fully demonstrate equivalent levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose .
for products within the scope of the construction products regulation this documentation would be the relevant declaration of performance and associated ce mark for the intended specified use .
num num when required in contract specific appendix num three copies of detailed working and fabrication drawings in the format detailed in contract specific appendix num prepared by or on behalf of the contractor shall be submitted for the overseeing organisations acceptance .
the minimum period for submission of the drawings prior to commencement of the related works shall be as stated in contract specific appendix num .
such acceptance shall in no way relieve the contractor of his responsibilities for the work under the contract .
num num goods materials sampling and testing goods and materials num num the contractor shall provide the overseeing organisation with details of the suppliers from whom he proposes to purchase the goods and materials necessary for the execution of the works prior to their inclusion in the works .
unless otherwise detailed in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall keep and maintain supply records of all works goods and materials incorporated into the works .
these shall include i suppliers details including namecompany name and address ii date of supply to site iii manufacturers information and safety information amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries iv details of where the goods are incorporated into the works .
these details shall be provided to the overseeing organisation by the contractor upon request and at completion of the works .
num sampling and testing num num the testing scheduled in contract specific appendix num including sampling and provision of the associated samples shall be undertaken by the contractor .
the contractor shall carry out each of the tests required in contract specific appendix num within an elapsed time from the taking of the respective samples which shall be reasonable in all the circumstances unless otherwise prescribed by the overseeing organisation .
the contractor shall supply to the overseeing organisation within num hours of the completion of each test a copy of the results .
the following operations are not included in contract specific appendix num i checking inspecting examining measuring except in connection with testing ii trials and demonstrations iii routine testing carried out by manufacturers and suppliers in compliance with a specified standard or specification iv testing of plant .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num test certificates andor product certification complying with the provisions of the relevant standard or specification where applicable and certifying that the goods or materials meet the specified requirements shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation by the contractor at least four weeks prior to the incorporation of the goods or materials in the works .
where goods or materials are required to be ce marked or where the contractor proposes to use ce marked goods or materials the contractor shall supply the overseeing organisation with the ce marking information including any relevant instructions and safety information at least four weeks prior to the incorporation of the goods or materials in the works .
this information shall be in english .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num tests and associated sampling shall be undertaken by testing laboratories accredited in accordance with bs en isoiec num .
the accreditation shall be by ukas or equivalent european accreditation organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement mla with ukas or any other equivalent international accreditation forum mla signatory with a scope that includes bs en isoiec num .
where ukas or equivalent laboratory accreditation is required the results shall be reported on an official ukas or equivalent accredited laboratory test report or certificate .
num num where goods or materials are accepted on the basis of an equivalent standard quality management scheme product certification scheme or product acceptance scheme as provided for in clause num testing and sampling as specified in or applicable to such an equivalent standard quality management scheme product certification scheme or product acceptance scheme is accepted and shall be substituted for those specified in contract specific appendices num and num respectively .
num num the contractor shall provide samples which shall include source samples of goods and materials and shall deliver these to the overseeing organisation as described in contract specific appendix num .
unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall arrange for the sampling of such goods and materials to be undertaken by qualified staff of testing laboratories holding ukas or equivalent european accreditation organisation accreditation to bs en isoiec num for such sampling .
these samples shall be supplied in sufficient time for them to be tested for acceptability by the overseeing organisation taking into account the programme for the works .
production samples shall be delivered in a condition which is representative of the materials state for the purpose of the test .
num num the contractor shall provide for rates of sampling specified in contract specific appendix num .
these rates of sampling shall apply at the outset of each of the respective activities and for the duration of each of the activities .
following an initial period of sampling the contractor may apply to the overseeing organisation for a relaxation in these rates of sampling having demonstrated to the overseeing organisation an acceptable level of confidence in control .
provided at any subsequent time when test results indicate the need for improved control in the opinion of the overseeing organisation the contractor samples at the rate specified in contract specific appendix num .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num num where testing is undertaken by a supplier or manufacturer in accordance with the contract other than for products which are ce marked the contractor shall ensure that each supplier and manufacturer will admit the overseeing organisations representative to his premises during normal working hours for the purposes of inspecting selecting the samples and witnessing the testing .
num num where testing or in use operation of works goods or materials which are ce marked identifies failure of the ce marked works goods or materials the contractor shall make formal notification of the failure to the relevant trading standards office .
the contractor shall copy such correspondence to the overseeing organisation .
num num design of works by the contractor num permanent works design num num the contractor shall design the works items or elements listed in contract specific appendix num a to comply with the design specifications and requirements therein .
where the contractor proposes to design a works item or element for which a choice of designs is offered and listed in appendix num b he shall comply with the design specification and requirements therein .
the contractor shall follow the technical approval procedures given in the technical approval scheme adopted by the overseeing organisation for which purposes the contractor shall be deemed to be the designer .
num permanent structures num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall follow the technical approval procedures given in bdnum dmrb num .
num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall complete the approval in principle aip form or record of design principles and record of assessment principles for each structure or element to be designed .
the contractor shall complete any other documentation required for the technical approval procedures such as departures from standard .
the contractor shall complete design and check certificates as required .
the contractor shall forward the completed forms and certificates to the overseeing organisation for acceptance and onward transmission to the technical approval authority .
the format of these and other submissions shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation where paper copies are required three copies shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation .
num num the contractor shall make any necessary alterations to the aip or other documentation as required and submit the revised documents to the overseeing organisation in the agreed format .
num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall allow six working weeks for the review of the documentation by the technical approval authority .
where revisions are required to the documentation the contractor shall allow an additional four working weeks for review of the revised documents by the technical approval authority .
num num unless otherwise stated in contact specific appendix num three copies of the completed issue for construction ifc drawings shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation for acceptance .
the contractor shall allow four working weeks for review and acceptance of the ifc drawings by the overseeing organisation .
num num the works detailed in the documentation shall not commence until acceptance by the technical approval authority and the overseeing organisation has been notified to the contractor .
num temporary works design num num the contractor shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num for the items of temporary works design listed therein .
num temporary structures num num equipment designed by the contractor for temporary works including bridge lifting systems structures demolition support systems and platforms used over or adjacent to highway railway watercourse footpath or other public right of way or where failure could affect the integrity or safety of any persons or structure shall be considered as a temporary structure and subject to the requirements of this clause .
amendment december num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment december num num num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall follow the technical approval procedures given in bdnum dmrb num for which purposes the contractor shall be deemed to be the designer .
works are to be designated as described in section num of bdnum dmrb num .
the design specifications requirements and constraints for equipment to be designed by the contractor shall be as stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num where required the contractor shall complete the approval in principle aip or record of design principles and record of assessment principles for each item incorporating all equipment to be designed .
the contractor shall complete any other documentation required for the technical approval procedures such as departures from standard .
the contractor shall complete design and check certificates as required .
the completed forms and certificates shall be submitted by the contractor to the overseeing organisation for onward transmission to the technical approval authority .
the format of these and other submissions shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation where paper copies are required three copies shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation .
the contractor shall make any necessary alterations to the aip or other documentation as required and submit the revised documents to the overseeing organisation in the agreed format .
num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall allow six working weeks for the review of the documentation by the technical approval authority .
where revisions are required to the documentation the contractor shall allow an additional four working weeks for review of the revised documents by the technical approval authority .
num num unless otherwise stated in contact specific appendix num three copies of the completed issue for construction ifc drawings shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation for acceptance and forwarding to the technical approval authority .
the contractor shall allow four working weeks for review and acceptance of the ifc drawings by the overseeing organisation .
num num the works detailed in the documentation shall not commence until acceptance by the technical approval authority and the overseeing organisation has been notified to the contractor .
num num site extent and limitations on use num num the extent of the site and any limitations on its use shall be as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num operatives for the overseeing organisation num num the contractor shall provide the overseeing organisation with and maintain continuity of operatives equal to the tasks and capable of performing the functions described in contract specific appendix num .
num num for site surveys and setting out operatives shall be experienced in assisting engineers in such work .
num num for laboratoryrelated duties operatives shall be capable of assisting laboratory staff in routine tasks .
num num operatives provided under subclauses num and num of this clause shall have valid driving licences and driving experience suitable for the vehicles supplied in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
num num control of noise and vibration num general num num the contractor shall comply with the recommendations for practical measures to reduce noise set out in bs num noise and vibration control on construction and open sites num parts num num and with any specific requirements stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall comply with any specific requirements for the control of vibration stated in contract specific appendices num num num num and clause num .
num num the contractor shall carry out the measurement and monitoring of construction noise and vibration effects as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num vibration num num the contractor shall limit vibration levels arising from the site activities to the levels stated in contract specific appendix num .
tracked plant shall be prohibited from travelling within numm of buildings .
num num unless otherwise detailed in contract specific appendix num the levels of vibration shall be monitored by the contractor using an approved vibration meter plus a graphical level recorder a record of this shall be provided to the overseeing organisation within num hours .
vibration control stations will be at locations as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
num num information boards num num the contractor shall within four weeks of the date for the commencement of the works provide and erect information boards at the locations and to the specification given in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall ensure that they are kept clean and maintained in a safe and legible condition and remove them on completion of the works .
num num the design content and layout of information boards and any other project publicity material including any and all overseeing organisation logos and branding shall be in accordance with policy requirements of the overseeing organisation the contract employer and the highway authority and in accordance with contract specific appendix num .
for the highways agency these requirements shall be in accordance with the requirements stated in the document the highways agencys visual identity specifications .
num num existing ground levels num num the contractor shall satisfy himself that the existing ground levels as described in contract specific appendix num are correct .
should the contractor wish to dispute any levels he shall submit to the overseeing organisation a schedule of the position of the levels considered to be in error and a set of revised levels .
the existing ground relevant to the disputed levels shall not be disturbed before the correct levels are determined .
num num setting out num num the contractor shall unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num within num weeks of the date for commencement of the works carry out a check of the coordinates and levels of all permanent ground markers and permanent bench marks described in appendix num and shall supply the overseeing organisation if requested with their position and level in order that they may be checked and revised if necessary .
the contractor shall identify and bring to the attention of the overseeing organisation any markers that are missing .
the contractor shall comply with any specific requirements for setting out described in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall keep updated schedules and drawings of all bench marks which shall be based on ordnance datum at newlyn used in the setting out and shall make these available to the overseeing organisation when required .
num num the contractor shall ensure that where necessary in order to maintain his programme lines and levels are set out in such time as to enable statutory undertakers apparatus and other publicly or privately owned services or supplies to be installed altered or removed .
num num the contractor shall survey and record existing details of items which he is required to remove and subsequently replace .
the level of survey information to be recorded is described in contract specific appendix num .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num num programme of works num num subject and without prejudice to the conditions of contract the programme which the contractor submits to the overseeing organisation shall comply with the constraints imposed by the contract and specific requirements stated in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall update the programme as necessary .
the programme and subsequent revisions of the programme shall show the level of detail appropriate to each stage of the works and all activities and restraints each of which shall be given a short title .
all events shall be numbered .
num num when required in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall also provide a masshaul diagram showing his intended earthworks movements and locations and capacities of anticipated plant and other resource input .
num num payment applications num num unless otherwise described in the contract the contractor shall comply with the requirements described in contract specific appendix num concerning applications for payment .
num num accommodation works num num the contractor shall undertake and complete the accommodation works as described in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall give the overseeing organisation at least ten days notice of the date he intends to start work on individual plots for the benefit of each owner lessee or occupier .
num num privately and publicly owned services or supplies num num the contractor shall satisfy himself as to the exact position of statutory undertakers and other publicly and privately owned services or supplies affected by the works .
num num the contractor shall during the progress of the works take all measures required by any statutory undertaker or the management of other publicly or privately owned services or supplies for the support and full protection of all such services or supplies .
num num where privately or publicly owned services or supplies affected by the works are subject to alteration removal or addition the contractor shall be responsible for all arrangements with the owners andor their agents for the execution and phasing of such works in accordance with his programme .
details of such work preliminary arrangements made by the overseeing organisation andor any orders already placed are given in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall take all measures required by the overseeing organisation for the location and protection of all cabling ducts and other devices which form part of the motorway or highway communications system or other systems of the overseeing organisation .
the contractor shall comply with the requirements of nrts national roads telecommunications services and the technology maintenance agent in relation to motorway communications cables .
where the communications system or other system will be affected by the works the contractor shall ensure that an alternative system as described in contract specific appendix num is fully operational prior to interrupting the existing system any connections or disconnections to the existing system may only be undertaken by the overseeing organisations maintenance agent .
the contractor shall be responsible for liaising with the overseeing organisations maintenance agent .
num num no services or supplies shall be interrupted without the written consent of the appropriate authority or owner and the contractor shall provide a satisfactory alternative before interrupting any existing service or supply unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num .
num num disconnected apparatus shall be removed by the contractor only with the prior consent of the authority concerned .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num num traffic safety and management num general num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall plan design programme provide implement maintain and remove all traffic safety and management measures necessary for the completion of the works .
this shall include undertaking all necessary liaison with the police and highway authority responsible for each public highway affected by the works both before commencement and throughout the duration of the works .
the traffic safety and management measures shall be in accordance with the requirements and constraints stated in contract specific appendix num and the contractor shall take into account the information contained in contract specific appendix num .
the traffic safety and management measures shall be in accordance with chapter num of the traffic signs manual .
the contractor shall inform the overseeing organisation of any details the contractor has agreed with the police andor the highway authority .
num num all traffic safety and management operations shall be undertaken by a supplier registered to national highway sector scheme num with a scope of registration that includes reference to one or more of national highways sector schemes numab numc or numd as appropriate to the works .
num num the contractor shall unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num after consultation with the police and highway authorities concerned prepare and submit traffic safety and management proposals within the timescale described in contract specific appendix num to the overseeing organisation .
these shall show the proposed traffic safety and management measures including provision of safety zones .
if stated in appendix num the proposals shall include the provision of running lanes for the use of emergency vehicles within the site .
the contractor shall make such changes to his proposals as may be necessary to meet the requirements of the contract .
thereafter the contractor shall furnish and update such details and information as may be necessitated by the works .
num num if stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall undertake the highway maintenance functions described therein and to the extent there described on the lengths of highway there specified until the issue of the appropriate certificate of completion .
num num traffic signs shall comply with the appropriate clauses in series num of the specification .
num num where a temporary speed limit at road works has been imposed and the works have been temporarily terminated with the removal of traffic management measures the contractor shall ensure that the temporary speed limit signs are covered or taken down for the duration of the cessation of the works .
where the temporary speed limit signs are covered the covering material shall prevent the sign being visible through the cover in natural light and under vehicle headlamp or street lamp illumination at night be non light reflective and securely fastened .
num num where the contract provides that the contractor shall not erect maintain or reposition traffic signs the contractor shall not change in any manner the permanent or temporary traffic signs without instruction from the overseeing organisation and shall give such notice as is stated in contract specific appendix num to indicate when signs should be moved compatible with the progress of the works .
num num all traffic safety and management measures necessitated by the works shall be fully operational before the contractor commences any work which affects the public highway or the use of it .
num num any area of highway which has been closed because of the works shall not be reopened to traffic until all appropriate traffic safety and management measures have been completed and the highway is in a suitable condition for public use .
num num where work is carried out on or adjacent to a highway open to traffic the contractor shall ensure that vehicles and mobile plant under his control operating frequently or regularly on or adjacent to that highway in the execution of the works shall be conspicuous and comply with section onum general vehicle issues of chapter num part num operations of the traffic signs manual .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num or where required for the execution of the works the contractor shall provide temporary lighting in accordance with clause num .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num or where required for the execution of the works the contractor shall provide temporary emergency telephones in accordance with clause num .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num num the contractor shall provide and suitably sign points of entry to and exit from the site for vehicles and plant engaged on the works .
the contractor shall ensure that when any vehicle or item of plant is reversing within the site on or adjacent to a highway open to traffic it does so only under the supervision of a person designated for the purpose of regulating traffic within the site who shall be readily distinguishable from the remainder of the work force .
num num if an accident or breakdown occurs on a carriageway or hard shoulder open to traffic within or in the vicinity of the site the contractor and operators of recovery vehicles provided in accordance with clause num shall act as requested by police officers or traffic officers acting under their statutory powers .
num num where work is carried out on or adjacent to a highway open to traffic the contractor shall ensure that the workforce and the site supervisory staff at all times wear high visibility warning clothing complying with bs en num .
clothing shall be to table num class num or num class num on motorways or other high speed roads and shall comply with the requirements of para numb .
in addition on motorways or other high speed roads full length sleeves meeting the requirements of para num shall be provided for coveralls and jackets .
the colour of the clothing shall normally be fluorescent yellow or fluorescent orangered complying with table num .
the retroreflective material used shall be to level num as defined at table num .
clothing complying with other specifications may be used in accordance with clause num where they offer equivalent levels of performance in so far as the specification given is not inconsistent with the basic health and safety requirements set out in annex num of the personal protective equipment directive numeec .
the contractor shall ensure that the person in charge of the workforce is readily distinguishable from the person designated in subclause num of this clause and from the remainder of the workforce .
num traffic safety and control officer num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall appoint a suitably qualified traffic safety and control officer tsco who shall make all arrangements necessary for traffic safety and control including the provision and operation of breakdown recovery vehicles .
num num the tsco shall be experienced in the control of temporary traffic management operations and shall possess a national highway sector scheme nhss num traffic safety and control officer num registration card .
num num the contractor shall provide the overseeing organisation with the names and contact details of the tsco and any nominated deputies .
unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num the tsco or a nominated deputy shall be on the site at all times when traffic management is in operation and shall be readily available to deal with matters related to traffic safety and control including breakdown recovery vehicles .
num num without prejudice to subclause num above whilst within the limits of a temporary traffic management scheme the tsco shall manage any traffic management related requests given by a police officer or traffic officer .
the tsco shall liaise with he overseeing organisations traffic management control centres and other parties detailed in contract specific appendix num on traffic management related matters including requests and instructions .
num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the responsibilities of the traffic safety and control officer and of his nominated deputies shall include the following a monitoring with the assistance of sufficient mobile personnel and of sufficient other suitable and appropriate aids the flow of traffic within the area of the site b ensuring that within num minutes of notification of the occurrence of an incident resulting in stationary vehicles on a highway open to the public the incident is reported to the vehicle recovery service when vehicle recovery is in operation c recording and logging all incidents and all movements of recovery vehicles and when called all movements of the emergency services .
where an incident is a shed load vehicle breakdown vehicle abandonment or traffic accident whether or not the latter involves personal injury .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num statutory orders temporary traffic regulation orders num num unless otherwise detailed in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall submit a formal application to the appropriate authority for any temporary traffic regulation orders or other statutory orders required to be made or notices required to be published in connection with his traffic safety and management proposals .
the contractor shall comply with any procedural requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall allow for the notice periods required for obtaining and implementation of any temporary traffic regulation orders or other statutory orders in the programme of works .
where applications are to be made to the overseeing organisation the notice periods required shall be as given in contract specific appendix num .
num num where applications for temporary traffic regulation orders or other statutory orders are made by the overseeing organisation prior to the commencement of the works the contractor shall provide all necessary traffic safety and management measures to implement the orders .
num crossovers num num the contractor shall design construct and maintain or if contract specific appendix num so provides shall construct and maintain the central reserve crossovers described in contract specific appendix num in accordance with the information stated therein .
unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall remove those crossovers when no longer required and reinstate the central reserve to its original condition .
num num if the contractor proposes to construct central reserve crossovers as part of his traffic safety and management proposals he shall submit such proposals to the overseeing organisation in advance in accordance with the requirements of subclause num of this clause .
num driver information signs num num where required in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall provide erect maintain and remove driver information signs to diagrams num and num of the traffic signs regulations and general directions in accordance with subclause num of this clause and chapter num of the traffic signs manual .
information signs shall only be displayed within roadworks where they accurately reflect the work being undertaken or the reason for the inactivity .
num num legends shall be selected as appropriate from those permitted and listed in chapter num of the traffic signs manual unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
sign num shall indicate how long delays are possible .
this date shall be updated by the contractor if necessary until the restrictions are removed .
sign num shall be located within roadworks when part of the road is coned off and the reason for this is not apparent from the carriageway for any period exceeding num minutes or one hour if road capacity is maintained .
however signs located within roadworks shall only be used where they can be located at least num metres beyond the downstream end of a taper and in a position which does not prejudice traffic safety .
if needed information signs shall be sited at the beginning and at one kilometre intervals through the works .
they shall not be placed where they may distract drivers negotiating traffic management provisions .
signs shall either be sited for the duration of the works where it is safe and appropriate to do so or provision made to enable their use at short notice .
the contractor shall provide adequate storage facilities clear of any safety zone .
storage within the central reserve or in front of safety barriers shall not be permitted .
num temporary automatic speed camera system tascar num num where required in contract specific appendix num a temporary automatic speed camera system for the enforcement of mandatory speed limits at roadworks tascar shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements and those given in contract specific appendix num .
the type of system and the number of speed monitoring sites and their locations shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num num the contractor shall be responsible for the design installation commissioning maintenance and removal of the system .
this shall be undertaken using a suitably qualified enforcement equipment supplier ees .
the ees shall make all arrangements necessary for the provision and operation of the tascar system .
the contractor shall supply evidence of the ees qualifications to the overseeing organisation prior to the commencement of the works .
the equipment shall meet the requirements of the speedmeter handbook and have home office type approval hota for the purpose required .
the installation commissioning operation and maintenance of the system shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of the equipments hota .
all equipment and training necessary to bring the sites into operation shall be provided and installed by the contractor this shall include but not be limited to all equipment poles housings and power supplies .
the quantities of equipment required shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall ensure that the system is completely installed and fully operational from the time defined in contract specific appendix num and that it remains in operation for the duration of the contract unless otherwise specified in appendix num and is removed on completion of the works .
the contractor shall commission any necessary third party certification of the system and shall supply copies of the certification to the overseeing organisation .
num num unless otherwise required by the equipments hota requirements the equipment and ancillary items shall be compatible with all permanent and temporary installations associated with the works .
num num the contractor shall liaise with the relevant enforcement authority ea to determine how the system for the scheme shall integrate with the eas existing facilities and operations .
the contractor shall comply with the overseeing organisations procedures with respect to the liaison as described in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall submit details of the system to the overseeing organisation four weeks in advance of its operation for approval .
num num the tascar equipment shall consist of a hota detection and measuring device and ancillary equipment that allows day and night operation .
if a trailer mounted system is supplied it shall be fitted with retractable demountable wheels .
num num the contractor shall arrange for the provision of a mains electrical supply of adequate power capacity to all components of the system .
alternatively he may provide an equivalent supply from a local electrical generator or generators which shall be used only for this purpose .
such generators shall have electric start mechanisms and be adequately regulated as to voltage and frequency to suit the accuracy requirements of the equipment provided for tascar and be capable of running constantly for num hours without refuelling at an output of not less than that required by the equipment at num power factor or equivalent output .
all generators shall be housed in vandalproof containers and be securely locked .
one set of keys shall be provided to the ea .
generators may only be used when they will not adversely affect the equipmentsystems operations or the equipments hota requirements .
num num the housing and poles for the tascar equipment must be as required for the specific hota for that equipment and shall include securitylocking mechanisms to prevent unauthorised access or operation .
num num the contractor shall install the polesmastscabinets or trailers required at each individual speed monitoring location any installation shall be within highway limits .
num at completion of the works the contractor shall remove all tascar equipment and reinstate ground as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall ensure that suitable access arrangements are in place at each speed monitoring site including vehicle hard standings walkways and steps where necessary to allow for general maintenance and servicing of the camera unit .
where supplied suitable provisions shall be made for installing and recovering trailers .
num num the contractor shall ensure that the camera poles are located in accordance with road restraint systems requirements detailed in td num .
num num the contractor shall ensure that the site reference number is clearly indicated on both the installation and on the road surface within the field of view of the cameras .
site reference numbers should be agreed with the ea .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num num any ducting provision loop or piezo installation shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant clauses of series num and num of the specification .
num num the contractor shall be responsible for the commissioning of the tascar as a whole including secondary and in station checks .
the contractor shall where required as part of the hota provide a secondary method of confirming the speed calculation .
num num the commissioning of the tascar shall be carried out in the presence of and for acceptance by the ea and shall be in accordance with any particular requirements in contract specific appendix num the commissioning shall only be complete when each site and where applicable the overall system is accepted as being operational by the ea .
the contractor shall give notice to the overseeing organisation of his intention to carry out this work unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num this shall be not less than four days in advance of the intended time for the commissioning .
an evidential trail et which meets all the requirements as stated in contract specific appendix num including commissioning certificates shall be provided by the contractor to the overseeing organisation and shall include one pair of photographs or video images for acceptance by the ea as part of the commissioning and acceptance procedure of the system .
the contractor shall ensure that all relevant requirements of the evidential trails for enforcement systems documents are achieved .
num num cameras sited on the nearside of the carriageway shall be installed and commissioned prior to num hour lane closures being put into operation .
cameras sited in the central reserve shall be installed and commissioned not later than num hours after installation of the contraflow .
both sets of cameras shall then remain in continuous operation until a completion certificate has been issued for the whole of the works .
at the end of the period of operation required under the contract the equipment shall remain the property of the contractor .
num num following commissioning the tascar operator will be the ea .
the contractor shall provide assistance to the ea for the repositioning of the speed monitoring equipment between the housings or switching of detection equipment between zones and servicing as and when requested by the ea .
any repositioning during the works that requires that the equipment parameters are changed must be supported by the issue of a calibration certificate by the contractor to the ea .
num num all evidential media from speed monitoring sites will remain the property of the ea .
the scheme et documents shall be kept up to date by the contractor .
num num the contractor shall provide and install all necessary speed limit signing in connection with the operation of the tascar system any signing used shall either be prescribed or where necessary authorised .
the contractor shall provide the ea through the overseeing organisation with a two hourly log showing the locations of all the speed limit and speed limit repeater signs relative to existing marker posts .
a repeater sign shall be positioned such that one is visible in each photograph .
where there is a numhour cctv system installed that is monitoring all speed limit and repeater signs this log can be compiled remotely .
num num where digital hota equipment is used the contractor will provide either the communications service to transfer data and control the device or appropriate media such as worm write once read many drives cds memory sticks as appropriate and in quantities required by the ea for the use of the equipment for the duration of the works .
if hota nummm wet film systems are used the film will be supplied to the ea by the contractor typically at the rate of one film per day per live camera in operation plus ten which shall be supplied at the commencement of the works .
num num temporary highways for traffic num num the provisions of this clause apply to the construction of temporary highways for use by traffic they do not apply to any temporary access or accommodation works which the contractor may construct for his sole use in the execution of the works or to existing highways used for diverted traffic .
requirements for existing highways subject to temporary closure and associated diversion route signing are given in clause num .
num num each temporary highway or part of highway for traffic shall be made operative in advance of any interference with the existing arrangements and shall be maintained to the standard stated in contract specific appendix num or if no standard is so stated in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num temporary highways for traffic specified by the overseeing organisation num num the contractor shall construct maintain remove and reinstate each temporary highway or part of highway for traffic specified in contract specific appendix num in accordance with the details stated therein .
where stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall design each temporary highway or part of highway for traffic including any temporary structures in accordance with the details stated therein .
unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall remove each temporary highway for traffic as soon as it is no longer required .
unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall reinstate the ground over which the temporary highway is provided to its original condition .
num temporary highways for traffic proposed by the contractor num num if the contractor proposes to construct a temporary highway or part of highway for traffic as part of his intended traffic safety and management measures he shall submit an outline of his proposals to the highway authority for their agreement and consultation with the police in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
num num the contractor shall submit a formal application to the appropriate authority for any statutory orders required to be made or notices required to be published in connection with the temporary highway or part of highway .
details of such applications shall be agreed with the overseeing organisation prior to their submission .
the contractor shall comply with procedural requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall allow for the notice periods required for obtaining and implementation of any statutory orders in the programme of works .
where applications are to be made to the overseeing organisation the notice periods required shall be as given in contract specific appendix num .
num num the standard and siting of every temporary highway or part of highway for traffic shall be suitable in all respects for the class or classes of traffic using it and its width shall be not less than that of the existing way except where indicated in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall inform the overseeing organisation of any details agreed with the highway authority for traffic signs lighting construction maintenance removal and reinstatement of any temporary highway or part of highway for traffic proposed by the contractor .
num num routeing of vehicles num num the contractor shall comply with the requirements described in contract specific appendix num in connection with routeing of site and delivery vehicles .
num num recovery vehicles and operation for breakdowns num general num num when required by contract specific appendix num the contractor shall provide and operate a vehicle breakdown recovery and removal service including storage .
this service shall recover broken down or accident damaged vehicles or vehicles that have been abandoned on the highway within the limits of the site .
the service shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this clause and contract specific appendix num it shall also comply with contract specific appendix num .
num num vehicle recovery operations shall be carried out by organisations registered to national highway sector scheme numb for vehicle recovery at highway construction sites num and vehicle recovery and removal on control roads numb as listed in appendix a .
num num the contractor shall ensure that once a vehicle recovery organisation has been appointed changes shall only be made with the agreement of the overseeing organisation .
num num when planning and undertaking any recovery work the contractor shall comply with the requirements of the sector scheme at all times if applicable .
num num the contractor shall ensure that recovery vehicles are operated in accordance with all applicable statutory requirements and the recommendations and requirements contained in the following unless superseded by more specific requirements of this clause or the sector scheme amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment may num num i code of practice on health and safety for vehicle recovery operators published by the association of vehicle recovery operators ii pas num safe working of vehicle breakdown and recovery operators management system specification published by the british standards institution iii bs num safe use of cranes recovery vehicles and equipment code of practice and iv bs num specification for recovery vehicles and vehicle recovery equipment .
num num the contractor shall ensure that suitable insurances to cover all claims arising out of the operation of the recovery service are taken out and maintained in force for the duration of the works .
the contractor shall submit copies of relevant certificates to the overseeing organisation not less than num days prior to the commencement of recovery operations and within num days of policy renewal thereafter .
num recovery personnel num num the contractor shall ensure that all recovery operations are carried out under the control of a competent recovery controller .
the recovery controller shall be an employee of the vehicle recovery organisation and may be either part of the recovery vehicle crew or a separate trained recovery technician .
the recovery controller shall be responsible for the planning and implementation of a safe and efficient system of work for recovery of the casualty vehicle unless subject to specific requests from police officers or uniformed traffic officers acting under their statutory powers .
num num without prejudice to subclause num above whilst within the limits of a temporary traffic management scheme the recovery controller shall comply with any traffic management related instructions given by the traffic safety and control officer or his deputy in accordance with subclause num .
elsewhere the recovery controller shall comply with the traffic management related instructions of the overseeing organisations regional control centre .
num num the contractor shall ensure that vehicle recovery technicians hold a relevant training certificate which meets the requirements of the sector scheme .
such certificate shall certify successful completion of a course on breakdown recovery applicable to the type of breakdown recovery vehicles being operated .
the sector scheme requires the certificate to be in the form of an identity card containing such information and a photograph of the technician .
a copy of each certificate shall be provided to the overseeing organisation not less than num days before the commencement of recovery operations .
num num the contractor shall check the validity of the certificatescards on a regular basis including checking that the photograph matches with the card holders image at intervals not exceeding num months and report his findings to the overseeing organisation .
num num the contractor shall ensure by appropriate checks on a regular basis that all operatives involved with vehicle recovery are suitable to work with vulnerable motorists .
the contractor shall report his findings to the overseeing organisation not less than num days prior to the commencement of recovery operations and at regular intervals thereafter not exceeding num months .
num num the contractor shall ensure by appropriate checks that each technician has a valid driving licence covering the class of vehicle and trailer being driven .
the contractor shall submit copies of all driving licences for operatives to the overseeing organisation not less than num days prior to commencement of recovery operations .
the contractor shall carry out regular num monthly checks on driving licences and report his findings to the overseeing organisation .
num num the contractor shall ensure that all technicians involved with vehicle recovery display an identity card which incorporates the name of the contractor the name of the vehicle recovery organisation and the name and a photograph of the holder .
this card must be available for inspection at all times and a copy must be submitted to the overseeing organisation prior to the commencement of the operative working .
num num in addition to any special provisions identified in the contractors health and safety risk assessment for recovery operations the contractor shall ensure that each recovery technician is provided with the following personal protective equipment as a minimum i a high visibility reflective safety jacket which prominently displays the word recovery on the front and back .
it shall conform to bs en num and the specific requirements of subclause num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries ii safety helmet to bs en num and chin strap where considered appropriate iii safety boots with steel reinforced toecaps and midsole conforming to bs en iso num iv protective goggles conforming to bs en num and v protective gloves conforming to bs en num .
the contractor may upgrade the specification of personal protective equipment at their own cost .
num num the contractor shall ensure that all personal protective equipment ppe is stored and maintained in good and clean condition .
the contractor shall ensure that high visibility safety wear is replaced or cleaned as necessary throughout the duration of the contract to maintain its conspicuity .
num num the contractor shall ensure that the operatives shall be familiar with their vehicles and the equipment carried on board before commencing recovery operations .
where appropriate they shall be trained to use any ancillary equipment carried on the vehicle including fire extinguishers and first aid equipment for personal use .
num recovery operations num num prior to the commencement of the works the contractor shall consult with the local representative of the chief officer of police andor the overseeing organisations regional control centre to establish procedures including contact telephone numbers for i clearing shed loads and ii vehicle recovery which may be beyond the capabilities of the free recovery service .
num num the recovery service is to be provided between the roadworks ahead num miles sign and the road works end sign unless otherwise stated in sheet num of contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall ensure that the recovery vehicles are only used to remove vehicles that are stationary due to mechanical breakdown accident damage or abandoned on the highway within the limits of the service .
num num the contractor shall ensure that the recovery vehicle operatives comply with the provisions contained within sheet num of contract specific appendix num in connection with this service subject to specific requests from police officers and uniformed traffic officers acting under their statutory powers .
num num the recovery vehicles shall be stationed at the points either specified in sheet num of contract specific appendix num or otherwise agreed with the overseeing organisation subject to specific requests from police officers and uniformed traffic officers acting under their statutory powers .
num num the contractor shall provide the facilities required by sheet num of contract specific appendix num and shall ensure that brokendown accident damaged or abandoned vehicles are not removed by the recovery vehicles other than to the locations described in sheet num of contract specific appendix num unless some other location has first been agreed with a police officer or uniformed traffic officer acting under their statutory powers .
num num the contractor shall ensure that after depositing a brokendown accident damaged or abandoned vehicle at one of the designated locations the recovery vehicle returns immediately to its station described in sheet num of contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall ensure that recovery vehicle operatives at no time attempt to repair vehicles that have broken down .
num num the contractor shall make no charge for this recovery service to the owner or driver of the recovered vehicle .
num num the contractor shall ensure that the recovery vehicle operatives issue leaflets as described in sheet num of contract specific appendix num before the tow commences to the drivers of vehicles requiring assistance .
num num the contractor shall submit weekly to the overseeing organisation i duplicate completed information sheets logging the assistance given by the recovery vehicles and ii duplicate completed log sheets which record daily checks made on each recovery vehicle .
these shall be on printed forms provided by the contractor in accordance with the samples given in sheets num to num of contract specific appendix num .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment may num num num communications systems num num in addition to the requirements of contract specific appendix num and appendix num and this subclause the contractor shall provide and maintain dedicated equipment for communication with the vehicle recovery organisation for the duration specified in the contract as described in sheet num of contract specific appendix num .
num num unless otherwise described in sheet num of contract specific appendix num the communication system shall also include the following i a secondary back up communications system between the recovery base stations and all recovery vehicles and ii an emergency telephone and line at the recovery base stations for the sole use of emergency calls .
where possible the link between the recovery base stations and the police shall be by direct land line .
num num the communication system shall be fully established tested and operational before the contractor commences the works .
num num the contractor shall be responsible for providing all associated equipment and payment of fees to operate the system .
num requirements for recovery equipment num num the contractor shall ensure that all recovery vehicles are maintained in such condition that the vehicles conform to appropriate current legislation including but not limited to the road vehicle construction and use regulations road vehicle lighting regulations road transport act and road traffic act at all times .
num num all recovery vehicles shall have either a current goods vehicle test certificate or mot certificate or other certificate of roadworthiness issued by a vehicle and operator services agency vosa approved testing station and also weigh bridge certificate stating individual axle and gross vehicle loadings .
copies of certificates shall be provided to the overseeing organisation not less than num days prior to the commencement of recovery operations using the vehicle concerned .
certificates shall be renewed annually on the due anniversary of the inspection and new certificates shall be provided to the overseeing organisation immediately following the inspection .
num num the contractor shall make appropriate arrangements for any inspections required under the sector scheme to be carried out in a place of safety either on or off site for the duration of the contract .
num num recovery vehicles shall not be replaced without the prior agreement of the overseeing organisation .
num num photographs of each vehicle clearly showing vehicle registration number shall be provided to the overseeing organisation not less than num days prior to the commencement of recovery operations using the vehicle concerned .
any replacement vehicle shall normally be of the same vehicle class and category shall conform to the requirements of this clause and shall have been inspected in accordance with any additional requirements of the sector scheme if applicable .
num num recovery vehicles shall prominently display the name and telephone number of the vehicle recovery organisation and be of conspicuous colour e.g .
white yellow or orange and marking to emphasise the length and outline of the vehicle .
suitable retroreflective markings not less than num mm wide shall be applied along the full length of the sides of the vehicle .
colours and usage of retroreflective markings must comply with the road vehicle lighting regulations .
high visibility chevron markings comprising of alternate strips of red retroreflective material and yellow nonretroreflective material of not less than nummm width each inclined at num to the horizontal shall be applied to the rear of the vehicle .
the chevrons shall cover as much of the rearfacing portion of the vehicle as possible without obscuring windows vehicle lighting or registration plates .
red retroreflective tape shall be applied to all rear facing edges of open doors and equipment lockers .
the vehicle and all retroreflective markings shall be maintained in good and clean condition .
num num each recovery vehicle shall display a sign with the legend free recovery to end of road works .
this sign shall be securely mounted on the recovery vehicle in such position as to be clearly visible from the driving seat of a car at a distance of num m from the rear of the recovery vehicle .
this sign shall at all times be clean and legible and shall not be obstructed .
num num a lighting board shall be secured to the rear of the vehicle being towed .
the board shall be clearly visible to other drivers of vehicles approaching from the rear .
it shall be maintained in good working order and shall be cleaned after use to maintain its conspicuity .
volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment may num num num num recovery vehicles shall be equipped with sufficient chains wire rope and shackles for the safe recovery of any fully laden vehicle within the appropriate class of recovery e.g .
heavy or light .
all chains wire ropes tow poles and shackles shall comply with relevant british standards and be fully certified by an independent competent person to comply with all current legislation .
all lifting equipment shall be accompanied by a valid proof loading certificate be suitably marked with the swl and be free from snags excess stretching and wear .
copies of all certificates shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation not less than num days prior to the commencement of recovery operations using the vehicle concerned .
num num all equipment shall be suitably marked so as to be identifiable and provide an audit trail for inspection purposes .
num num all walkways at height on the recovery vehicle shall be fitted with hand rails and non slip tread systems .
access steps shall be provided on the nontrafficked passenger side of the vehicle .
equipment shall be stored on the passenger side of the vehicle as far as is practicable .
num num where insufficient seating capacity is available in the recovery vehicle for transport of passengers the contractor shall ensure that suitable arrangements are made to transport passengers to the setting down location .
num num when carrying child passengers the contractor shall ensure that a child restraint seat appropriate to the age of the child is used .
num num the contractor shall ensure that each light recovery vehicle has a crew including at least one trained technician and that each heavy recovery vehicle has a crew including at least two trained technicians .
num num prior to commencement of the recovery service the contractor shall provide method statements for heavy and light recovery to be agreed by the overseeing organisation .
the method statement shall include a detailed list of the equipment carried on each recovery vehicle .
the list may be used for audit by independent third party as required by the overseeing organisation .
num heavy recovery vehicles num num a heavy recovery vehicle shall comply with the following as a minimum i it shall be a recovery vehicle with not less than three axles capable of removing a loaded vehicle of num tons total train weight i.e .
category num special types in accordance with road traffic act section num and road vehicles authorisation of special typesgeneral order .
it must be able to maintain a minimum road speed of num mph on a level road when fully loaded and pull away or hold back the complete train weight when towing a maximum weight vehicle either up or downhill without wheel slip or loss of traction .
axle loadings shall be within permissible legal loadings for the vehicle at all times .
ii it shall be fitted with two power winches of not less than num tons each on bottom layer safeguarded by pressure relief devices as appropriate .
each winch shall have no less than num m of cable .
all equipment shall be poweroperated with swl indicated on both the winch and fixings .
operating leversbuttons shall be clearly marked for operational use with key functions duplicated on a remote control unit .
emergency stop controls shall be provided .
iii without prejudice to subclause num of this clause it shall carry the following recovery equipment as a minimum a num no .
full set of forks for use with underlift .
b num no .
tool kit including both  and  inch socket sets with afmetric sized sockets .
c num no .
num tonne bottle jacks .
d num no .
num volt engine starter pack .
e num no .
crowbar .
f num no .
sledge hammer num lbs minimum .
g all lines and fittings necessary for connection of the air braking system on the casualty vehicle to the air braking system on the recovery vehicle .
h num no .
wheel chocks suitable for use with an hgv .
volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment may num num i num no .
suitable lengths of wood block skidding .
j num no .
screw pin bow shackles minimum swl num tonnes .
k num no .
nummm diameter gnum chains with grab hooks num m minimum length .
l num no .
num mm diameter gnum chains with grab hooks num m minimum length .
m num no .
num mm diameter gnum chains with grab hooks num m minimum length .
n num no .
num mm diameter gnum chains with grab hooks num m minimum length .
o num no .
num mm ratchet straps numm minimum length with soft eyes .
p num no .
num tonne swl nylon straps with sewn eyes no less than numm long and nummm wide .
q num no .
snatch blocks per winch each with a swl of twice that of the winch .
snatch block sheaves shall have a minimum diameter of num times the diameter of the winch cable .
iv it shall carry and use when necessary equipment designed and manufactured for the purpose of locking the steering of the brokendown or accidentdamaged vehicle in order to tow it safely in a reverse direction .
v it shall carry equipment to enable the recovery crew to remove the drive line or shafts of the broken down or accidentdamaged vehicle .
vi it shall have seating for not less than two recovery operatives .
the contractor shall make suitable arrangements for the safe transport of passengers from the recovered vehicle to the setting down location .
vii it shall be fitted with and where appropriate operatives trained to use the following ancillary equipment as a minimum a num no .
full cab width amber warning lightbar minimum num no .
active light sources visible through num degrees from road level and complying with the road vehicle lighting regulations and the united nations economic commission for europe unece regulation num on special warning lamps.vehicle electrics must be capable of running the lightbar for a minimum of num minutes with the ignition key removed .
b num no .
fully adjustable work lights to illuminate both the sides and rear of the vehicle .
c num no .
fire extinguishers num litre nett aqueous film forming foam in accordance with adr marked with date of last inspectiontest .
d num no .
hse approved num person first aid kit marked with expiry date .
e num no .
traffic cones minimum num mm height .
f num no .
num mm diameter keep right arrow traffic sign complying with diagram num of the current traffic signs regulations and general directions .
g num no .
rear lighting board incorporating a duplicate of the recovery vehicle registration plate and on tow legend in lettering of not less than num mm on conspicuously coloured background to conform with the size colour and type illustrated in the road vehicles lighting regulations .
the board shall be fitted with lights reflectors and indicators and sufficient cable to reach the rear of any vehicle recovered .
h num no .
adr hazchem chart .
i num no .
spillage containment kit including oildiesel absorbent granules minimum num kg in sealed container .
j num no .
intrinsically safe battery operated torch with spare batteries .
k num no .
broom and shovel .
the number of the required heavy recovery vehicles shall be as stated in sheet num of contract specific appendix num .
volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment may num num num light recovery vehicle num num a light recovery vehicle shall comply with the following as a minimum i it shall be capable of removing by means of a slide bed andor underlift at least one vehicle weighing num kg including a vehicle with permanent four wheel drive and shall be fitted with a suitable towing hitch for the safe recovery of all forms of trailers including caravans boat trailers and horse boxes etc .
it must be able to maintain a minimum road speed of num mph on a level road when fully loaded and pull away or hold back the complete train weight when towing a maximum weight vehicle either up or downhill without wheel slip or loss of traction .
axle loadings shall be within permissible legal loadings for the vehicle at all times .
ii it shall be fitted with at least one power winch of not less than num tonnes capacity on bottom layer safeguarded by pressure relief devices as appropriate .
the winch shall have no less than num m of cable .
all equipment shall be poweroperated with swl indicated on both the winch and fixings .
operating levers buttons shall be clearly marked for operational use with key functions duplicated on a remote control unit .
emergency stop controls shall be provided .
iii slide bed vehicles shall have num tonne swl lashing points fitted every half a metre on each side of the bed the last being no more than num cm from the end of the bed .
there shall be a return anchorage point of minimum num kg swl fitted to or alongside the winch .
suitable anchorage points shall also be provided at points on the bed to enable side pulls to be performed .
iv without prejudice to subclause num of this clause it shall carry the following recovery equipment as a minimum a num no .
num tonne straight tow pole .
b num no .
tool kit including both  and  inch socket sets with afmetric sized sockets .
c num no .
num tonne minimum capacity trolley jack .
d num no .
num volt engine starter pack .
e num no .
crowbar .
f num no .
wheel chock suitable for use with a light commercial size vehicle .
g num no .
suitable lengths of wood block skidding .
h num no .
num tonne swl screw pin bow shackles .
i num no .
num mm gnum chains num m minimum length with grab hooks .
j num no .
num tonnes swl num mm webbing straps num m minimum length with soft eyes .
k num no .
transporter straps num m minimum length .
l num no .
underlift frame straps .
m num no .
snatch block per winch each with a swl of twice that of the winch .
n snatch block sheaves shall have a minimum diameter of num times the diameter of the winch cable .
o num no .
wheel skates .
v when specified in sheet num of contract specific appendix num it shall be capable of recovering motor cycles using a damage free motorcycle liftingrecovery frame or dolly andor lorry mounted crane as appropriate to the condition of the casualty motorcycle .
vi it shall have seating capacity for up to five adult passengers in addition to the recovery operatives with access from the passenger side of the cab .
the contractor shall make suitable arrangements for the safe transport of additional passengers from the recovered vehicle to the setting down location .
when carrying child passengers the contractor shall ensure that a child restraint seat appropriate to the age of the child is used .
vii it shall be fitted with and where appropriate operatives trained to use the following ancillary equipment as a minimum volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries a num no .
full cab width amber warning lightbar minimum num no .
active light sources and num no .
independent reflectors fitted transversely visible through num degrees from road level and complying with the road vehicle lighting regulations and economic commission for europe ece regulation num on special warning lamps .
vehicle electrics must be capable of running the lightbar for a minimum of num minutes with the ignition key removed .
b num no .
fully adjustable work lights to illuminate both the sides and rear of the vehicle .
c num no .
fire extinguishers num no .
num kg nett dry powder num no .
num litre nett aqueous film forming foam marked with date of last inspectiontest .
d num no .
hse approved num person first aid kit marked with expiry date .
e num no .
traffic cones minimum num mm height .
f for underlifts num no .
rear lighting board incorporating a duplicate of the recovery vehicle registration plate and on tow legend in lettering of not less than num mm on conspicuously coloured background to conform with the size colour and type illustrated in the road vehicles lighting regulations .
the board shall be fitted with lights reflectors and indicators and sufficient cable to reach the rear of any vehicle recovered .
g num no .
spillage containment kit including oildiesel absorbent granules minimum num kg in sealed container .
h num no .
adr hazchem chart .
i num no .
intrinsically safe battery operated torch with spare batteries .
j num no .
broom and shovel .
viii it shall carry and use when necessary equipment designed and manufactured for the purpose of locking the steering of the brokendown or accidentdamaged vehicle in order to tow in a reverse direction .
the number of the required light recovery vehicles shall be as stated in sheet num of contract specific appendix num .
num impact protection vehicles num num where specified in sheet num of contract specific appendix num the contractor shall provide dedicated impact protection vehicles ipvs to protect recovery operations in the live carriageway .
num num the contractor shall ensure that ipvs comply with the requirements of section onum of chapter num part num operations of the traffic signs manual and that any nonprescribed traffic signs mounted on the vehicle meet the requirements of the traffic signs regulations and general directions particularly with respect to authorisation andor type approval .
num num the contractor shall ensure that ipv drivers hold a relevant training certificate which meets the requirements of the sector schemes numab numc and numd as detailed in appendix a .
num accommodation num num the contractor shall ensure that any accommodation caravans or cabins provided in connection with the recovery service complies with all appropriate legislation including health safety and welfare requirements .
num num the contractor shall ensure that any accommodation sited within the highway is afforded appropriate protection from errant vehicles is conspicuously coloured with retroreflective markings on the sides facing traffic and is prominently marked with the name of the vehicle recovery organisation .
num num where the recovery service is located on the hardshoulder the contractor shall make arrangements for private vehicles to be parked off site and operatives transported to site by an appropriate vehicle complying with subclause num .
num num unless stated otherwise in sheet num of contract specific appendix num where it is proposed to construct or site temporary facilities for recovery services outside the highway boundary the contractor shall be responsible for planning permission waste arrangements and any statutory charges or other costs associated with the facilities e.g .
ground rent .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num num tidal flowing and standing water num num the contractor shall take measures and carry out any operation necessary for dealing with tidal flowing or standing water within the site .
num num progress photographs num num the contractor shall arrange as described in contract specific appendix num to have record photographs of the works taken at the times andor intervals stated in contract specific appendix num .
the format of the photographs and the media used for submission to the overseeing organisation shall be as described in contract specific appendix num .
unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the photographs shall be taken by a professional photographer .
num num all prints shall be marked on the reverse side with the date taken identification reference number and brief description of the work or features including chainage and direction of view .
num num the copyright of all photographs shall be vested in the employer and the photographs shall be delivered to the overseeing organisation within num week of the photographs being taken .
the photographs shall not be used for any purpose whatsoever without the overseeing organisations approval .
num not used num num health and safety restrictions precautions and monitoring num num in addition to all other health and safety requirements the contractor shall implement the requirements described in contract specific appendix num to protect the workforce members of the public and persons visiting the site from risks arising from the hazards defined therein .
where described in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall also comply with the specific monitoring requirements described therein .
the monitoring requirements as described in contract specific appendix num are in addition to contract specific monitoring requirements described elsewhere in the specification .
num num in addition to all other information required the contractor shall provide copies of ce marking information for all ce marked works goods or materials used in the works for inclusion in the health and safety file .
this information shall include as appropriate the declaration of conformity or declaration of performance and all safety information .
num num temporary closed circuit television cctv system for the monitoring of traffic num general num num where required in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall design provide install maintain operate and at the completion of the requirement remove the temporary cctv system as specified in this clause .
where associated work is subject to a quality management scheme listed in appendix a such work shall be undertaken by organisations registered to the relevant schemes .
the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining any licences power supplies and approvals required including structural approvals prior to the installation of any equipment .
num num the system shall be designed such that the whole of the works area including both carriageways and hardshoulders is covered at all times .
there shall be sufficient overlap between the areas covered by adjacent cameras such that there are no blind spots .
supplementary cameras shall be provided in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
num num where specified in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall interface the temporary cctv system with the permanent cctv system and ensure that it does not cause any interference to or interruption of effective operation and functionality of any other element of the existing or permanent cctv system or motorway communications equipment and network .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num num the contractor shall restore each site to its original condition following the removal of cameras and other temporary equipment .
num cameras num num the temporary cctv system shall provide coverage of the works area specified in subclause num using cameras that are fixed in their direction of view .
the orientation of all cameras on each carriageway shall be the same .
num num where specified in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall design provide install maintain operate and at the completion of the requirement remove supplementary cameras at the locations specified in contract specific appendix num .
these supplementary cameras shall have pan tilt and zoom facilities providing an unimpaired view of traffic in all directions .
num num the cameras and their location shall take account of the sun and lighting such that their effectiveness is not reduced by glare over a num hour period .
num num cameras shall be of a type that provides num hours per day operation .
num camera supports num num the contractor shall be responsible for the design provision construction maintenance operation and at the end of the requirement removal of all necessary supporting structures and associated safety barriers paving steps and hand rails .
num maintenance num num the minimum requirements for maintenance shall be i any faults shall be repaired or the equipment replaced within num hours of any fault or failure ii the whole system including cameras monitors and video recording equipment shall be in full working order for no less than num hours in any num day period .
num num the cameras shall be located such that they can be removed replaced and maintained without the need for traffic management .
num monitoring num num the contractor shall provide train and maintain suitable staff for the monitoring of the works area covered by the temporary cctv system .
num num the contractor shall provide maintain and at the end of the requirement remove suitable temporary accommodation for monitoring equipment and staff .
num num the monitoring staff shall be competent in the use of the system and shall be responsible for the reporting of breakdowns and faults to the contractor .
num num the monitoring staff shall maintain a daily log of all incidents within the roadworks area .
this log shall be available for inspection by the overseeing organisation and the police at all times .
the monitoring staff shall report all incidents immediately to the contractors traffic safety and control officer .
the contractor shall provide a suitable communications system for use by the monitoring staff .
where an incident is a shed load vehicle breakdown vehicle abandonment or traffic accident whether or not the latter involves personal injury or any other incident which causes a change to traffic flow or a potential for personal injury .
num num the monitoring equipment shall include video recording equipment with sufficient capacity and recording media for the duration of the requirement .
the system shall be such that the image on the monitor and any video recording taken from it shall provide a legible image of the registration plate of any stationary vehicle within num metres of the camera .
all monitor images shall include the date time and unique camera reference .
num num the contractor shall provide install operate maintain and at the completion of the requirement remove a dedicated communication link to the regional control centre police control office or other control centre as detailed in contract specific appendix num .
amendment may num num volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num num timber and products containing wood supplied under the contract num num all timber and woodderived products for supply or use in the works shall be independently verifiable and either from a legal and sustainable source or a flegtlicensed or equivalent source .
the contractor shall submit documentary evidence to demonstrate this to the overseeing organisation prior to its inclusion or use in the works .
the verification and evidence shall comply with the criteria in this clause .
num num management of the forest or plantation shall be audited at intervals confirming ongoing good forest management and by organisations with appropriate forest management experience that are independent of the organisation that holds timber harvest andor management rights for that forest .
num num the overseeing organisation will accept evidence from any of the following three categories a category a evidence certification under a scheme recognised by the uk government as meeting the criteria set out in the document entitled uk government timber procurement policy criteria for evaluating certification schemes category a evidence the edition current on the day the contract is awarded shall apply .
acceptable schemes must ensure that at least num by volume or weight is from a legal and sustainable source with the balance from a legal source .
b category b evidence documentary evidence other than category a evidence and flegt evidence that provides assurance that the source is sustainable .
in this context sustainable is defined in the document entitled uk government timber procurement policy framework for evaluating category b evidence the edition current on the day the contract is awarded shall apply .
such category b evidence may include for example independent audits and declarations by the contractor or his suppliers .
where category b evidence is to be relied on the contractor is required to notify the overseeing organisation of the source or sources of all virgin timber and woodderived products supplied .
source in this context means the forest or plantation where the trees were grown and all subsequent places of delivery through the supply chain prior to receipt of the timber or woodderived product on site .
the contractor shall separately identify virgin timber and woodderived products supplied from forests and plantations that are claimed to be subject to sustainable timber production and shall submit to the overseeing organisation documentation in respect of such wood to confirm that the criteria for sustainable timber production set out in this specification have been met .
c flegt evidence from either or both of the following categories evidence of timber and woodderived products being exported from a timberproducing country that has signed a bilateral forest law enforcement governance and trade flegt voluntary partnership agreement vpa with the european union and which have been licensed for export by the producing countrys government .
this may also include timber and woodderived products that have been independently verified as meeting all the producing countrys requirements for a flegt licence where a vpa has been entered into but the flegt licensing system is not fully operational or equivalent evidence from a country that has not entered into a vpa which demonstrates that all of the requirements equivalent to flegtlicensed timber have been met .
amendment may num numf volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries national alterations of the overseeing organisation of wales numnaw num checking bar schedules num num the contractor shall check the bar schedules and make any corrections necessary .
checking shall be commenced sufficiently in advance of ordering steel reinforcement to allow for corrections and approvals .
the contractor shall be fully responsible for correctness of the schedules and the overseeing organisation does not accept any liability whatsoever for any errors therein .
the schedules corrected as necessary shall be the basis of admeasurement .
numnaw num dimensional accuracy num num before commencing any part of the works the contractor shall check that all coordinates levels and dimensions shown in the contract documents are correct .
he shall check and satisfy himself that the various parts fit satisfactorily together and in relation to existing physical features .
checking shall be commenced sufficiently in advance of construction to allow for corrections .
the contractor shall be fully responsible for correctness and the overseeing organisation does not accept any liability whatsoever for any errors therein .
numnaw num agreement on measurements involving computer equipment num num if applicable all measurements relating to the works which involve the use of computer equipment whether in the taking of the measurements or in the storage of results of the measurements and will have a bearing on valuations payment and specification compliance shall where practicable be jointly undertaken by the overseeing organisation and contractors staff .
the results of the measurement as produced by or stored in the respective computer equipment shall be complied to and certified as being correct by both parties .
if joint measurement is not possible independent check measuring shall be carried out and certifying countersignatures shall be attached to the original measure and the checkmeasure .
num num if compatible computerised datastorage systems are employed by both the overseeing organisation and the contractor agreement on the correctness of the data can be based on data files transferred between the parties in the form of computer disks or by direct transfer .
countersignatures must however be attached to printed copies of the data which must be filed for record purposes .
amendment may num wnumf volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment december num nnum national alterations of the overseeing organisation of northern ireland numni num standards quality management and acceptance num standards and ce markings num num where there is a requirement in this specification for compliance with any part of a british standard or other technical specification that requirement may be met by compliance with a a standard or code of practice of a national standards body or equivalent body of any eea state or turkey b any international standard recognised for use as a standard or code of practice by any eea state or turkey c a technical specification recognised for use as a standard by a public authority of any eea state or turkey or d a european technical assessment issued in accordance with the procedure set out in regulation eu no num provided that the relevant standard imposes an equivalent level of performance and safety provided for by the stated standard or technical specification .
eea state means a state which is a contracting party to the agreement on an european economic area signed at oporto on the numnd of may num as adjusted or amended .
british standard means any standard published by the british standards institution including adopted european or other international standards .
num num electrical equipment to which directives numec or numec apply and which are produced for incorporation in a permanent manner in the works must have affixed to them ce marking attesting to their conformity to the provisions of the applicable directives .
declarations of conformity required by the above directives must be provided to the overseeing organisation prior to installation or use or procurement or supply of the equipment .
num num construction products which are produced for incorporation in a permanent manner in the works and are covered by a harmonised european standard or european technical approval or assessment must have the product performance required by the specification for the intended use declared under the declaration of performance and be ce marked in accordance with the relevant british adopted european standard or european technical approvals or assessments and the regulation eu no num .
unless otherwise described in the specification the declared performance of the product shall meet the required performance of all the essential characteristics required by the specification .
declarations of performance required by the above regulation shall be provided to the overseeing organisation prior to installation or use or procurement or supply of the product .
num quality management num num unless otherwise indicated in contract specific appendix num or as required in the conditions of contract the contractor shall institute a quality management system complying with bs en iso num and shall prepare a quality plan .
the contractor shall demonstrate compliance with this requirement to institute a quality management system to the overseeing organisation one acceptable method for this demonstration is to evidence registration to bs en iso num .
num num the quality plan shall incorporate the requirements of contract specific appendix num and the requirements of the quality management schemes listed in appendix a applicable to the works in accordance with subclause num of this clause .
the quality plan shall be submitted to the overseeing organisation within the periods stated in contract specific appendix num for acceptance before any related work is commenced .
volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment may num nnum where any work goods or materials to be used in the works are the subject of the quality management schemes listed in appendix a the contractor shall require the supplier of such items to prepare a quality plan and the contractor shall submit it to the overseeing organisation .
such quality plans shall comply with the requirements of contract specific appendix num and the individual requirements of the relevant sector scheme documents for quality management in highway works see subclause num .
num num quality plans shall indicate hold points as follows contractors points where no further work shall hold points proceed without the written approval of a designated person of the contractors management who shall be named in the quality plan .
overseeing points where no further work shall organisations proceed without the written approval of hold points a designated representative of the overseeing organisation .
the contractor shall ensure the quality plans and associated quality documentation are made available to all parties involved with the works .
num quality records num num for works goods or materials other than those which are ce marked the contractor shall make available contemporary quality records to the overseeing organisation when requested .
this includes quality records such as those identified in bs en iso num to demonstrate achievement of the required quality and the effectiveness of the quality system .
the contractor shall require any member of the contractors supply chain to make available such contemporary quality records when requested .
following a request copies of all quality records shall be made available immediately to the overseeing organisation .
the contractor shall report any nonconforming productservice to the overseeing organisation and shall require any member of the contractors supply chain to immediately report any nonconforming productservice to the contractor .
the contractor shall immediately pass these reports to the overseeing organisation and undertake no further related work until remedial or other measures have been undertaken .
the contractor shall submit the quality records required by this specification as indicated in appendix h to the overseeing organisation .
no item of work shall be considered complete until these records have been received by the overseeing organisation .
note quality terms used in this clause are as bs en iso num .
num quality management schemes num num except as described in subclause num where any work goods or materials to be used in the works are the subject of a quality management scheme listed in appendix a only work goods or materials conforming with such a scheme shall be used and the organisations carrying out such work shall have current registration to the relevant schemes .
the contractor shall in each case submit to the overseeing organisation a copy of the certificate of conformity affirming compliance with the scheme .
num num where any work goods or materials to be used in the works are the subject of a quality management scheme listed in appendix a and for which the goods or materials are ce marked products in accordance with the relevant standards exclusions to mandatory requirements as listed in appendix a apply .
num num where specific training and competency requirements are identified in any quality management scheme listed in appendix a the contractor shall provide copies of the relevant training andor competency assessments certificates andor registrationskill cards of the workforce to the overseeing organisation for acceptance prior to the commencement of relevant work .
num num the requirement for compliance with a registered quality management scheme listed in appendix a shall be satisfied by compliance with an equivalent quality management scheme of any member state of the european economic area or a state which is party to a relevant agreement with the european union provided that the proposed scheme is designed to ensure in use levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose equivalent to those provided for by the scheme specified .
the proposed scheme will include third party assessment by bodies accredited in accordance with bs en isoiec num by the united kingdom accreditation service ukas or equivalent european accreditation organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement mla with ukas or volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment may num nnum any equivalent international accreditation forum iaf mla signatory with a scope which includes the relevant standards .
this subclause applies also to works only in so far as the means of carrying out such works are indivisibly associated with the goods or materials for which an alternative quality management scheme is proposed .
num product certification schemes and ce marked products num num works goods and materials other than those covered by the construction products regulation falling under the standards listed in appendix b are required to have attestation or third party accreditation to demonstrate compliance with the relevant standard .
this can be satisfied by one or more of the following i compliance with a relevant product mark scheme demonstrating compliance as described in subclause num below ii demonstration of compliance as described in subclause num below iii demonstration of compliance using testing and calculation as described in subclause num below .
where works goods or materials are covered by the construction products regulation eu no .
num cpr their compliance with the specification shall be demonstrated by the product being ce marked the declared performance of the product given in the declaration of performance meeting the required performance of all the essential characteristics given in the specification and evidence being provided that demonstrates the product meets the requirements of the specification for aspects other than those covered by the essential characteristics where such evidence meets the requirements of options i or ii above .
num num where option i or ii of subclause num is used the product shall be certified as compliant with the specification and relevant standard or equivalent as described in subclause num of this clause by a certification body .
the certification body shall be accredited in accordance with bs en num or bs en isoiec num by the united kingdom accreditation service ukas or equivalent european accreditation organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement mla with ukas or any equivalent international accreditation forum iaf mla signatory with a scope which includes the relevant standards .
unless otherwise described in the specification assessment of the product shall be carried out to the level of attestation as determined in the relevant standard for the intended use of the product in the works and shall include confirmation that the product provides in use adequate levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose .
for products covered by the low voltage directive numec and the electromagnetic compatibility directive numec the safety aspects would be for aspects not covered by the relevant ce marking .
the contractor shall provide information on the product to the overseeing organisation for acceptance .
this information shall include certification attestation details and certification body details .
num num where option iii of subclause num is used it shall be demonstrated that the product is capable of performing as required using tests calculations or other means .
such testing or other means shall have a minimum level of attestation as that determined by the relevant standard and be suitably extensive to provide information on all relevant parameters .
testing shall be carried out by laboratories accredited to ukas or equivalent accredited organisation as described in subclause num .
the testing or other means shall include confirmation that the product provides in use adequate levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose .
for products covered by the low voltage directive numec and the electromagnetic compatibility directive numec the safety aspects would be for aspects not covered by the relevant ce marking .
the contractor shall provide information on the product to the overseeing organisation for acceptance .
this information shall include testing or calculation details and results certification and attestation details .
num product acceptance schemes num num where there are references in the specification to particular industry product acceptance schemes such as british board of agrment certificates roads and bridges certificates hapas certificates cares certificate or equivalent scheme these shall be taken as references to a product acceptance scheme that has the attributes given in subclause num below .
the types of work goods or materials listed in appendix c are required to be certificated by a product acceptance scheme prior to their inclusion in the works .
volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment may num nnum num num the works goods or materials shall be assessed against a set of guidelines and criteria by a certification body .
certification to confirm the products successfully meet the guidelines and criteria shall be issued by a certification body .
the contractor shall provide information on the product to the overseeing organisation for acceptance .
this information shall include the certification and when requested details of the scheme to confirm its compliance with the criteria given below and accreditation details of the organisation issuing the certification .
the scheme shall meet the following criteria .
a product acceptance and certification specified in this subclause shall be structured and implemented to provide assurance to the overseeing organisation that the product when supplied for its intended use and installed or processed post manufacture in accordance with the manufacturers instructions will give the performance and level of safety required by the specification and be fit for purpose .
b the organisation certifying products and issuing the certificates must be accredited to the relevant certification body standard bs en num or bs en isoiec num for product certification or bs en isoiec num for site inspection by ukas or equivalent european accreditation organisation which is party to a multilateral agreement mla with ukas or any equivalent international accreditation forum iaf mla signatory with a scope which includes the relevant standards .
this shall include accreditation to manage and execute a certification scheme as defined in this subclause .
accreditation must cover a scope of activity relevant to the construction installation maintenance and operation of highway infrastructure .
c the scheme must cover as appropriate i .
manufacture and installation or post manufacture processing of those products for which a declaration of performance and consequent ce marking has not been made on the basis of any harmonised european standard hen or european technical assessment or ii .
only the installation of a material or post manufacture processing where the manufacturer has made a declaration of performance of the material with consequent ce marking or iii .
product characteristics not included in the required essential characteristics of a hen or in a european technical assessment if such characteristics provide additional protection for the consumer e.g .
road user .
d the assessment and certification requirements for a product certified under the scheme must be developed ensuring due consideration is given to the requirements of the users of the product and those responsible for the highways on which such products will be used or installed .
e the scheme must have a technical supervisory panel that provides technical oversight on the operation of the scheme and formally consents to the issue of assessment and certification requirements of the specialist groups developing the assessment and certification requirements .
this panel must include a balanced representation of key end users recognized industry experts and those responsible for the highways on which such products will be used or installed .
f the product certification must include requirements for the audit and quality control of the production and installation processes for the product where necessary taking account of the product having its performance declared under a ce mark .
installer certification must include requirements for on site surveillance of installation or post manufacturing processes .
g for every product it has certified under a product certification scheme an organisation must make open and publicly accessible details of the assessment and certification guidelines .
h where different organisations have certified the same generic form of product they must be able to demonstrate to the overseeing organisation equivalence of performance of products certified under the different schemes or agree a common set of guidelines for the assessment and certification of the product .
i the competences of organisations certifying products shall be as the competency requirements for technical assessment bodies given in regulation eu no num the construction products regulation annex iv table num with the additions given in table num .
volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment may num nnum num table num competency additions to construction product regulation eu no .
num annex iv table num competence description of competence requirement num .
determining the specific installation or post manufacturing control understand and evaluate the installation or post manufacturing processes of the specific product in order to identify appropriate measures ensuring consistent compliant delivery of the installed or post manufactured product .
a certification body shall have staff with appropriate technical knowledge of the relationship between the installation post manufacturing processes and the product characteristics related to production control for installation or post manufacture .
num .
constructive engagement be prepared to engage constructively with highway infrastructure managers and other certifying bodies for resolution of issues .
be able to resolve differences in the certified performance of products of the same generic type and where appropriate agree a common set of guidelines for the assessment and certification of such products .
num european technical assessment eta num num the requirements for works goods or materials to be subject to a product certification scheme or product acceptance scheme as discussed in sub clauses num to num above may alternatively be met by a product being attested using a european technical assessment eta issued in accordance with the procedure set out in regulation num provided that the relevant attestation imposes an equivalent level of safety performance and fitness for purpose provided for by the specification .
num num not used .
num departmental authorisation num num departmental authorisation is required before any traffic signs are incorporated into the works where these are of a character andor are to be used in circumstances which have not been prescribed in the traffic signs regulations northern ireland num the zebra pelican and puffin pedestrian crossings regulations northern ireland num and subsequent amending regulations .
where the contractor has designed part of the works for which such authorisation is required application shall be made to the overseeing organisation .
num num the types of works goods or materials which are required to have type approval or registration prior to their acceptance for inclusion in the works are given in appendix e with the exception that products that are covered by the construction products regulation eu no .
num cpr do not have to be listed prior to their acceptance for inclusion in the works .
for products not covered by cpr previously obtained type approval or registration can be used .
the contractor shall submit to the overseeing organisation a copy of the type approval registration certificate .
where previously obtained type approval or registration is not available the contractor shall submit documentation to the overseeing organisation which demonstrates compliance with the relevant specification andor standards .
for products covered by the cpr the information required in clause num shall be provided by the contractor in accordance with that subclause .
num provision of information num num where information and documentation regarding works goods or materials is required to be submitted to the overseeing organisation for acceptance the contractor shall submit such documentation in a timescale to meet the requirements of the contractors programme of works .
the contractor shall liaise with the overseeing organisation to ensure that adequate time is allocated for the overseeing organisation to undertake the required assessments for acceptance .
the time allocated for acceptance shall not be less than four weeks .
num num unless otherwise specified two copies of all information and documentation including valid certificates in respect of work goods or materials proposed by the contractor shall be supplied to the overseeing organisation in english .
volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment may num nnum num num where the contractor proposes to use an equivalent standard quality management scheme product certification scheme industry product acceptance scheme or type approvalregistration to that specified the contractor shall provide relevant information to enable the overseeing organisation to ascertain whether or not the proposal is equivalent to the specified requirement .
the information provided by the contractor shall provide full disclosure and appropriate evidence regarding the works goods or materials concerned in order to fully demonstrate equivalent levels of safety performance and fitness for purpose .
for products within the scope of the construction products regulation this documentation would be the relevant declaration of performance and associated ce mark for the intended specified use .
num num when required in contract specific appendix num three copies of detailed working and fabrication drawings in the format detailed in contract specific appendix num prepared by or on behalf of the contractor shall be submitted for the overseeing organisations acceptance .
the minimum period for submission of the drawings prior to commencement of the related works shall be as stated in contract specific appendix num .
such acceptance shall in no way relieve the contractor of his responsibilities for the work under the contract .
numni num setting out num num the contractor shall unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num within num weeks of the date for commencement of the works carry out a check of the coordinates and levels of all permanent ground markers and permanent bench marks described in contract specific appendix num and shall supply the overseeing organisation if requested with their position and level in order that they may be checked and revised if necessary .
the contractor shall identify and bring to the attention of the overseeing organisation any markers that are missing .
the contractor shall comply with any specific requirements for setting out described in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall keep updated schedules and drawings of all bench marks which shall be based on ordnance datum of belfast mean sea level used in the setting out and shall make these available to the overseeing organisation when required .
num num the contractor shall ensure that where necessary in order to maintain his programme lines and levels are set out in such time as to enable statutory undertakers apparatus and other publicly or privately owned services or supplies to be installed altered or removed .
num num the contractor shall survey and record existing details of items which he is required to remove and subsequently replace .
the level of survey information to be recorded is described in contract specific appendix num .
numni num traffic safety and management num general num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall plan design programme provide implement maintain and remove all traffic safety and management measures necessary for the completion of the works .
this shall include undertaking all necessary liaison with the police and highway authority responsible for each public highway affected by the works both before commencement and throughout the duration of the works .
the traffic safety and management measures shall be in accordance with the requirements and constraints stated in contract specific appendix num and the contractor shall take into account the information contained in contract specific appendix num .
the traffic safety and management measures shall be in accordance with chapter num of the traffic signs manual .
the contractor shall inform the overseeing organisation of any details the contractor has agreed with the police andor the highway authority .
num num all traffic safety and management operations shall be undertaken by a supplier registered to national highway sector scheme num with a scope of registration that includes reference to one or more of national highways sector schemes numab numc or numd as appropriate to the works .
num num the contractor shall unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num after consultation with the police and highway authorities concerned prepare and submit traffic safety and management proposals within the timescale described in contract specific appendix num to the overseeing organisation .
these shall show the volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries proposed traffic safety and management measures including provision of safety zones .
if stated in contract specific appendix num the proposals shall include the provision of running lanes for the use of emergency vehicles within the site .
the contractor shall make such changes to his proposals as may be necessary to meet the requirements of the contract .
thereafter the contractor shall furnish and update such details and information as may be necessitated by the works .
num num if stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall undertake the highway maintenance functions described therein and to the extent there described on the lengths of highway there specified until the issue of the appropriate certificate of completion .
num num traffic signs shall comply with the appropriate clauses in series num of the specification .
num num where a temporary speed limit at road works has been imposed and the works have been temporarily terminated with the removal of traffic management measures the contractor shall ensure that the temporary speed limit signs are covered or taken down for the duration of the cessation of the works .
where the temporary speed limit signs are covered the covering material shall prevent the sign being visible through the cover in natural light and under vehicle headlamp or street lamp illumination at night be non light reflective and securely fastened .
num num where the contract provides that the contractor shall not erect maintain or reposition traffic signs the contractor shall not change in any manner the permanent or temporary traffic signs without instruction from the overseeing organisation and shall give such notice as is stated in contract specific appendix num to indicate when signs should be moved compatible with the progress of the works .
num num all traffic safety and management measures necessitated by the works shall be fully operational before the contractor commences any work which affects the public highway or the use of it .
num num any area of highway which has been closed because of the works shall not be reopened to traffic until all appropriate traffic safety and management measures have been completed and the highway is in a suitable condition for public use .
num num where work is carried out on or adjacent to a highway open to traffic the contractor shall ensure that vehicles and mobile plant under his control operating frequently or regularly on or adjacent to that highway in the execution of the works shall be conspicuous and comply with section onum general vehicle issues of chapter num part num operations of the traffic signs manual .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num or where required for the execution of the works the contractor shall provide temporary lighting in accordance with clause num .
num num where required in contract specific appendix num or where required for the execution of the works the contractor shall provide temporary emergency telephones in accordance with clause num .
num num the contractor shall provide and suitably sign points of entry to and exit from the site for vehicles and plant engaged on the works .
the contractor shall ensure that when any vehicle or item of plant is reversing within the site on or adjacent to a highway open to traffic it does so only under the supervision of a person designated for the purpose of regulating traffic within the site who shall be readily distinguishable from the remainder of the work force .
num num if an accident or breakdown occurs on a carriageway or hard shoulder open to traffic within or in the vicinity of the site the contractor and operators of recovery vehicles provided in accordance with clause num shall act as requested by police officers or traffic officers acting under their statutory powers .
num num where work is carried out on or adjacent to a highway open to traffic the contractor shall ensure that the workforce and the site supervisory staff at all times wear high visibility warning clothing complying with bs en num .
clothing shall be to table num class num or num class num on motorways or other high speed roads and shall comply with the requirements of para numb .
in addition on motorways or other high speed roads full length sleeves meeting the requirements of para num shall be provided for coveralls and jackets .
the colour of the clothing shall normally be fluorescent yellow or fluorescent orangered complying with table num .
the retroreflective material used shall be to level numas defined at table num .
clothing complying with other specifications may be used in accordance with clause num where they offer equivalent levels of performance in so far as the specification given is not inconsistent with the basic health and safety requirements set out in annex num of the personal protective equipment directive numeec .
the contractor shall ensure that the person in charge of the workforce is readily distinguishable from the person designated in subclause num of this clause and from the remainder of the workforce .
amendment may num nnum volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment may num nnum num traffic safety and control officer num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall appoint a suitably qualified traffic safety and control officer tsco who shall make all arrangements necessary for traffic safety and control including the provision and operation of breakdown recovery vehicles .
num num the tsco shall be experienced in the control of temporary traffic management operations and shall possess a national highway sector scheme nhss num traffic safety and control officer num registration card .
num num the contractor shall provide the overseeing organisation with the names and contact details of the tsco and any nominated deputies .
unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num the tsco or a nominated deputy shall be on the site at all times when traffic management is in operation and shall be readily available to deal with matters related to traffic safety and control including breakdown recovery vehicles .
num num without prejudice to subclause num above whilst within the limits of a temporary traffic management scheme the tsco shall manage any traffic management related requests given by a police officer or traffic officer .
on highways agency roads the tsco shall liaise with the overseeing organisations regional control centre on traffic management related matters including requests and instructions .
num num unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num the responsibilities of the traffic safety and control officer and of his nominated deputies shall include the following a monitoring with the assistance of sufficient mobile personnel and of sufficient other suitable and appropriate aids the flow of traffic within the area of the site b ensuring that within num minutes of notification of the occurrence of an incident resulting in stationary vehicles on a highway open to the public the incident is reported to the vehicle recovery service when vehicle recovery is in operation c recording and logging all incidents and all movements of recovery vehicles and when called all movements of the emergency services .
where an incident is a shed load vehicle breakdown vehicle abandonment or traffic accident whether or not the latter involves personal injury .
num statutory orders temporary traffic regulation orders num num unless otherwise detailed in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall submit a formal application to the appropriate authority for any temporary traffic regulation orders or other statutory orders required to be made or notices required to be published in connection with his traffic safety and management proposals .
the contractor shall comply with any procedural requirements given in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall allow for the notice periods required for obtaining and implementation of any temporary traffic regulation orders or other statutory orders in the programme of works .
where applications are to be made to the overseeing organisation the notice periods required shall be as given in contract specific appendix num .
num num where applications for temporary traffic regulation orders or other statutory orders are made by the overseeing organisation prior to the commencement of the works the contractor shall provide all necessary traffic safety and management measures to implement the orders .
num crossovers num num the contractor shall design construct and maintain or if contract specific appendix num so provides shall construct and maintain the central reserve crossovers described in contract specific appendix num in accordance with the information stated therein .
unless otherwise described in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall remove those crossovers when no longer required and reinstate the central reserve to its original condition .
num num if the contractor proposes to construct central reserve crossovers as part of his traffic safety and management proposals he shall submit such proposals to the overseeing organisation in advance in accordance with the requirements of subclause num of this clause .
volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries amendment may num nnum num driver information signs num num where required in contract specific appendix num the contractor shall provide erect maintain and remove driver information signs to diagrams num and num of the traffic signs regulations and northern ireland num in accordance with subclause num of this clause and chapter num of the traffic signs manual .
information signs shall only be displayed within roadworks where they accurately reflect the reason for the inactivity .
num num legends shall be selected as appropriate from those permitted and listed in chapter num of the traffic signs manual unless stated otherwise in contract specific appendix num .
sign num shall indicate how long delays are possible .
this date shall be updated by the contractor if necessary until the restrictions are removed .
sign num shall be located within roadworks when part of the road is coned off and the reason for this is not apparent from the carriageway for any period exceeding num minutes or one hour if road capacity is maintained .
however signs located within roadworks shall only be used where they can be located at least num metres beyond the downstream end of a taper and in a position which does not prejudice traffic safety .
if needed information signs shall be sited at the beginning and at one kilometre intervals through the works .
they shall not be placed where they may distract drivers negotiating traffic management provisions .
signs shall either be sited for the duration of the works where it is safe and appropriate to do so or provision made to enable their use at short notice .
the contractor shall provide adequate storage facilities clear of any safety zone .
storage within the central reserve or in front of safety barriers shall not be permitted .
num temporary automatic speed camera system tascar num num where required in contract specific appendix num a temporary automatic speed camera system for the enforcement of mandatory speed limits at roadworks tascar shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements and those given in contract specific appendix num .
the type of system and the number of speed monitoring sites and their locations shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall be responsible for the design installation commissioning maintenance and removal of the system .
this shall be undertaken using a suitably qualified enforcement equipment supplier ees .
the ees shall make all arrangements necessary for the provision and operation of the tascar system .
the contractor shall supply evidence of the ees qualifications to the overseeing organisation prior to the commencement of the works .
the equipment shall meet the requirements of the speedmeter handbook and have home office type approval hota for the purpose required .
the installation commissioning operation and maintenance of the system shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of the equipments hota .
all equipment and training necessary to bring the sites into operation shall be provided and installed by the contractor this shall include but not be limited to all equipment poles housings and power supplies .
the quantities of equipment required shall be as specified in contract specific appendix num.the contractor shall ensure that the system is completely installed and fully operational from the time defined in contract specific appendix num and that it remains in operation for the duration of the contract unless otherwise specified in contract specific appendix num and is removed on completion of the works .
the contractor shall commission any necessary third party certification of the system and shall supply copies of the certification to the overseeing organisation .
num num unless otherwise required by the equipments hota requirements the equipment and ancillary items shall be compatible with all permanent and temporary installations associated with the works .
num num the contractor shall liaise with the relevant enforcement authority ea to determine how the system for the scheme shall integrate with the eas existing facilities and operations .
the contractor shall comply with the overseeing organisations procedures with respect the liaison as described in contract specific appendix num .
the contractor shall submit details of the system to the overseeing organisation four weeks in advance of its operation for approval .
volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num num the tascar equipment shall consist of a hota detection and measuring device and ancillary equipment that allows day and night operation if a trailer mounted system is supplied it shall be fitted with retractable demountable wheels .
num num the contractor shall arrange for the provision of a mains electrical supply of adequate power capacity to all components of the system .
alternatively he may provide an equivalent supply from a local electrical generator or generators which shall be used only for this purpose .
such generators shall have electric start mechanisms and be adequately regulated as to voltage and frequency to suit the accuracy requirements of the equipment provided for tascar and be capable of running constantly for num hours without refuelling at an output of not less than that required by the equipment at num power factor or equivalent output .
all generators shall be housed in vandalproof containers and be securely locked .
one set of keys shall be provided to the ea .
generators may only be used when they will not adversely affect the equipmentsystems operations or the equipments hota requirements .
num num the housing and poles for the tascar equipment must be as required for the specific hota for that equipment and shall include securitylocking mechanisms to prevent unauthorised access or operation .
num num the contractor shall install the polesmastscabinets or trailers required at each individual speed monitoring location any installation shall be within highway limits .
num num at completion of the works the contractor shall remove all tascar equipment and reinstate ground as described in contract specific appendix num .
num num the contractor shall ensure that suitable access arrangements are in place at each speed monitoring site including vehicle hard standings walkways and steps where necessary to allow for general maintenance and servicing of the camera unit .
where supplied suitable provisions shall be made for installing and recovering trailers .
num num the contractor shall ensure that the camera poles are located in accordance with road restraint systems requirements detailed in td num .
num num the contractor shall ensure that the site reference number is clearly indicated on both the installation and on the road surface within the field of view of the cameras .
site reference numbers should be agreed with the ea .
num num any ducting provision loop or piezo installation shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant clauses of series num and num of the specification .
num num the contractor shall be responsible for the commissioning of the tascar as a whole including secondary and in station checks .
the contractor shall where required as part of the hota provide a secondary method of confirming the speed calculation .
num num the commissioning of the tascar shall be carried out in the presence of and for acceptance by the ea and shall be in accordance with any particular requirements in contract specific appendix num the commissioning shall only be complete when each site and where applicable the overall system is accepted as being operational by the ea .
the contractor shall give notice to the overseeing organisation of his intention to carry out this work unless otherwise stated in contract specific appendix num this shall be not less than four days in advance of the intended time for the commissioning .
an evidential trail et which meets all the requirements as stated in contract specific appendix num including commissioning certificates shall be provided by the contractor to the overseeing organisation and shall include one pair of photographs or video images for acceptance by the ea as part of the commissioning and acceptance procedure of the system .
the contractor shall ensure that all relevant requirements of the evidential trails for enforcement systems documents are achieved .
num num cameras sited on the nearside of the carriageway shall be installed and commissioned prior to num hour lane closures being put into operation .
cameras sited in the central reserve shall be installed and commissioned not later than num hours after installation of the contraflow .
both sets of cameras shall then remain in continuous operation until a completion certificate has been issued for the whole of the works .
at the end of the period of operation required under the contract the equipment shall remain the property of the contractor .
num num following commissioning the tascar operator will be the ea .
the contractor shall provide assistance to the ea for the repositioning of the speed monitoring equipment between the housings or switching of detection equipment between zones and servicing as and when requested by the ea .
any repositioning during the works that requires that the equipment parameters are changed must be supported by the issue of a calibration certificate by the contractor to the ea .
amendment may num nnum volume num series num specification for highway works preliminaries num num all evidential media from speed monitoring sites will remain the property of the ea .
the scheme et documents shall be kept up to date by the contractor .
num num the contractor shall provide and install all necessary speed limit signing in connection with the operation of the tascar system any signing used shall either be prescribed or where necessary authorised .
the contractor shall provide the ea through the overseeing organisation with a two hourly log showing the locations of all the speed limit and speed limit repeater signs relative to existing marker posts .
a repeater sign shall be positioned such that one is visible in each photograph .
where there is a numhour cctv system installed that is monitoring all speed limit and repeater signs this log can be compiled remotely .
num num where digital hota equipment is used the contractor will provide either the communications service to transfer data and control the device or appropriate media such as worm write once read many drives cds memory sticks as appropriate and in quantities required by the ea for the use of the equipment for the duration of the works .
if hota nummm wet film systems are used the film will be supplied to the ea by the contractor typically at the rate of one film per day per live camera in operation plus ten which shall be supplied at the commencement of the works .
amendment may num nnumf
