standard specifications for roads and bridges connecting south dakota and the nation num south dakota department of transportation this page intentionally left blank table of contents section page page i division i general provisions num definitions and terms num num wording of the specifications num num titles or headings num num references num num abbreviations num num definitions num num bidding requirements and conditions num num prequalification of bidders num num electronic identification num num issuance of bidding package num num contents of bidding package num num interpretation of quantities in bidding package num num examination of plans specifications special provisions and site of work num num preparation of bid proposal num num bid proposal guaranty num num bidder submitted bid proposal limitations num num submission of bid proposal num num withdrawal or revision of proposal prior to letting num num combination bidding packages num num public opening of bid proposals num num award and execution of contract num num consideration of bid proposals num num irregular bid proposals num num dismissal of bid proposal num num award of contract num num cancellation of award num num bid proposal guaranty num num requirements of contract performance bond num num execution and approval of contract num num failure to execute contract num num material guaranty num num scope of work num num intent of contract num num differing site conditions num num significant changes in the character of work num num extra work num num maintenance of traffic num num rights in and use of materials found on the work num num final cleaning up num num value engineering incentive num table of contents section page page ii num control of work num num authority of the engineer num num plans and working drawings num num conformity with plans and specifications num num coordination of contract documents num num cooperation by contractor num num cooperation with utilities num num cooperation between contractors num num construction stakes lines and grades num num authority and duties of area engineer num num duties of the inspector num num inspection of work num num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized work num num weight limitations num num maintenance during construction num num failure to maintain roadway or structure num num acceptance of field work num num claims for adjustment and disputes num num control of material num num source of supply and quality requirements num num local material sources and sites num num samples tests cited specifications num num plant inspection num num storage of materials num num handling materials num num unacceptable material num num department furnished material num num buy america num num legal relations and responsibility to public num num laws to be observed num num permits licenses and taxes num num patented devices materials and processes num num restoration of surfaces opened by permit num num federal aid participation num num sanitary health and safety provisions num num public convenience and safety num num railwayhighway provisions num num construction over or adjacent to navigable waters num num barricades and warning signs num num use of explosives num num protection and restoration of property and landscape num num forest protection num num responsibility for damage claims num num liability insurance num num opening sections of project to traffic num num contractors responsibility for work num table of contents section page page iii num furnishing rightofway num num personal liability of departments authorized representatives num num no waiver of legal rights num num environmental considerations and cooperation with environmental regulatory agencies num num sound control requirements num num americans with disabilities act num num prosecution and progress num num subcontracting num num notice to proceed num num prosecution and progress num num limitation of operations num num character of workers methods and equipment num num determination of contract time num num extension of contract time num num failure to complete on time num num suspension of work ordered by the engineer num num default and termination of contract num num termination of contract num num measurement and payment num num measurement of quantities num num scope of payment num num payment for extra haul of materials num num compensation for altered quantities num num extra and force account work num num eliminated items num num progress payments num num payment for materials delivered to project num num final acceptance and final payment num num mobilization num num freight rates num num fuel cost adjustment num num prompt payment and retainage num division ii construction details part a earthwork num clearing and grubbing num num removal of structures and obstructions num num roadway and drainage excavation and embankment construction num num dust control num table of contents section page page iv num roadway shaping num num salvaging stockpiling and placing topsoil num num obliterating old roads num num incidental work num part b granular bases and surfacing num granular bases and surfacing num num salvaging processing and stockpiling granular bases and asphalt concrete mix materials num num full depth reclamation fdr num part c asphalt construction num asphalt concrete general num num asphalt concrete class d e g num num asphalt concrete class q new section num num asphalt concrete composite num num asphalt concrete class s num num asphalt concrete class hr num num prime tack fog seal and flush seal num num cold milling asphalt concrete num num asphalt concrete crack sealing num num asphalt surface treatment num num cold in place recycling cir of asphalt concrete num part d rigid pavement num portland cement concrete pavement num num concrete spall repair num num undersealing num table of contents section page page v num pavement jacking num num cracking and seating of pcc pavement num num rubblize pcc pavement new section num part e structures num steel structures num num shop painting num num bridge field painting repainting and paint residue containment num num structure excavation num num box pipe and plate pipe culvert undercutting num num drainage fabric protection for cast in place reinforced concrete box culverts .. num num temporary works num num bridge end backfill num num approach slab underdrain system new section num num structural plate pipe and structural plate pipe arch culverts num num pipe culverts num num structural concrete num num concrete for incidental construction class m num num controlled density fill new section num num drilled shaft construction num num railing num num reinforcing steel num num bridge deck polymer chip seal num num timber prestressed and steel piles num num bridge deck preparation and resurfacing num table of contents section page page vi num precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete num part f incidental construction num field laboratory num num haul roads num num fly ash num num cattle guards num num rightofway fencing num num chain link fencing num num cable guardrail num num steel beam guardrail num num highway signs and delineators num num pavement marking num num temporary traffic control num num traffic signals and roadway lighting num num concrete curb and gutter num num concrete sidewalk num num drop inlets num num manholes num num underdrains num num riprap num num bank and channel protection gabions num num seeding num num fertilizing num num mulching num table of contents section page page vii num sodding num num erosion control and water pollution control num num aggregate for maintenance stockpiles num division iii materials details num portland cement num num airentraining admixtures num num chemical admixtures for concrete num num fly ash num num hydrated lime num num calcium chloride num num sodium chloride num num water for use in portland cement concrete num num fine aggregate for use in portland cement concrete num num materials for polymer chip seals num num masonry mortar sand and epoxy resin mortar sand num num coarse aggregate for use in portland cement concrete num num concrete curing materials num num riprap num num geotextiles and impermeable plastic membrane num num select granular backfill num num preformed expansion joint filler for concrete num num concrete joint sealer num num asphalt concrete crack sealant new section num num blotting sand num table of contents section page page viii num aggregates for asphalt concrete num num aggregates for asphalt surface treatments num num aggregates for granular bases and surfacing num num clay num num milled reclaimed and salvaged material new section num num asphalt material num num dust control chlorides num num rightofway fence num num chain link fence num num wood preservatives and preservative treatments num num timber piling num num steel structures material num num bolts num num paint num num glass beads num num materials for highway signs and delineators num num cold applied plastic pavement marking and legends num num temporary traffic control devices num num traffic signals and roadway lighting num num pipe culverts and drainage tubing num num concrete reinforcement num num gabions num num steel sheet piling num num steel sheeting num division i num general provisions definitions and terms page num num wording of the specifications when the contract provides that work will be contemplated required determined directed specified authorized ordered given designated indicated considered necessary deemed necessary permitted reserved suspended established approval approved disapproved acceptable unacceptable suitable accepted satisfactory unsatisfactory sufficient insufficient rejected or condemned these expressions will be construed to be followed by the words by the engineer or to the engineer unless the contents of the specification clearly indicates otherwise .
whenever the term provide is used in these specifications it will be interpreted to mean both furnish and install .
num titles or headings the titles or headings of the sections and subsections in the specifications are intended for convenience of reference and will not have any bearing on their interpretation .
num references the specifications rely on many cross references both to internal sources in the specifications and external sources in other contract documents department manuals and other industry resources .
if the contract documents reference an external publication the department intends that the reference be to the most recent issue including interim publications at the time of the letting unless the contract specifies otherwise .
each contract item listed in the contract references to a section number from the specifications therefore all of the provisions of the referenced section relevant to the proper completion of the contract item are binding upon the contractor .
this includes the requirements found in the general subsections as well as those specific requirements listed thereafter .
within the specifications references to other sections and subsections of the specifications apply the same as if they were a part of the specification section or subsection from which they were referenced .
a crossreference to a specific subsection of these specifications includes all general requirements of the section of which the subsection is a part .
num abbreviations the following abbreviations used in these specifications or other contract documents aar association of american railroads aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials ac asphalt cement aci american concrete institute ada americans with disabilities act adt average daily traffic agc associated general contractors of america aia american institute of architects aisc american institute of steel construction aisi american iron and steel institute num definitions and terms page num anla american nursery and landscape association ansi american national standards institute ara american railway association area american railway engineering association asce american society of civil engineers asla american society of landscape architects astm american society for testing and materials atssa american traffic safety services association awpa american wood protection association awwa american water works association aws american welding society bia bureau of indian affairs bmp best management practices cmp sd dot construction measurement and payment system cfr code of federal regulations dbe disadvantaged business enterprise eeo equal employment opportunity esal equivalent single axle load epa environmental protection agency faa federal aviation administration fhwa federal highway administration gsa general services administration hdpe high density polyethylene ia independent assurance icc interstate commerce commission icea insulated cable engineers association ite institute on transportation engineers jmf job mix formula led light emitting diodes mst sd dot materials sampling testing system mash manual for assessing safety hardware mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices nchrp national cooperative highway research program nec national electrical code nema national electrical manufacturers association nepa national environmental policy act nhtsa national highway traffic safety administration ntpep national transportation product evaluation program noi notice of intent not notice of termination osha occupational safety health administration pcc portland cement concrete pcn project control number psi pounds per square inch pvc polyvinylchloride pvc pipe qa quality assurance qc quality control rap reclaimed asphalt pavement definitions and terms num page num rca recycled concrete pavementaggregate retma radio electronic television manufacturers association row rightofway sae society of automotive engineers international sdebs south dakota department of transportation electronic bid system shpo state historical preservation office sspc the society of protective coatings swppp storm water pollution and prevention plan ul underwriters laboratory usace united states army corps of engineers usfs united states forest service usfws united states fish and wildlife service num definitions act of god an unforeseeable act event or happening resulting from natural causes including but not limited to earthquake tornado or other cataclysmic phenomena .
addendum changes to the bidding package issued by the contracting agency prior to the time of opening of bid proposals .
advertisement a public announcement inviting bid proposals for work to be performed or materials to be furnished .
area engineer see engineer .
award the departments acceptance of a bid proposal .
base course the layer or layers of specified select material placed on a subbase or a subgrade to support a surface course .
bidder an individual partnership firm corporation or an acceptable combination thereof such as a joint venture submitting a bid proposal for performance of prescribed work .
bid proposal the bidders offer on the prescribed form to furnish materials or to perform the work at the prices quoted .
bid proposal guaranty the security furnished with a bid proposal to guarantee the bidder will enter into the contract if the bid proposal is accepted .
bid schedule the list of bid items together with estimated quantities appearing in the bidding package .
bridge a structure including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction such as water highway or railway said structure having a length measured along the center of roadway of more than num feet between undercopings of abutments or extreme num definitions and terms page num ends of openings for multiple boxes and pipes where the clear distance between openings is less than half of the smaller contiguous opening .
bridge length the greater dimension of a structure measured along the center of the roadway between backs of abutment backwalls or between ends of bridge floor .
bridge roadway width the clear width of structure measured at right angles to the center of the roadway between the bottom of curbs or if curbs are not used between the inner faces of parapet or railing .
business day see day .
calendar day see day .
change order a written order issued by the engineer to the contractor covering changes in the plans specifications or quantities within the scope of the contract and establishing the basis of payment and time adjustments for the work affected by the changes .
commission the transportation commission as constituted under the laws of south dakota .
contract the written agreement between the department and the contractor setting forth the obligations of the parties for the performance of the prescribed work .
the contract includes the following addenda bidding package bid proposal bid proposal guaranty bid schedule contract form change orders contract items pay items contract performance bond contract time contract unit prices notice to contractors notice to proceed plans general and detailed project question and answer qa form proposal forms standard specifications supplemental specifications special provisions working drawings written orders and agreements required to complete construction of the work including authorized extensions of time all of which constitute one instrument .
contract item pay item a specific unit of work for which a price is provided in the contract .
major contract item a contract item having a contract value greater than num of the original contract amount .
minor contract item a contract item that is not a major contract item .
a minor contract item becomes a major contract item when the total cost of the contract item increases to more than num of the original contract amount .
definitions and terms num page num specialty item any designated contract item that requires specialized knowledge ability or equipment not ordinarily required with the major type of work specified in the contract .
contract performance bond the security executed by the contractor and furnished to the department to guarantee performance of the work in accordance with the contract .
contract time the working day count calendar day count fixed calendar date or a combination of day count and fixed calendar date allowed for completion of the work included in the contract .
contract unit price the price bid per unit specified for a contract item as included in the contract .
contractor the individual partnership firm corporation or joint venture contracting with the department for performance of prescribed work .
employee any person working on the project covered by the contract that is under the direction of control of or receives compensation from the contractor or a subcontractor .
subcontractor an individual partnership firm corporation or joint venture to which the contractor subcontracts part of the contract .
project manager a contractor employee that is the designated decision making authority for the contractor and subcontractors .
project superintendent the contractors authorized representative in responsible charge of the contract work and directs the daily project operations .
crew foreman see crew superintendent crew superintendent an employee of the contractor or subcontractor that directs a group of employees working for the contractor or subcontractor to complete a specific type of work the contractor or subcontractor has contracted to complete .
surety the corporation partnership or individual other than the contractor executing a bond furnished by the contractor .
commercial source an established lawful business operating in continual use at the time of bid opening as a source to the general public of materials or products relevant to the project .
controlling item any item of work which would normally be in progress and would control the completion of the project .
num definitions and terms page num county a subdivision of the state used to designate or identify the location of the project .
crew foreman see contractor .
crew superintendent see contractor .
crushed material granular material with one or more crushed faces on at least num of the particles retained on the num sieve unless more stringent requirements are specified in the contract .
culvert a structure not classified as a bridge which provides an opening under the roadway .
day the contract will specify the type of day pertinent to the specification .
if no type is specified a calendar day will be used .
business day any calendar day except saturdays holidays and days designated by the governor of this state as an administrative leave day for state employees .
calendar day a day shown on the calendar beginning and ending at midnight .
every day including saturdays holidays and days designated by the governor of this state as an administrative leave day for state employees are considered calendar days .
working day see section num .
department the south dakota department of transportation as constituted under the laws of south dakota .
employee see contractor .
engineer the engineer acting through the director of operations or through an authorized representative responsible for engineering supervision of the contract work .
region engineer a representative of the director of operations acting under the supervision of the director of operations and in charge of assigned operations within a designated region .
area engineer a representative of the director of operations acting under the supervision of the region engineer and in charge of assigned operations within a designated area .
engineering supervisor a representative of the director of operations acting under the supervision of the area engineer and in charge of assigned operations within a designated area .
definitions and terms num page num project engineer a representative of the director of operations acting under the supervision of the engineering supervisor and responsible for engineering supervision of the contract work .
engineering supervisor see engineer .
equipment machinery tools implements or apparatus together with supplies for maintenance and upkeep necessary for the construction and completion of the project .
erosion control those items necessary to the completed highway which provide for the preservation of landscape materials and features .
the rehabilitation and protection against erosion of areas disturbed by construction through seeding sodding mulching and the placing of other ground covers .
such suitable planting and other improvements as may increase the effectiveness and enhance the appearance of the highway and adherence to water quality regulations .
estimate of quantities plan shown summary of the estimated quantities of work necessary to complete the project .
extra work an item of work not provided for in the contract as awarded but found by the engineer essential to the satisfactory completion of the contract within the contracts intended scope .
extra work authorization an agreement between the department and the contractor to perform extra work at an agreed price or on a force account basis .
holiday in the state of south dakota the first day of every week known as sunday the first day of january commonly known as new years day the third monday in january commonly known as martin luther king jr. day the third monday in february commonly known as presidents day the last monday of may commonly known as memorial day the fourth day of july commonly known as independence day the first monday in september commonly known as labor day the second monday in october commonly known as native american day the eleventh day of november commonly known as veterans day the fourth thursday in november commonly known as thanksgiving day and the twenty fifth day of december commonly known as christmas day and every day designated by the president of the united states or by the governor of this state for a public fast thanksgiving or holiday will be observed as a legal holiday .
if the first day of january the fourth day of july the eleventh day of november or the twentyfifth day of december falls upon a sunday the monday following is a legal holiday and will be so observed .
if any such day falls upon a saturday the preceding friday is also a legal holiday and both friday and saturday will be so observed .
inspector the engineers authorized representative assigned to make detailed inspections of contract performance .
laboratory the departments testing laboratory or other testing laboratory which may be designated by the engineer .
num definitions and terms page num letting letting date the time and date specified for the opening of bid proposal by the notice to contractors in the bidding package .
regional letting department managed lettings conducted without the use of the sdebs .
sdebs letting department managed lettings conducted with the use of the sdebs .
major contract item see contract item .
materially unbalanced bid see unbalanced bid .
materials substances specified for use in the construction of the project .
mathematically unbalanced bid see unbalanced bid .
minor contract item see contract item .
notice of award written notice to the contractor stating the departments acceptance of the bid proposal and the departments award of the contract .
notice to contractors the advertisement for bid proposals for work or materials .
the advertisement will indicate with reasonable accuracy the quantity and location of the work to be done or the character and estimated quantity of the material to be furnished and the time and place of the opening of bid proposals .
notice to proceed written notice to the contractor to begin with the contract work .
pavement structure the combination of subbase base course and surface course placed on a subgrade to support and distribute the traffic load to the roadbed .
plan quantity the quantity of a contract item shown on the bid item file and the plans .
plans the contract drawings showing the location character and dimensions of the prescribed work including plan notes layouts profiles cross sections and contract documents .
prequalification statement the forms on which the contractor will furnish required information as to the contractors ability to perform and finance work .
profile grade the trace of a vertical plane usually intersecting the top surface of the proposed subgrade surface usually along the longitudinal centerline of the roadbed .
profile grade means either elevation or gradient of such trace according to the context .
definitions and terms num page num project the specific location area or section of the highway together with all appurtenances and construction to be performed under the contract .
project control number pcn a number generated by the department for project tracking .
found on the cover sheet of the plans .
project manager see contractor .
project superintendent see contractor .
project number a number generated by the department containing coded project data .
found on the cover sheet of the plans .
project question and answer qa forum an online medium for project specific questions and answers between prospective bidders and the department .
proposal form the prescribed form on which the bidders offer is submitted .
region engineer see engineer .
regional letting see letting .
responsive bid proposal a bid proposal that meets all requirements of the proposal package .
responsible bidder a bidder whose bid proposal meets all of the departments bidding requirements .
rightofway a general term denoting the property interest acquired for or devoted to a highway use .
road a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the rightofway .
roadbed the graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
roadside a general term denoting the area adjoining the outer edge of the roadway .
extensive areas between the roadways of a divided highway may also be considered roadside .
roadway the portion of a highway within limits of construction .
sdebs letting see letting .
num definitions and terms page num shoulder the portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles emergency use and lateral support of base and surface courses .
sidewalk that portion of the roadway primarily constructed for use by pedestrians .
special provisions see specifications .
specifications a general term applied to all directions provisions and requirements pertaining to performance of the work .
special provisions additions and revisions to the standard and supplemental specifications applicable to an individual project .
standard specifications a book of specifications approved for general applications and repetitive use .
supplemental specifications approved additions and revisions to the standard specifications .
standard specifications see specifications .
state the state of south dakota acting through its authorized representative .
street a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the rightofway .
structures bridges culverts catch basins drop inlets retaining walls cribbing manholes endwalls buildings sewers service pipes underdrains foundation drains and other features which may be encountered in the work and not otherwise classified .
subbase the layer or layers of specified or selected material of designated thickness placed on a subgrade to support a base course or a surface course .
subcontractor see contractor .
subgrade the top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders including curbs are constructed .
substructure that part of a structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewback of arches and top of the footings of rigid frames including backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
for reinforced concrete slab bridges that portion below the deck slab .
superintendent see contractor .
superstructure the entire structure except the substructure .
definitions and terms num page num supplemental specifications see specifications .
surety see contractor .
surface course one or more layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
the top layer sometimes called wearing course .
township city town or district a subdivision of the county used to designate or identify the location of the project .
traffic vehicles pedestrians and other modes of transportation .
unbalanced bid a bid proposal that does not reflect the true cost of providing the material equipment and labor required to complete the contract item .
materially unbalanced bid a bid proposal in which there is reasonable doubt award to the bidder submitting the mathematically unbalanced bid will result in the lowest ultimate cost to the department .
mathematically unbalanced bid a bid proposal containing contract unit prices that do not reflect reasonable actual costs plus a reasonable proportionate share of the bidders anticipated profit overhead costs and other indirect costs which the bidder anticipates for the performance of the contract items in question .
traveled way the portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders .
work the providing of all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to the successful completion of the project in accordance with the contract .
working drawings shop drawings shop plans erection plans falsework plans framework plans bending diagrams for reinforcing steel or supplementary plans or similar data which the contractor is required to submit to the engineer for review .
written order an order issued in writing by the engineer of a contractual status requiring performance by the contractor without negotiation of any sort .
num definitions and terms page num this page intentionally left blank bidding requirements and conditions num page num num prequalification of bidders prequalification on state highway construction contracts is required unless the amount being bid is less than num .
a prospective bidder must be prequalified prior to the time and date specified for bid opening .
a prospective bidder may apply for prequalification by completing and executing a contractors prequalification statement on a form approved by the department .
this application must be received by the departments classification and rating committee at least num calendar days prior to the letting date .
once prequalified the department will issue a notice to the prospective bidder stating the prospective bidders approved work classification or work classifications the prospective bidders overall bidding capacity the prospective bidders per contract bidding capacity and the prospective bidders expiration date for prequalification status .
the complete prequalification requirements are contained in south dakota administrative rule num .
num electronic identification for contracts let using the south dakota electronic bid system sdebs a prospective bidder must register as a new user on the departments website to obtain a company identification and password .
certain bidding documents will only be available for download with proper company identification and password .
each company will receive one company identification and password .
in addition to the company identification and password a prospective bidder must obtain a bidder identification and password for each individual who will be authorized to submit a bid proposal on behalf of the company .
to authorize an individual to submit a bid proposal on behalf of the company and obtain the bidder identifications and passwords the company must complete a bidding authorization form available on the departments website furnishing all required information and all appropriate notarized signatures and submit the form to the department no later than num hours prior to the bid opening .
the individual receiving this bidder identification and password must be an authorized agent of the company having legal authority to do business for the company .
num issuance of bidding package the department will issue bidding packages for projects let using the regional letting process and the sdebs letting process .
for contracts let using the sdebs letting process the department will not place restrictions on who may download the bidding package except certain documents will require a company identification described in section num .
the bidder must verify the bidders prequalification status prior to bidding .
the department will verify bidder status in accordance with section num prior to opening bids .
num contents of bidding package the bidding package consists of the proposal booklet plans electronic design files specifications special provisions supplemental specifications addenda project question and answer qa forum and electronic bid files .
the bidding package will state the location and description of the contemplated construction show the estimate of the various quantities and type of work to be performed num bidding requirements and conditions page num or materials to be furnished and will have a schedule of items for which unit bid prices are invited .
the bidding package will state the time in which the contract work must be completed the time and date deadline for submitting the required bid proposals and prequalification requirements .
a .
regional lettings pages bound or attached to the bidding package by the department are considered a part of the bidding package and must not be detached or altered when the bid proposal is submitted except the bidder may attach a substitute bid schedule as provided in section num .
plans specifications and other documents included by reference in the bidding package will be considered a part of the bidding package whether attached or not .
b. sdebs lettings prospective bidders must refer to the sddot website to acquire the bidding package .
the department will open the project qa forum when the project is advertised for letting .
prospective bidders are responsible for periodically checking the project qa forum for new questions and answers .
the department will post questions and answers but will provide no additional notification of the posting of questions and answers .
prospective bidders may post new questions to the project qa forum until num am ct on the friday prior to the letting at which time prospective bidders will be locked from further posting .
the department may post new questions and answers to the project qa forum up until num am ct on the tuesday prior to the letting at which time the project qa forum will be final and locked from all editing .
in submitting a complete and final bid a prospective bidder will be deemed to have accounted for any and all information posted to the final project qa forum regardless of when the prospective bidder submits a bid proposal .
num interpretation of quantities in bidding package the quantities appearing in the bidding package are estimates and are prepared for the comparison of bids .
the engineer will make payment to the contractor for the actual quantities of work performed or materials furnished in accordance with the contract .
the estimated quantities of work to be done and materials to be furnished may each be increased decreased or deleted as provided in these specifications .
num examination of plans specifications special provisions and site of work the bidder must examine the project site and the entire bidding package for the work contemplated .
the bidders submission of a bid proposal will be considered conclusive evidence the bidder has investigated and is satisfied as to the conditions to be encountered the character quality and quantities of work to be performed and materials to be furnished according to all contract documents .
boring logs and other records of subsurface investigations are available for inspection by prospective bidders upon request .
prospective bidders must understand this information was obtained and is intended for department design and estimating purposes only .
the department can not guarantee the accuracy of this information .
this information is made available so all prospective bidders have access to the same subsurface information bidding requirements and conditions num page num available to the department .
the furnishing of this information is not intended as a substitute for the prospective bidders personal investigation interpretation and judgment .
the department will not be bound by any statement or representation made by any department employee or agent prior to the execution of the contract unless included in the bidding package .
a prospective bidder must request any explanation regarding the meaning or interpretation of the bidding package in adequate time to allow a department reply to reach all prospective bidders before submission of final bid proposals .
a .
regional lettings for contracts let using the regional letting process the bidder will contact the office responsible for the letting .
the department may answer the request for explanation by issuing an addendum to all prospective bidders as deemed appropriate by the department in its sole discretion .
the department will make any addendum available to all prospective bidders before the time specified for opening of bid proposals .
the bidder will not take advantage of any apparent error omission or ambiguity in the bidding package .
if the bidder discovers an error omission or ambiguity the bidder will immediately notify the department of the apparent error omission or ambiguity and its perceived consequences .
the bidder will notify the department by contacting the region office responsible for the letting .
the department may certify the error omission or ambiguity and may issue an addendum to all prospective bidders as deemed appropriate by the department in its sole discretion .
the department will make any addendum available to all prospective bidders before the time specified for opening of bid proposals .
b. sdebs lettings for contracts let using the sdebs the bidder will contact the department by submitting a request for explanation to the project qa forum .
if the deadline for submitting questions to the project qa forum has passed the bidder will submit the request for explanation to the department bid letting office .
the department may answer the request for explanation on the project qa forum or issue an addendum to all prospective bidders as deemed appropriate by the department in its sole discretion .
the department will furnish any addendum to all prospective bidders by electronic addendum before the time specified for opening of bid proposals .
the bidder will not take advantage of any apparent error omission or ambiguity in the bidding package .
if the bidder discovers an error omission or ambiguity the bidder will immediately notify the department of the apparent error omission or ambiguity and its perceived consequences .
the bidder will notify the department by submitting a question to the project qa forum .
if the deadline for submitting questions to the project qa forum has passed the bidder will notify the department bid letting office .
the department may certify the error omission or ambiguity and may answer the question on the project qa forum or issue an addendum to all prospective bidders as deemed appropriate by the department in its sole discretion .
the department will furnish any addendum to all prospective bidders by electronic addendum before the time specified for opening of bid proposals .
num bidding requirements and conditions page num num preparation of bid proposal the bidder will prepare the bid proposal as described in the following a .
regional lettings the bidder will prepare the bid proposal on the forms furnished by the department .
the bidder will specify a unit price in numerals for each pay item for which a quantity is given show the products of the respective unit prices and quantities written in numerals in the column provided for that purpose and show the total amount of the bid proposal obtained by adding the amounts of all products .
numerals will be in ink or typed .
the department will refer to section num in case of a discrepancy between the unit prices written in numerals for a pay item the resultant product and the total amount of the bid proposal .
the bidder must specify a unit price in numerals for each bid item for which a quantity is given .
a unit price can not be num .
in case of a discrepancy between the line number bid item description or quantity shown in the bid proposal and the corresponding item shown in the plans the bid item description and the quantity shown in the bid proposal will govern .
when the bidding package contains an alternate bid item or groups of alternate bid items the bidder must indicate a choice for each available item or group in accordance with the proposal for the particular item or group .
the bidders bid proposal must be signed by the individual by one or more members of the partnership by one or more members or officers of each firm representing a joint venture by one or more officers of a corporation or by an agent of the contractor legally having a power of attorney .
if signing pursuant to a power of attorney the agent must be qualified and acceptable to the department and a copy of the power of attorney must be attached to the bid proposal or previously filed with the department .
if the bid proposal is made by an individual the individuals name and post office address must be shown if by a partnership the name and post office address of each partnership member must be shown if by a joint venture the name and post office address of each member or officer of the firms represented by the joint venture must be shown if by a corporation the name and business address of the corporation must be shown .
the bidder may attach a substitute bid schedule in lieu of completing the original bid schedule provided all of the provisions of this section are complied with .
if the bidder uses a substitute bid schedule the bidder will attach the substitute bid schedule to the original bid schedule .
the bidder will include the following at the top of each page of the substitute bid schedule letting date project number pcn county type of work bidders name and address bidding requirements and conditions num page num the substitute bid schedule will have the following column headings line number item description estimated quantity unit designation unit bid price and amount bid for each item .
the substitute bid schedule will include total or gross sum bid below the last bid item .
the substitute bid schedule will be in the legal name of the bidder and include the signature and title of an authorized representative as required by this section .
the original bid schedule does not need to be signed when using a substitute bid schedule unless the original bid schedule is used to authorize additional signatures .
the bidder will also include the total or gross sum bid on the original bid schedule .
in case of a discrepancy between the line number bid item description or quantity shown in the original bid schedule and that shown for any of these entries on the substitute bid schedule the line number bid item description and the quantity shown in the original bid schedule will govern .
the unit bid price shown for each line number on the substitute bid schedule will govern whether or not the product shown is correct .
the substitute bid schedule page size and size of printed characters will be approximately the same as the original bid schedule .
solid lines for separating columns and line numbers need not be printed .
at least one blank line or space will separate each line number .
columns may be arranged either vertically or horizontally on the substitute bid schedule .
pages must be arranged and numbered sequentially .
b. sdebs lettings the bidder must prepare and submit a bid proposal using the latest version of the sdebs .
a prospective bidder may obtain the latest version of the sdebs software from the department website .
the bidder must specify a unit price in numerals for each bid item for which a quantity is given .
a unit price can not be num .
when the bidding package contains an alternate bid item or groups of alternate bid items the bidder must indicate a choice for each available group by entering unit prices for all bid items within the alternate chosen .
the bidder must complete all required fields in the sdebs .
if the bidder does not completely fill out all required fields the department may consider the bid irregular and reject the bid proposal in accordance with section num .
for bidding purposes in case of a discrepancy between the bid item description or quantity shown in the sdebs and the corresponding item shown in the plans the bid item description and the quantity shown in the sdebs will govern .
num bid proposal guaranty the bidder will secure a bid proposal guaranty as described in the following a .
regional lettings no bid proposal will be considered unless accompanied by a guaranty of the character and the amount indicated in the bid proposal form .
b. sdebs lettings the department will not consider any bid proposal unless the bidder has furnished the department a guaranty in the amount of num of the total amount of the bid prior to opening of the bids .
satisfactory forms of proposal guaranties are certified num bidding requirements and conditions page num checks cashiers checks bank drafts issued upon a national or state bank and bid bonds issued in accordance with south dakota law .
if the bidder uses an electronic bid bond the bidder must submit the bid bond identification number with the bid proposal .
unless otherwise specified in the bidding package the proposal guaranty must be made payable at sight to the south dakota department of transportation .
num bidder submitted bid proposal limitations a bidder may submit a written statement providing limitation of work for a single bid letting date .
the bidder must submit the written bid proposal limitation statement to the department prior to the time and date set for opening the bid proposals .
a bidder may submit a written statement providing limitation of work for bid proposals submitted in subsequent bid proposal openings provided the department has not awarded contracts from an earlier bid letting date by the time of the latter bid letting date and the bidder submits the written bid proposal limitation statement to the department prior to the time and date set for opening bid proposals of the latter bid letting date .
a written bid proposal limitation statement must include the following information a .
identification of the bidders company name and name and title of the employee submitting the bid proposal limitation statement b .
identification of the bid proposal opening date or dates and the contracts for which the limitations apply and c. a statement of the total dollar volume of work or number of contracts acceptable to the bidder .
if a bidder submits a bid proposal limitation statement and becomes the apparent low bidder on multiple contracts exceeding the limitations the bidder has set forth the department will determine in its sole discretion which contract or contracts will be awarded to the bidder within the limitations set by the bidder .
num submission of bid proposal the bidder will submit the bid proposal as described in the following a .
regional lettings the bidder will place the bid proposal in a sealed envelope plainly marked to indicate its contents .
when sent by mail the bidder will address the sealed proposal to the department in care of the official responsible for the letting .
the bidder will file the bid proposal prior to the time and date and at the place specified by the notice to contractors .
the department will not accept any bid proposal received after the time and date specified for opening of bid proposals and will return any late bid proposal to the bidder unopened .
b. sdebs lettings a bidder must submit a bid proposal electronically using the sdebs to the departments secure bid submission site prior to the time and date specified by the notice to contractors in the bidding package .
the department will not accept any bid proposal received after the time specified for opening of bid proposals .
bidding requirements and conditions num page num num withdrawal or revision of bid proposal prior to letting a bidder may withdraw or revise a bid proposal after it has been submitted if the withdrawal is made before the time set for opening bid proposals and according to the following a .
regional lettings a bidder may withdraw or revise a bid proposal after it has been deposited with the department if the request for withdrawal or revision is received by the department in writing before the time set for opening bid proposals .
b. sdebs lettings a bidder may withdraw or revise and resubmit a bid proposal any time prior to the time and date set for opening the proposals .
the department will consider only the last bid proposal submitted as a valid bid proposal for the letting item .
a bidder may withdraw or revise and resubmit a bid proposal only through the departments secure bid proposal submission site .
num combination bidding packages when required in the bidding package the department will require a bidder to submit a bid proposal for multiple bidding packages in combination .
the department will consider award of the contracts based on the total of the combination of the bid proposals .
the department will not consider a combination bid proposal other than as specified .
the department will write a separate contract for each project included in the combination .
num public opening of bid proposals the department will open and read bid proposals according to the following a .
regional lettings the department will open and read bid proposals publicly at the time date and place indicated by the notice to contractors .
b. sdebs lettings the department will open and read bid proposals at the time and date set for opening the bid proposals .
the department will check all bid proposals for qualifications and will post the results on the departments website .
num bidding requirements and conditions page num this page intentionally left blank award and execution of contract num page num num consideration of bid proposals at the time of opening bid proposals the department will verify the bidder is prequalified for the specified work type and the bidders bidding capacity at that time is sufficient to handle the work for which the bidder submitted a bid proposal .
the department reserves the right to refuse to accept a bid proposal for any of the following reasons a .
lack of competency or adequate machinery plant or other equipment as shown by the contractors prequalification statement b .
uncompleted work which the department determines in its sole discretion may hinder or prevent the prompt completion of additional work c. failure to pay or satisfactorily settle any legal obligation due for labor or material on any contract at the time of issuance of proposals d. failure to comply with the departments prequalification regulations e. default under any previous contract or contracts f. debarment by the department or the federal government g. disqualification by the department .
the following reasons will be considered sufficient for disqualifying a bidder and rejecting the bid proposal or bid proposals num .
submittal of more than one bid proposal for the same work from an individual firm or corporation under the same or different name or num .
evidence of collusion among bidders .
a participant in collusion will not receive recognition as a bidder for future work with the department until reinstated as a qualified bidder h. lack of overall bidding capacity as established by the contractors prequalification statement considering the uncompleted work currently under contract i .
lack of per contract bidding capacity as established by the contractors prequalification statement or j .
unsatisfactory performance on previous work or any current contract or contracts consisting of but not limited to num .
noncompliance with contract specifications contract requirements or engineers directives num .
failure to complete work on time num .
instances of substantial corrective work prior to acceptance num .
instances of completed work that requires acceptance at reduced pay num award and execution of contract page num num .
production of work or materials not meeting required specifications and when applicable requiring price reductions or corrective work num .
failure to provide adequate safety measures or appropriate traffic control that endangers the safety of the work force and public num .
questionable moral integrity as determined by the attorney general of the state or the department or num .
failure to reimburse the state for monies owed on any previously awarded contract including any contract where the prospective bidder is a party to a joint venture and the joint venture has failed to reimburse the state for monies owed .
after opening the department will compare the bid proposals on the basis of the summation of the products of the quantities shown in the bid proposal by the unit bid prices .
the department will make results of such comparisons available to the public .
in the event of a discrepancy between unit bid prices and extensions the unit bid price will govern .
the department reserves the right to reject any bid proposal the right to waive technicalities and the right to reject all bid proposals and advertise for new bid proposals if in the sole judgment of the department the rejection or waiver will promote the best interest of the department .
num irregular bid proposals the department will consider a bid proposal irregular and may reject the bid proposal for any of the following reasons a .
the bid proposal is incomplete or is submitted on a form other than the departments latest version of the sdebs or the form furnished by the department the form is altered or part thereof is detached or incomplete b .
the bid proposal contains unauthorized additions conditional or alternate bids or other irregularities which may tend to make the bid proposal incomplete indefinite or ambiguous as to its meaning c. the bid proposal contains provisions reserving the right to accept or reject an award or to enter into a contract pursuant to an award .
this is not intended to exclude a bid proposal limiting the maximum gross amount of awards acceptable to a bidder at one bid letting .
the department will select awards in its sole discretion .
d. the bid proposal does not contain a unit price in numerals for each pay item listed except in the case of authorized alternate pay items or groups e. the department determines in its sole discretion that any of the unit bid prices are significantly unbalanced to the potential detriment of the department award and execution of contract num page num f. for regional lettings in the case of a discrepancy between the unit bid price and the price extension the unit bid price will govern .
if the intended unit bid price can not be determined the bid proposal will be voided as per section num b g. for sdebs lettings the bid proposal is signed with an invalid bidder identification h. for sdebs lettings confirmation of receipt of all addenda issued by the department is not included in the bid proposal or i .
for sdebs lettings incorporation of the addendum bid item file is not included in the bid proposal file .
num dismissal of bid proposal after the opening of the bid proposals but prior to the award of a contract a bidder may submit a written request to have the bidders bid proposal dismissed if an error was made in the preparation of the bid proposal .
the bidder must include supporting documentation justifying the request .
the request must include a notarized affidavit or declaration signed under penalty of perjury which clearly sets forth the specific error or errors and certifies the bid documentation submitted is the only information used in the preparation of the bid proposal .
the department will review the request prior to making a determination of the request .
if the department determines in its sole discretion to grant the request to dismiss the bid proposal the department will retain the bidders bid proposal guaranty unless the bidder satisfies all of the following conditions a .
the bidder immediately notifies the department as soon as the error is observed and no later than num business days after the bid letting date b .
the error is of a mechanical clerical or mathematical nature and not one of bad judgment careless inspection of the work site or in reading the plans and specifications .
the bidder must be able to produce bid preparation documentation clearly setting forth how the clerical error occurred c. the bidder submits the formal request and required documentation within num business day of notifying the department of the error and d. the scope of the mistake is significant in nature as determined by the department in its sole discretion .
the department will notify the bidder of the decision to either grant the request for dismissal of the bid proposal without forfeiture of the bid proposal guaranty to the department or to allow dismissal of the bid proposal with forfeiture of the bid proposal guaranty to the department .
the bidder will then have num business day to respond in writing to either confirm acceptance of the departments decision which will result in an irregular bid proposal or withdraw their request to dismiss their bid proposal which will result in a responsive bid proposal for award of contract consideration .
if the bidder does not respond within num business day the departments decision will stand .
num award of contract the department will award a contract to the lowest competent and responsible bidder whose bid proposal complies with the requirements prescribed num award and execution of contract page num within num calendar days after the opening of bid proposals .
the department will notify the successful bidder that the bid has been accepted and the contract awarded .
the department and the successful bidder may extend the contract award date by mutual agreement .
num cancellation of award the department reserves the right to cancel the award of a contract before the execution of said contract without liability against the department .
num bid proposal guaranty the department will retain the bid proposal guaranties of the two lowest responsible and competent bidders .
the department will release the remaining bid proposal guaranties following opening and checking of bid proposals .
the department will release the bid proposal guaranties of the two low bidders when the contract has been executed .
num requirement of contract performance bond at the time of the execution of the contract the successful bidder will furnish a contract performance bond or bonds in a sum equal to the amount of the contract in a form acceptable to the department .
the contract performance bond will remain in effect for not less than one year after the date of the region engineers letter of final acceptance .
if the contractors bonding company becomes insolvent or is declared bankrupt the department will require the contractor to furnish a new contract performance bond .
num execution and approval of contract the successful bidder will sign and return the contract together with the contract performance bond within num calendar days after the date of the notice of award .
the department and the successful bidder may extend the contract return by mutual agreement .
if the department does not execute the contract within num calendar days following the receipt of the signed contract and related documents from the bidder the bidder may withdraw the bid without penalty .
a contract will not be considered in effect until it has been executed by all parties to the contract .
num failure to execute contract if the successful bidder does not execute and return the contract and file acceptable bond within num calendar days after bidders receipt of the notice of award the department may cancel the award and the bid proposal guaranty will be forfeited and become the property of the department as liquidated damages .
the department may then award a contract to the next lowest responsible bidder or re advertise the work .
num material guaranty the successful bidder will furnish a complete statement of the origin composition and manufacture of materials to be used in the construction of the work together with samples .
samples will be tested and inspected for conformance with the contract provisions .
scope of work num page num num intent of contract the intent of the contract is to provide for the construction and completion in detail of the work described .
the contractor will furnish labor materials equipment tools transportation and supplies required to complete the work in accordance with the plans specifications and terms of the contract .
num differing site conditions during the progress of the work if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered at the site differing materially from those indicated in the contract or if unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract are encountered at the site the party discovering such conditions will promptly notify the other party in writing of the specific differing conditions before the site is disturbed and before the affected work is performed .
upon written notification the engineer will investigate the conditions and if it is determined that the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of any work under the contract an adjustment excluding anticipated profits will be made and the contract modified in writing accordingly .
the engineer will notify the contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
no contract adjustment which results in a benefit to the contractor will be allowed unless the contractor has provided the required written notice .
no contract adjustment will be allowed on work not affected by the changed conditions .
num significant changes in the character of work the engineer reserves the right to make in writing at any time during the work such changes in quantities and such alterations in the work as are necessary to satisfactorily complete the project .
such changes in quantities and alterations will not invalidate the contract or release the contract performance bond and the contractor agrees to perform the work as altered as if the work had been part of the original contract .
if the alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work under the contract whether such alterations or changes are in themselves significant changes to the character of the work or by affecting other work cause such other work to become significantly different in character an adjustment excluding anticipated profit will be made to the contract .
the basis for the adjustment must be agreed upon prior to the performance of the work .
if a basis can not be agreed upon then an adjustment will be made either for or against the contractor in such amount as the engineer may determine to be fair and equitable .
if the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of the work to be performed under the contract the altered work will be paid for as provided elsewhere in the contract .
the term significant change shall be construed to apply only to the following circumstances num scope of work page num a .
when the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction or b .
when a major item of work as defined in section num is increased in excess of num or decreased below num of the original contract quantity .
any allowance for an increase in quantity shall apply only to that portion in excess of num of original contract item quantity or in case of a decrease below num to the actual amount of work performed .
when an adjustment to the unit price is made due to a decrease in the contract quantity to below num of the original contract quantity the total payment made will not exceed the amount which would have been paid for num of the original contract quantity .
if the contractor believes an alteration in the work is a significant change that necessitates a contract revision the contractor must request a contract revision for the significant change in work in writing to the engineer .
the department will pay the contractor for work occasioned by alterations in plans in accordance with the provisions set forth under section num .
if the altered work is of sufficient magnitude that additional time to complete the project is warranted the department will make time adjustments in accordance with the provisions of section num .
items and prices set forth in the special provision for price schedule for miscellaneous items and the bidding package are predetermined by the department and will not be subject to negotiation due to alterations in the plans or quantity changes .
num extra work the contractor will perform authorized work for which there is no price included in the contract whenever necessary or desirable in order to complete the work as contemplated .
the contractor will perform this extra work in accordance with the specifications and as directed and be paid for as provided under section num .
num maintenance of traffic unless otherwise provided the contractor will keep the road open to traffic in accordance with the traffic control plans .
the contractor will keep the portion of the project used by public traffic in a condition that will adequately and safely accommodate traffic .
accommodation of traffic will include but not be limited to providing a roadway in a passable condition providing flaggers in areas where the operation of construction equipment interferes with the movement of traffic sweeping and providing and maintaining in a safe condition pedestrian routes temporary approaches or crossings and intersections with trails roads streets businesses parking lots residences garages and farms .
while sweeping in curb and gutter sections or in rural sections where a finished and maintained lawn extends to the edge of the shoulder the contractor will use a pickup broom having an integral selfcontained storage .
the pickup broom must be a minimum of num feet wide .
while sweeping in curb and gutter sections the pickup must have working gutter brooms .
the contractor will not be required to provide snow removal .
the contractor will bear the expense of maintaining traffic over the project undergoing improvement and constructing and maintaining approaches crossings intersections and scope of work num page num other features as may be necessary without direct compensation except as provided below a .
traffic diversions traffic diversions will be designated in the contract .
rightofway for traffic diversions will be furnished by the department .
construction maintenance and removal of traffic diversions will be as directed by the engineer .
materials other than temporary drainage structures required to construct and maintain traffic diversions will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices .
the cost of labor equipment and incidentals required to satisfactorily maintain traffic diversions and provide temporary drainage structures will be incidental to the contract lump sum price for maintenance of traffic diversions .
the cost of labor equipment and incidentals necessary to satisfactorily remove traffic diversions and dispose of materials will be incidental to the contract lump sum price for remove traffic diversions .
b .
maintenance of traffic during suspension of work num .
prior to written suspension due to unfavorable weather or conditions not the fault of the contractor the contractor will prepare the project as directed by the engineer to provide for the accommodation of traffic during the anticipated period of suspension .
during the suspension and until an order for resumption of construction operations is issued the maintenance of the project for traffic to the extent specified in writing by the engineer will be by and at the expense of the department .
when the order for the resumption of work is issued the contractor will be responsible for the maintenance of traffic and will replace or repair work or materials lost or damaged during the period of suspension remove any work or materials for maintenance and complete the project in every respect as though the projects prosecution had been continuous and without interference .
the department will pay for additional work made necessary by such suspensions for reasons beyond the control of the contractor at contract prices or by extra work .
num .
the contractor will maintain replace or repair any work or material lost or damaged without cost to the department during periods not covered by a written suspension order and when the work is suspended for the contractors failure to comply with the provisions of the contract .
num rights in and use of materials found on the work the engineer may authorize the contractors use of materials found in the excavation that are suitable for completing bid items other than excavation .
the department will pay the contractor for the excavation of such materials at the corresponding contract unit price and for the pay item for which the excavated material is used .
the contractor will replace all excavation material removed with acceptable material at the contractors expense .
charge for the materials so used will not be made against the contractor .
the contractor will not excavate or remove num scope of work page num any material from within the highway rightofway which is not within the grading limits without the engineers written authorization .
unless otherwise provided the contractor may temporarily use the material from an existing structure in the erection of the new structure .
the contractor will not modify such material without the engineers approval .
num final cleaning up before the area office makes acceptance of field work and unless otherwise approved by the engineer the contractor will clear the highway and areas occupied by the contractor in connection with the work of rubbish excess materials temporary structures and equipment and leave the work in an acceptable condition .
num value engineering incentive a .
general value engineering incentive applies to those cost reduction proposals initiated and developed by the contractor for changing the drawings designs specifications or other requirements of the contract .
the value engineering incentive does not apply to a cost reduction proposal unless the contractor identifies the value engineering incentive at the time of submission to the department .
the cost reduction proposals contemplated are those that num .
would require a change order to this contract .
num .
would result in savings to the department by providing less costly items or methods than those specified in the contract without impairing any essential functions and characteristics such as service life reliability economy of operation ease of maintenance and necessary standardized features .
b .
the department will process cost reduction proposals in the same manner as prescribed for any proposal which would require a change order .
at a minimum the contractor must submit the following information with each proposal num .
a statement that the cost reduction proposal is submitted for consideration as a value engineering incentive .
num .
a description of the cost reduction proposal .
num .
an itemization of the requirements of the contract which would require a change and a recommendation of how to make each change .
num .
an estimate of the reduction in performance costs that will result from adoption of the cost reduction proposal .
num .
a prediction of any effects the proposed change would have on other costs to the department .
scope of work num page num num .
a time schedule or date within which the change order must be issued to obtain the maximum cost reduction during the remainder of the contract and the reason for this time schedule .
num .
the dates of any previous submission of the cost reduction proposals including contract numbers and the actions of the department .
num .
a statement as to the effect the cost reduction proposal would have on the time for completion of the project .
c. the department will not be liable for delay in acting upon a cost reduction proposal submitted .
the engineers decision as to the acceptance of any such cost reduction proposal will be final and will not be subject to section num .
the engineer may accept in whole or in part cost reduction proposals submitted by issuing a change order that incorporates the accepted elements of the proposal into the contract by changes to quantities of existing contract items addition of new contract items at agreed upon unit prices or lump sums changes to contract plans and specifications or any combination as appropriate .
if the engineer accepts a cost reduction proposal the engineer will make an equitable adjustment in the contract price and change other affected provisions of this contract in accordance with this specification and other applicable provisions in this contract .
the engineer will establish the equitable adjustment based on the engineers determination of the effect of the contractors cost reduction proposal .
when the cost of performance is decreased as the result of the change the engineer will reduce the contract price by the following amount num of the difference between the total estimated decreases in the cost of performance and the total estimated increases in the cost of performance reasonably anticipated as a result of application of the cost reduction proposal .
if the contract changes associated with the value engineering proposal results in an increase in the cost of performance this specification will not apply and the increase will be determined in accordance with section num .
d. the engineer will not consider substitution of one bid item for another bid item resulting in a decrease in the contract amount as a saving under value engineering incentive .
when the change involves the increase of one bid item and the decrease of another bid item the change order will be made in conformance with section num .
e. the contractor may restrict the departments right to use or disclose the information submitted with a cost reduction proposal for other purposes .
such restrictions must be in writing and be submitted with the cost reduction proposal .
f. if the engineer accepts the cost reduction proposal the contractors restriction will be void and the department may use duplicate or disclose in whole or in part data necessary to utilize the cost reduction proposal .
num scope of work page num this page intentionally left blank control of work num page num num authority of the engineer the contractor will perform the work to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the engineer will decide questions which may arise including but not limited to the following the quality and acceptability of materials furnished work performed and rate of progress of the work all questions which may arise as to the interpretation of the plans and specifications all questions as to the contractors acceptable fulfillment of the contract and disputes between contractors where it effects the progress of the work .
the engineers decision will be final .
the engineer will have the authority to suspend the work wholly or in part by written suspension order for the following reasons a .
the contractor does not carry out contract requirements b .
the contractor does not carry out orders from the engineer c. periods of unsuitable weather d. conditions considered unsuitable for the prosecution of the work e. other condition or reason determined by the department to be in the public interest or f. other reasons mutually agreed on by the engineer and the contractor .
num plans and working drawings plans will show details of structures lines grades typical cross sections of the roadway location and design of structures and a summary of items appearing on the proposal .
the contractor will have num set of plans specifications and other contract documents available at the work site .
the contractor will supplement plans with working drawings consisting of detailed plans as required in the plans or specifications to control the work .
these working drawings will include stress sheets shop plans erection plans falsework plans bending diagrams for reinforcing steel erosion control plans or other supplementary plans or data .
working drawings must be reviewed by the engineer .
the engineers review will not relieve the contractor of responsibility under the contract for completion of the work .
num conformity with plans and specifications work performed and materials furnished will conform to the lines grades cross sections dimensions and material requirements including tolerances shown on the plans specifications and other contract documents .
if the engineer determines the materials furnished work performed or the finished product is not within strict conformity with the plans and specifications the contractor will remove and replace or correct the work or materials at the contractors expense .
if the engineer determines the materials furnished work performed or the finished product num control of work page num is not within strict conformity with the plans and specifications but is within reasonable conformity the engineer may accept the materials furnished and work performed and allow the finished product to remain in place .
if the engineer allows reasonably conforming materials furnished work performed or the finished product to remain in place the engineer will document the basis of acceptance by contract modification .
this documentation will provide for an adjustment in the contract price determined in the departments sole discretion .
if the engineer determines the materials furnished work performed or the finished product is not in reasonably close conformity with the plans and specifications resulting in an inferior or unsatisfactory product the contractor will remove and replace or correct the work or materials at the contractors expense .
if the engineer determines the materials furnished work performed or the finished product is not in conformity with the plans and specifications and may have an impact on traffic or public safety the contractor will immediately remove and replace or correct the work or materials at the contractors expense and any work or materials allowed to remain in place may be subject to price adjustment .
num coordination of contract documents the contents of the bidding package are essential parts of the contract .
a requirement occurring in one is as binding as though occurring in all .
the contents of the bidding package are intended to be complementary and to describe and provide for a complete work .
if any discrepancy exists the governing ranking is num .
addenda num .
project qa forum num .
special provisions num .
plans num .
supplemental specifications num .
standard specifications num .
electronic design files addenda will govern over the project qa forum unless a department response in the project qa forum specifically addresses an addendum issued by the department .
in case of a discrepancy between questions on the project qa forum regarding the same topic the most recent question and answer will govern over previous questions and answers .
questions will be numbered on the project qa forum in order of date and time posted .
in addition plans shown dimensions will govern over scaled dimensions .
the contractor will not take advantage of any apparent error omission or ambiguity in the contract .
if the contractor discovers an error omission or ambiguity the contractor will immediately notify the engineer of the apparent error omission or ambiguity and its perceived consequences .
the engineer will make corrections and interpretations as control of work num page num necessary to fulfill the intent of the contract .
num cooperation by contractor the department will supply the contractor with a minimum of num sets of plans and related contract documents num of which the contractor will have available on the project .
the contractor will give the work the constant attention necessary to facilitate the progress and will cooperate with the engineer inspectors and other contractors .
the contractor will have on the project at all times as the contractors agent a competent superintendent capable of reading and understanding the plans and specifications and experienced in and capable of accomplishing the type of work being performed .
the contractor will have this superintendent on the project at all times regardless of the amount of work subcontracted .
num cooperation with utilities the department will notify utility companies pipe line owners and other parties affected and have adjustments of the public or private utility fixtures pipe lines and other appurtenances within or adjacent to the limits of construction made as soon as practicable .
utility appurtenances within the limits of the proposed construction which are to be relocated or adjusted are to be moved by the owner at the owners expense unless otherwise provided in the contract .
the contractor will be deemed to have considered in the contractors bid the permanent and temporary utility appurtenances in their present or relocated positions as specified in the contract .
the department will not allow the contractor additional compensation for any delay inconvenience or damage sustained due to interference from the utility appurtenances or relocation .
where it is reasonably foreseeable the contractors operations will result in considerable damage expense loss or inconvenience to adjacent property including but not limited to railway telecommunications electric water sewer petroleum products and private property the contractor will not commence operations until the contractor has made the arrangements necessary to protect these other interests .
the contractor will cooperate with utility owners in removing and rearranging underground or overhead utility lines or facilities to minimize interruption of service and duplication of work by utility owners .
if utility service is interrupted the contractors cooperation will be continuous until the service is restored .
the contractor will not commence work around a fire hydrant until provisions for continued service have been approved by the local fire authority .
contractors are required to comply with south dakota codified law sdcl numa and administrative rule article num addressing south dakota onecall notification before excavation activities .
num control of work page num if an excavation is made in a time of an emergency the contractor will take all reasonable precautions to protect the underground utilities .
in emergencies the contractor will notify the south dakota onecall notification center as required above as soon as practical .
in accordance with administrative rule article num the utility will as soon as possible but not longer than num hours from the notification time during the business day and not longer than num hours from the notification time outside of the business day or by the start time on the ticket whichever is later provide all reasonably available practical information to the contractor .
an emergency is defined as an occurrence which demands immediate action to prevent significant environmental damage or loss of life health property or essential public services including the reerecting of critically needed traffic control signs or devices .
if an underground utility is damaged dislocated or disturbed the contractor will notify the owner of the utility or if unknown the south dakota onecall notification center .
the contractor is prohibited from concealing attempting to conceal or making repairs to the utility unless authorized by the utility owner .
if the contractor is unable to locate the underground utility or discovers that the owner has incorrectly located the facility the contractor will promptly notify the owner or the south dakota onecall notification center .
num cooperation between contractors the department reserves the right to contract and perform additional work within the limits of or adjacent to the work covered by the contract .
when separate contracts are let within the limits of or adjacent to the project the contractor will conduct work without interfering or hindering the progress or completion of the work by other contractors .
contractors working within the limits or adjacent to the project will cooperate with each other as directed .
the contractor will arrange work and will place and dispose of the materials without interfering with the operations of the other contractors within the limits of or adjacent to the project .
the contractor will coordinate work with the work and sequence of other contractors .
each contractor involved will accept all liability financial or otherwise in connection with the contract and will protect and hold the department harmless from damages or claims that may arise because of inconvenience delay or loss experienced because of the presence and operations of other contractors working within the limits of or adjacent to the project .
num construction stakes lines and grades the engineer will set the necessary centerline slope and grade stakes .
the department will not be responsible for delays in setting stakes unless the contractor gives the engineer num calendar days notice prior to beginning work on the project and thereafter unless the contractor gives the engineer num business days notice that stakes are needed .
the department will be responsible for the accuracy of stakes set and lines established by the engineer .
control of work num page num the contractor will determine the meaning of all stakes measurements and marks before commencing work .
the contractor will preserve stakes and marks .
if the contractor destroys or disturbs any construction stakes or marks the department will charge the cost of replacing these stakes and marks to the contractor .
structure staking a. bridges for bridges the department will provide stakes to establish elevation location and alignment for each abutment .
the engineer will stake and reference the centerline of each abutment in the longitudinal direction and in each direction transversely .
b .
box culverts for box culverts the department will provide stakes to establish elevation location and alignment of both ends of the box culvert .
the engineer will stake and reference the centerline of each box culvert in the longitudinal direction and in each direction transversely .
the contractor will provide all other stakes required to successfully complete construction of the structure unless additional staking due to difficult site conditions is requested by the contractor and agreed to by the engineer .
the contractor will verify the accuracy of all stakes .
num authority and duties of area engineer as the representative of the director of operations the area engineer has immediate and responsible charge of engineering details and administration of the construction project .
the area engineer has the authority to reject defective work and to suspend work being improperly performed .
num duties of the inspector department inspectors will inspect all work done and materials furnished .
this inspection may extend to any part of the work preparation fabrication or manufacture of the materials to be used .
the inspector will not alter or waive the provisions of the contract .
the inspector will not issue instructions contrary to the contract or act as a foreman for the contractor .
the inspector may reject work or materials until any issues can be referred to and decided by the engineer .
neither the departments authority to inspect all work nor any actual inspections performed by the department during the course of construction will constitute an acceptance of work performed or operate to relieve the contractor of the contractors obligation to construct the project in compliance with the plans and specifications .
num inspection of work materials and details of the work will be subject to inspection by the department .
the contractor will allow the engineer access to the work and will furnish the engineer with information and assistance necessary to make a complete and detailed inspection .
the contractor will notify the engineer num hours in advance of any change in construction activity requiring inspection staff changes .
num control of work page num the department may order work done or materials used without inspection by the engineer to be removed and replaced .
the contractor prior to final acceptance of the work will remove or uncover portions of the finished work as directed by the engineer .
after examination the contractor will restore the work to the standard required by the contract .
if the engineer determines the work is acceptable the department will pay the contractor for uncovering removing and replacing of the work removed as extra work .
if the engineer determines the work is unacceptable the uncovering removing and the replacing of the work removed will be at the contractors expense .
when a unit of government political subdivision utility or railroad corporation is to accept or pay a portion of the cost of the work covered by the contract a representative of the respective unit of government political subdivision utility or railroad corporation will have the right to inspect the work .
this inspection will not make the unit of government political subdivision utility or railroad corporation a party to the contract and will not interfere with the rights of either party under the contract .
num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized work the department will consider unacceptable any work which does not conform to the requirements of the contract and will accept or reject nonconforming work under the provisions of section num .
the contractor will immediately remove and replace in an acceptable manner at the contractors expense work rejected for any cause .
the contractor will finish all work to the lines and grades established by the engineer .
the department will not pay for work done contrary to the engineers instructions work done without authorization beyond the lines shown on the plans or extra work done without authorization .
the engineer may order the contractor to remove or replace at the contractors expense any work done contrary to the engineers instructions work done without authorization beyond the lines shown on the plans or extra work done without authorization within the lines shown on the plans .
if the contractor does not comply with the engineers orders made under the provisions of this section the engineer may order unacceptable work remedied or removed and replaced and unauthorized work removed .
the engineer may deduct the cost of correcting unauthorized or unacceptable work from any monies due or to become due the contractor .
num weight limitations the contractor will comply with weight limitations established by south dakota codified laws num and num on roads and highways outside the limits of the project .
within the project limits the contractor will comply with the above referenced weight limitations and with special weight limitations imposed by the contract for the hauling of material and the movement of equipment over bridges and box culverts and the courses making up the pavement structure .
when hauling materials or moving equipment on gravel cushion the contractor will be allowed the above referenced weight limitations plus an additional num of the above referenced weight limitations .
weight restrictions will not be imposed for the hauling of materials or movement of equipment on an earth subgrade select subgrade topping select granular backfill or temporary granular control of work num page num material that will be removed and will not make up a portion of the final pavement structure .
the contractor may submit a written request to the engineer to cross bridges box culverts or the courses making up the pavement structure with equipment or loads that exceed the weight limitations .
this written request will include the following information the loaded vehicle weight empty vehicle weight equipment make and model tire size axle spacing and axle loading of the equipment proposed for use .
the engineer and the office of bridge design will review this information and determine whether to grant approval .
nothing set forth in the foregoing will relieve the contractor of liability for damage resulting from the operation and movement of construction equipment .
num maintenance during construction the contractor will maintain the work during construction and until the area engineer issues the acceptance of field work .
the contractors obligation to maintain the work will consist of continuous and effective work prosecuted daily with adequate equipment and forces to keep the roadway and structures in satisfactory condition .
unless otherwise specified in the contract the contractors responsibility for project maintenance will be as follows when the work begins on the roadbed or pavement structure the contractor will maintain the entire project including but not limited to all surface maintenance drainage weed control and temporary traffic control .
this responsibility will continue until the area engineer issues the acceptance of field work except for those periods when the project is suspended .
maintenance during periods of project suspension will be in accordance with section num b .
when work begins and is limited to construction of a box culvert or structure including berm construction as part of a larger project the contractor will only be required to maintain the portion of the project disturbed by the box culvert or structure work including portions of the project used for temporary traffic control .
mobilization of equipment material stockpiling clearing topsoil stockpiling and fencing will not constitute work on the roadbed or pavement structure .
in the case of a contract involving the placement of material on or the utilization of a previously constructed subgrade base course pavement or structure the contractor will maintain the previously constructed work during construction operations .
cost of maintenance work during construction and before the area engineer issues the acceptance of field work will be incidental to the contract unit prices for the various pay items and the contractor will not be paid an additional amount for such work .
num failure to maintain roadway or structure if the contractor does not comply with the provisions of section num or num the engineer will notify the contractor of such noncompliance .
if the contractor fails to remedy unsatisfactory maintenance within num hours after receipt of notice the engineer will proceed to maintain the project and will num control of work page num deduct the entire cost of this maintenance from monies due or to become due the contractor .
num acceptance of field work when the contract work including authorized modifications and final cleanup has been completed the area engineer or designee will within num calendar days make a final inspection of the work .
when provided in the contract the area engineer or designee may make inspections following completion of portions of the contract .
if the work is found to conform to the requirements of the contract the area engineer or designee will issue written notification to the contractor of acceptance of field work .
such notice is not to be construed as an acceptance by the area engineer or designee of previously noted defective or unauthorized work or of unauthorized work subsequently determined during the final computations of field measurements .
should the work fail to conform with the requirements of the contract the engineer will provide the contractor with a written statement of the features to be remedied .
final acceptance in accordance with section num will not be made until the contractor notifies the engineer that corrections have been made and the engineer determines the requirements have been met .
num claims for adjustment and disputes if the contractor contends additional compensation is warranted for assessments made to the contract work or material not covered by the contract or adjustments made pursuant to section num the contractor will give the area engineer written notice of the claim for additional compensation .
if the contractor contends additional compensation is warranted for work or materials not covered in the contract the contractor will give the area engineer written notice of the claim for additional compensation before beginning or continuing construction on the affected work .
if the basis for claim does not become apparent until after proceeding with the work or it is not feasible to stop the work the contractor will immediately notify the area engineer that the work is continuing and the contractor will submit written notification of the intent to file a claim within num calendar days .
the contractors failure to give the required notification or to provide the area engineer proper facilities and assistance in keeping strict account of actual costs will constitute a waiver of the claim for additional compensation in connection with the work already performed .
if the engineer has kept account of the costs involved the act of keeping account will not be construed as proving or substantiating the validity of the claim .
after completion of the work on which the claim is based the contractor will complete and submit to the area engineer a contract claim form dotnum furnished by the department .
the contractor must complete and submit this contract claim form within num calendar days after the acceptance of field work .
the engineer may grant a written extension to this num calendar day period if circumstances warrant .
interest due to the contractor in accordance with section num will not apply to the extended num calendar day period if the num calendar day period is extended beyond num calendar days after the date of the region engineers letter of final acceptance .
the contractor must describe in detail in the contract claim form all claim items being submitted for review .
the contract claim form must contain adequate information for the engineer to make a determination as to the validity of the claim .
at a minimum the contractor will submit the following control of work num page num a .
a detailed narrative justification citing the basis for the claim with reference to relative portions of the plans specifications or other contract documents .
b .
a detailed explanation of the amount of extra compensation time or both providing all necessary dates locations and items of work claimed including but not limited to an itemized breakdown of actual costs for materials and supplies labor equipment delays indirect costs overhead and profit .
allowable costs submitted for each of the individual claim items will be verified using generally accepted contract cost principles and procedures .
c. a signed statement stating the information furnished is true and fully documented .
d. authorization for the department to examine all contractor records regarding this claim .
once the area engineer has received a properly submitted claim the contractor may not submit additional justification either written or verbal throughout the remainder of the department claim review process unless the contractor can establish the additional offered information was not available at the time of the initial submission or unless the inclusion of additional information is agreed to by the department .
claims for additional compensation may not be added to the original claim packet after the original claim has been submitted to the area engineer .
any additional claim must be submitted as a separate claim in accordance with these specifications .
within num calendar days following receipt of a properly submitted claim the area engineer will furnish written notification to the contractor indicating approval partial approval or disapproval of the claim .
if the area engineer denies the claim in whole or in part the area engineer will submit all documentation justifying the denial of the claim to the region engineer and the contractor .
if the area engineer does not approve the claim in full the contractor may elect to have the claim reviewed by the region engineer by notifying the region engineer in writing within num calendar days of receiving notice of the area engineers action on the claim .
the region engineer will have num calendar days following the written notification from the contractor to review and respond to the submitted claim materials .
the region engineer will furnish written notification to the contractor indicating approval partial approval or disapproval of the claim .
if the region engineer does not approve the claim in full the contractor may elect to have the claim reviewed by the department claim review panel .
the contractor will notify the region engineer within num calendar days of receipt of the region engineers notification .
the region engineer will submit the contract claim form and all supporting information for approval or denial of the claim to the claim review panel secretary .
the claim review panel secretary will establish a suitable date for the claim review panel to review the claim .
the claim review panel will consist of the following department num control of work page num secretary director of planning and engineering state construction maintenance engineer chief legal counsel and the remaining region engineers who are not responsible for the project for which the claim was submitted or any panel members designee .
the department secretary will serve as chairperson of the claim review panel .
a claim review panel member may choose to be excused from a review if the claim review panel member feels there may be a conflict of interest either real or perceived .
the chairperson of the claim review panel may choose to designate a replacement panel member if a panel member is excused .
the chairperson of the claim review panel may also ask additional department staff members to provide additional input to the claim review panel .
the contractor region engineer area engineer and appropriate project and central office staff or their designees may be present at the claim review meeting to discuss and respond to any questions the claim review panel might have regarding the claim .
the department secretary will issue a written decision on the claim within num calendar days of the claim review panel meeting .
upon mutual consent of the contractor and the department secretary nonbinding mediation proceedings may commence once the department has made final determination following claim review panel review .
if the claim is determined valid in whole or in part the department will pay that part of the claim determined valid plus interest computed at the rate of num per annum for the time period between the date of the region engineers letter of final acceptance and the date the claim is paid .
control of material num page num num source of supply and quality requirements the contractor will use materials which conform to the contract requirements .
to expedite the inspection and testing of materials the contractor will notify the engineer of the proposed sources of materials prior to delivery .
the engineer may conditionally approve materials at the source of supply before the contractor begins delivery .
if the engineer determines a conditionally approved source does not produce specified materials the contractor will furnish materials from another source .
num local material sources and sites the contract may designate sources of local materials and sites .
the contractor will determine the amount of equipment and work required to produce material conforming to contract requirements .
for designated option material sources it may not be feasible to ascertain the limits and quality of an entire source from samples .
variations will be considered as usual and are to be expected .
the engineer may require the contractor to procure material from any portion of a source including below water and may reject portions of the source as unacceptable .
the department may secure an easement to haul materials across private property and include the terms of the easement in the contract .
the department will assign the easement to the contractor and require the contractor to perform the departments obligations under the terms of the easement .
the department will make all payments due the landowner under the terms of this easement .
a .
department designated sources and sites and designated option sources and sites designated option sources and sites will be included in the contract .
an option secured by the department will be transferred and assigned to the contractor .
the contractor will perform all department obligations under such option agreement .
the department will make all payments due the landowner under the terms of this option .
the department will deduct royalty from monies due the contractor .
the contractor will be responsible for costs connected with the removal of materials from such sources and sites except as otherwise provided in the contract and the following num .
when material is removed under the terms of a department secured option the department will bear the royalty cost of reject material left at the pit site .
num .
the department will make payment for excavation and furnishing material from a designated source as borrow unclassified excavation in accordance with section num g. the department will make payment for excavation and furnishing material from a designated option source for borrow as option borrow excavation in accordance with section num e. num .
the department will pay the contractor for topsoil replaced on designated sources as provided in section num g. the department will pay the contractor for topsoil replaced on designated option borrow sources as provided in section num e. num .
the department will not accept the project or release the contractor until written releases have been secured from property owners of designated sources and haul num control of material page num routes across private property used by the contractor or in lieu thereof a written statement from the commission exempting this requirement .
num .
if the department designated source does not provide materials meeting specifications in the quantities shown on the plans or as ordered by the engineer the contractor will furnish satisfactory materials from other sources .
the department will consider the substitute source as a substituted contractor furnished source and the requirements of section num b.num will apply .
the department will make payment for excavation and furnishing material from the source including extra haul at the price agreed upon by the department .
num .
the department will bear the cost of crop damage loss of use seeding fertilizing mulching and fencing under the terms of the department secured option .
num .
when the contractor uses a designated option source the contractor will comply with the restoration provision set forth in the option mining license regulations and paragraphs a through g below to the satisfaction of the engineer .
a .
surface mined areas will be reclaimed and shaped to control erosion eliminate hazards to domestic animals and wildlife protect public health and safety protect the environment and provide for future beneficial land use .
b .
refuse equipment and materials from the pit operation will be disposed of in a manner to create the least amount of unsightliness and unproductive areas and not pollute surface or groundwater .
c. land will be revegetated as agreed upon by the department the local conservation district and the landowner which establishes a diverse effective and longlasting vegetative cover .
for future land use other than crop land the revegetation will be capable of selfregeneration equal in extent of cover to the natural vegetation of the surrounding area .
d. when it is necessary to remove overburden to remove construction aggregates topsoil will be removed from the effected land and segregated from other spoil .
the topsoil will be protected from wind and water erosion and from contamination by acid or toxic material to ensure its ability to sustain vegetation when restored .
e. disturbance to the prevailing hydrologic balance of the affected land and surrounding area and to the quality and quantity of water in surface and groundwater systems both during and after the pit operation and during reclamation will be minimized .
operations will be conducted to protect waters from pollution by siltation waste debris and toxic fluids or materials .
f. surface areas of the affected land including spoil piles will be stabilized and protected to control erosion and associated air and water pollution .
noxious weed infestations will be controlled during phases of the pit operation and reclamation .
control of material num page num g. areas outside of the affected land will be protected from slides subsidence and damage occurring during the mining operation and reclamation .
high walls will be reduced to a slope not greater than the angle of repose upon abandonment of the mining operation unless such a reduction would create conditions more detrimental than preservation of the high wall .
prior to slope reduction the operator will limit access to and warn the public of the high wall area .
precautions will include fencing and posting of warning signs .
if high wall reduction is deemed impossible impractical or aesthetically undesirable by the board of minerals and environment the board will prescribe adequate fencing .
b .
contractor furnished sources and sites for contractor furnished sources that will impact an environmental resource including but not limited to wetlands cultural resources threatened and endangered species critical habitat and bodies of water the contractor will develop an appropriate mitigation plan .
when the contractor provides sources of material the department will process necessary samples to determine the suitability of the material .
materials obtained from established commercial sources under the jurisdiction of the south dakota department of environment and natural resources minerals and mining program are not subject to the provisions of this specification for pit restoration .
when the contractor uses a contractor furnished source the contractor will comply with the restoration provision set forth in any agreement between the contractor and affected landowner or the mining license regulations .
num .
specified contractor furnished sources and sites when material deposits or waste sites are not designated in the plans the contractor will furnish sources acceptable to the engineer .
when material is removed under terms of a contractor furnished source the contractor will bear all cost of reject material left at the pit site .
if the contractor furnishes material under the contract item of contractor furnished borrow the department will make payment for excavation and furnishing material from the source as contractor furnished borrow excavation and make payment for topsoil seeding fertilizing and mulching in accordance with section num f. num .
substituted contractor furnished sources and sites the contractor will bear all costs of exploring and developing other sources .
prior to substituting a contractor furnished source for a designated option source the contractor will submit a pit change request to the engineer for approval .
the contractor is responsible for acquiring the necessary environmental clearances associated with the contractor furnished source .
num control of material page num if the contractor elects to use material from a source other than that designated the contractor will acquire the necessary rights to take or deposit materials from the source and will pay all costs related thereto including extra haul .
if the contractor elects to substitute a contractor furnished borrow source for a designated option borrow source the department will make payment for excavation and furnishing material from the source as option borrow excavation and make payment for topsoil seeding fertilizing and mulching in accordance with section num e. num samples tests cited specifications the engineer will inspect test and approve materials for use in accordance with relevant contract requirements .
for qcqa asphalt concrete the contractor and the engineer will perform inspection sampling and testing in accordance with the relevant contract requirements .
the contractor will furnish certification for all materials designated in the contract or the departments materials manual to be accepted by certification .
the departments materials manual assigns tiers based on how critical the materials are to the project .
all materials are subject to inspection testing rejection and replacement at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will furnish copies of tests to the contractor or the contractors representative when requested .
if the contract requires the contractor to perform inspection sampling or testing the contractor will provide the engineer with copies of all inspection sampling and testing results .
the engineer will sample and test in accordance with the most recent at the time of the letting standard or approved interim standard methods of the departments materials manual aashto or astm .
procedures are specified by the naming convention of the applicable document .
the departments materials manual procedures are noted by sd followed by the appropriate procedure number .
samples will be taken and tests made by a representative of and at the expense of the department except as otherwise stipulated .
if a discrepancy exists the order of precedence is as follows a .
departments materials manual b. aashto c. astm a representative from the area office must witness the sampling performed by the contractor of materials for acceptance testing .
the area office representative will take possession of the samples .
the department may allow the contractor to transport and deliver the samples only when the area office representative has sealed the samples with a tamper evident tag with proper documentation attached .
all individuals providing acceptance testing and independent assurance testing of materials or acceptance inspection will meet the requirements of the sddot materials testing and inspection certification program manual .
control of material num page num testing equipment identified in the sddot materials testing and inspection certification program manual will be calibrated at the designated frequencies procedures and documented according to the manual .
the departments central materials laboratory will meet the requirements of the sddot central materials laboratory quality system manual .
num plant inspection the engineer may inspect materials at the source .
if the engineer inspects materials at the plant the contractor will meet the following conditions a .
the engineer will have the contractors and producers cooperation and assistance .
b .
the engineer will have full access to all material manufacture and production areas of the plant .
c. the contractor will provide and maintain adequate safety measures .
the department reserves the right to retest and reject materials previously tested and conditionally accepted at the source of supply if the material delivered to the work does not meet the requirements of the contract .
num storage of materials the contractor will store materials to ensure the preservation of quality and fitness for the work .
the contractor will store materials so as to facilitate prompt inspection .
the contractor may use approved portions of the rightofway for the storage of materials and for the contractors plant and equipment .
the contractor will provide additional required space at the contractors expense .
the contractor will not use private property without written permission of the owner or lessee .
the contractor will furnish copies of such written permission to the engineer .
the contractor will restore storage sites to their original condition or a condition agreed to by the landowner at the contractors expense .
the contractor will not store or stockpile materials on bridges or box culverts without the bridge construction engineers written permission .
the contractor will submit details of proposed material storage to the engineer a minimum of num calendar days prior to beginning storage including but not limited to material type weight duration of storage and location on the structure .
the engineer will forward this information to the bridge construction engineer .
the engineer and the bridge construction engineer will review this information and determine whether to grant approval .
num handling materials the contractor will handle materials to preserve material quality and fitness for the work .
the contractor will transport aggregates from the storage site to the work in vehicles constructed to prevent loss or segregation of materials after loading and measuring .
num unacceptable material the engineer may reject material not conforming to the contract requirements .
the contractor will immediately remove rejected material from the num control of material page num work .
the contractor will not use rejected material until the defects have been corrected and the material approved by the department .
num department furnished material material designated to be furnished by the department will be delivered or made available to the contractor at points specified in the contract .
the contractor will be responsible for material delivered .
the engineer will deduct from monies due for any shortages deficiencies and damage occurring to the material after delivery .
the engineer will deduct demurrage charges resulting from the contractors failure to accept the material at the designated time and point of delivery from monies due .
the department will consider the cost of handling and placing materials after delivery and excise tax due to the south dakota department of revenue for the value of the department furnished material noted in the plans as included in the contract price for the item in which the material is used .
num buy america permanently incorporated domestic structural steel and other iron and steel products are required .
to be considered domestic all manufacturing processes including the application of coatings of the iron and steel material in a product for example smelting and any subsequent process which alters the steel materials physical form or chemical composition must occur within the united states .
this includes processes such as rolling extruding machining bending grinding and drilling .
a statement will be included on the certificate of compliance stating whether the iron or steel is of domestic or foreign origin .
buy america does not apply to iron ore scrap pig iron and processed pelletized and reduced iron ore. minor quantities of foreign iron or steel and coatings may be incorporated provided their cost does not exceed num of the total contract amount or num whichever is greater .
if iron ingots or steel billets produced in the united states are sent out of the country for a subsequent manufacturing process and then are brought back into the united states the full value of the iron or steel as it reenters the country including the original billet cost and any coatings is considered to be foreign .
if foreign iron or steel components are combined with other components into a fabricated or assembled composite product the foreign iron or steel content of the composite product is not only the value of the foreign iron or steel components but also the prorata value of the fabrication and assembly labor and overhead used in the combining the foreign iron or steel and other components into the finished composite product including coatings .
the application of a coating is interpreted to mean all processes that protect or enhance the value of material or product to which it is applied examples are epoxy coatings galvanizing and painting .
legal relations and responsibility to public num page num num laws to be observed the contractor will keep fully informed of and comply with all federal state and local laws ordinances and regulations and all orders and decrees of bodies or tribunals having any jurisdiction or authority which may affect those engaged or employed on the work or which may affect the conduct of the work .
the contractor will protect and indemnify the department and the departments representatives against any claim or liability arising from or based on the violation of any such law ordinance regulation order or decree whether by the contractor subcontractors suppliers of materials or services or their employees .
num permits licenses and taxes the contractor will procure required permits and licenses pay all charges fees and taxes and give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work .
the contractor will include all charges fees and taxes in the contract unit price for each contract item .
for extra work performed at agreed upon prices the contractor will include excise tax due to the south dakota department of revenue in the proposed unit or lump sum price .
for extra work performed on a force account basis the department will compensate the contractor for excise tax due to the south dakota department of revenue in accordance with section num j .
num patented devices materials and processes if the contractor employs any design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright the contractor will provide for their use by legal agreement with the patentee or owner .
the contractor and the surety will indemnify and save harmless the department affected third party and political subdivision from any and all claims for infringement resulting from the use of such patented design device material or process trademark or copyright and indemnify the department for costs expenses and damages caused by reason of any infringement during the prosecution or after the completion of the contract .
num restoration of surfaces opened by permit the right to approve a permit to construct or reconstruct utility service in the highway or street is reserved by the department for the authorities of the municipality in which the work is done .
the contractor will not be entitled to consideration for damages for delays resulting from work performed under a permit .
when an individual firm or corporation is authorized through a duly executed permit from the department the contractor will allow parties bearing such permit to make openings in the highway .
when ordered by the engineer the contractor will make the necessary repairs resulting from this work .
this work will be paid for as extra work or as provided in the contract and will be subject to the same requirements as the work performed under the contract .
num federal aid participation when the united states government participates in the cost of the work covered by the contract the work will be under the supervision of the department but subject to the inspection and approval of united states government officials in accordance with the applicable federal statutes and rules and regulations .
such inspection will not make the united states government a party to this contract and will not interfere with the rights of the parties to the contract .
num legal relations and responsibility to public page num num sanitary health and safety provisions the contractor will provide and maintain in a neat sanitary condition accommodations for the use of employees as necessary to comply with the requirements of the state and local boards of health or of other bodies or tribunals having jurisdiction .
attention is directed to federal state and local laws rules and regulations concerning construction safety and health standards .
all workers within the rightofway who are exposed either to traffic vehicles using the highway for purposes of travel or to construction equipment within the work area will wear highvisibility safety apparel intended to provide conspicuity during both daytime and nighttime usage and meeting the performance class num or num requirements of the ansiisea num publication entitled american national standard for highvisibility safety apparel and headwear or equivalent revisions .
num public convenience and safety the contractor will conduct the work to minimize obstruction to traffic .
the contractor will provide for the safety and convenience of the general public and the residents along the highway and the protection of persons and property as specified under section num .
the contractor will eliminate dust which causes a hazard or nuisance by the application of water or other acceptable measure in the amounts and at a frequency directed by the engineer .
when the item does not appear in the estimate of quantities in the bidding package the item will be paid for at the rate specified in the special provision for price schedule for miscellaneous items .
when the item appears in the estimate of quantities in the bidding package the item so used will be paid for at the contract unit price .
the department will reimburse the contractor for num of the actual quantities for furnishing and installing dust control on approved haul roads under section num .
num railwayhighway provisions when the contractor is required or elects to haul materials across the tracks of any railway the contractor will make arrangements with the railway company for new private crossings required or for the use of existing private crossings .
if the railway company requires it all costs for railroad protective insurance will be borne by the contractor unless a bid item for railroad protective insurance is established in the plans .
the contractor will perform all work on the railroad rightofway without unnecessary interference with the movement of trains or traffic upon the railway companys track .
num construction over or adjacent to navigable waters the contractor will perform all work over on or adjacent to navigable waters without interfering with the navigation of the waterways and in a manner that no existing navigable depths will be impaired except as allowed by permit issued by the u.s. coast guard or the u.s. army corps of engineers .
num barricades and warning signs the contractor will provide erect and maintain necessary barricades suitable and sufficient lights danger signals signs and traffic control devices and take all necessary precautions to protect the work and safety of the public .
the legal relations and responsibility to public num page num contractor will provide barricades on highways closed to traffic will illuminate obstructions during hours of darkness and will provide warning signs to control and direct traffic .
the contractor will erect warning signs at locations where operations may interfere with the use of the road by traffic and at intermediate points where the new work crosses or coincides with an existing road .
barricades warning signs lights temporary signals and other protective devices must conform to the current edition of the federal manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd at the time of letting and the details shown in the plans .
num use of explosives when the use of explosives is necessary for the prosecution of the work the contractor will not endanger life property or the new work .
the contractor will be responsible for all damage resulting from the use of explosives .
the contractor will comply with all laws and ordinances as well as num cfr num num cfr num num cfr num and fhwa form num part vii whichever is the most restrictive in the use handling loading transportation and storage of explosives and blasting agents .
the contractor will notify property owners and public utility companies having structures or facilities in proximity to the site of the work of the intention to use explosives .
such notice will be given sufficiently in advance to enable these potentially affected parties to protect their property from injury .
num protection and restoration of property and landscape the contractor will be responsible for the preservation of public and private property and will not disturb damage or move land monuments and property marks until the engineer has witnessed or referenced the location of the affected property .
the contractor will be responsible for all damage or injury to property resulting from an act omission neglect or misconduct in the manner or method of executing the work or due to defective work or materials .
the contractors responsibility will not be released until completion of the project and final acceptance is made as noted by the date shown on the region engineers letter of final acceptance .
the contractor will be responsible for any direct or indirect damage or injury to public or private property resulting from or on account of any act omission neglect or misconduct in the execution of the work or in consequence of the nonexecution of the work .
the contractor will restore the property to a condition similar or equal to that existing before such damage or injury occurred by repairing rebuilding or restoring and making good such damage or injury as directed by the engineer and at the contractors expense .
the contractor will take all necessary precautions to prevent fires during construction .
the contractor will obtain all necessary permits and will provide adequate fire protection while performing burning blasting welding and cutting .
num legal relations and responsibility to public page num num forest protection in carrying out work within or adjacent to state or national forests the contractor will comply with regulations of the south dakota state fire marshall united states forest service south dakota department of agriculture division of wildland fire south dakota department of agriculture division of resource conservation and forestry and other authorities having jurisdiction governing the protection of forests .
the contractor will also comply with sanitary laws and regulations in the performance of work within or adjacent to forest areas .
the contractor will keep the areas in an orderly condition dispose of refuse and obtain permits for the construction and maintenance of construction camps stores warehouses residences latrines cesspools septic tanks and other structures in accordance with the requirements and instructions issued by the forest supervisor .
the contractor will prevent and suppress forest fires and will require employees and subcontractors both independently and at the request of forest or fire officials to prevent suppress and to assist in preventing and suppressing forest fires and to immediately notify a forest official of the location and extent of any fire observed .
num responsibility for damage claims the contractor will hold harmless and indemnify the department its officers and employees from all suits actions or claims of any character brought because of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any person persons or property arising from the contractors operations or on account of or in consequence of any neglect in safeguarding the work or through use of unacceptable materials in constructing the work or because of any act or omission neglect or misconduct of said contractor or because of any claims or amounts recovered from any infringements of patent trademark or copyright or from any claims or amounts arising or recovered under the workers compensation act or any other law ordinance order or decree and so much of the money due the said contractor under and by virtue of the contract as may be considered necessary by the department for such purpose may be retained for the use of the state or in case no money is due the contractors surety may be held until such suit or suits action or actions claim or claims for injuries or damages as aforesaid will have been settled and suitable evidence to that effect furnished to the department money due the contractor will not be withheld when the contractor produces satisfactory written confirmation from the contractors insurer that adequate public liability insurance and property damage insurance providing coverage for such particular claims as may be made is in force and the contractor provides evidence the claim has been submitted to the contractors insurer .
a copy of a certificate of insurance without further confirmation of coverage for the particular claim being made will not be sufficient to satisfy the requirement of written confirmation .
num liability insurance the contractor will procure and maintain at the contractors expense during duration of the contract liability insurance with an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of south dakota for damages imposed by law .
the insurance will cover all operations under the contract whether performed by the contractor or by subcontractors .
before commencing the work the contractor will furnish certificates of insurance certifying that the policies will not be changed or cancelled until num calendar days written notice has been given to the department .
legal relations and responsibility to public num page num the certificates of insurance will provide evidence that the contractor carries sufficient liability insurance to protect the public from injuries sustained by reason of pursuing the work and that workers compensation insurance meets the requirements of the south dakota workers compensation law .
num opening sections of project to traffic the provisions of this section will apply to those projects or portions of projects on which the contractor is not required to maintain traffic as specified in section num .
the department may open certain sections of the work to traffic prior to completion or acceptance of the work .
such opening will not constitute acceptance of the work or any part of the work or a waiver of provisions of the contract .
on such portions of the project as are accepted for use of traffic the contractor will not be responsible for expense entailed in maintaining the roadway for traffic and will be compensated for the work as provided in section num .
damage to the highway not attributable to traffic or unforeseeable causes as set forth in section num will be repaired by and at the contractors expense .
if the contractor is dilatory in completing shoulders drainage structures or other features of the work the engineer may order all or a portion of the project open to traffic .
in such event the contractor will not be relieved of liability or responsibility during the period the work is so opened and prior to acceptance of field work .
the contractor will conduct the remainder of construction operations with a minimum obstruction to traffic .
num contractors responsibility for work the contractor is responsible for the work until the acceptance of field work is made by the area office except as set forth in section num b.num .
the contractor will protect the work against injury or damage from all causes whether arising from the execution or from the nonexecution of the work .
the contractor will rebuild repair restore and replace all work that is injured or damaged prior to the acceptance of field work at no additional cost to the department .
damage to work due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of and without the fault or negligence of the contractor including but not restricted to acts of god acts of the public enemy or acts of governmental authorities will be restored by the contractor at the departments expense according to section num or num as applicable .
following the acceptance of field work but prior to final acceptance as described in section num the contractor will be responsible for damage to work resulting from any act omission neglect or misconduct in the contractors manner or method of executing the work or due to defective work or materials at no additional cost to the department .
during periods that work is suspended for any cause the contractor will be responsible for the project and will take precautions as necessary to prevent damage to the project provide for drainage and will erect necessary temporary structures signs and other facilities required to maintain the project .
the contractor will properly and continuously maintain in an acceptable growing condition all newly established plants seedbeds and sod furnished under the contract .
the contractor will protect new tree growth and other important vegetative growth against injury .
the contractor will bear all costs for work performed during periods of work suspension not covered by a written suspension order or when the work is suspended for the contractors num legal relations and responsibility to public page num failure to comply with the provisions of the contract or when work is suspended by option of the contractor .
num furnishing rightofway the department will secure necessary rightsofway in advance of construction .
exceptions will be indicated in the contract .
num personal liability of departments authorized representatives the departments authorized representatives acting as agents and representatives of the department will not be liable either personally or as employees of the department when carrying out and exercising the power or authority granted under the contract .
num no waiver of legal rights the department will not be precluded or estopped by any measurement estimate or certificate made either before or after the completion and acceptance of the work and payment therefor from showing the true amount and character of the work performed and materials furnished by the contractor nor from showing that any such measurement estimate or certificate is untrue or is incorrectly made nor that the work or materials do not in fact conform to the contract .
the department will not be precluded or estopped notwithstanding any such measurement estimate or certificate and payment in accordance therewith from recovering from the contractor or sureties or both such damages as the department may sustain by reason of the contractors failure to comply with the terms of the contract .
neither the acceptance of the department or any representative of the department nor any payment for or acceptance of the whole or any part of the work nor any extension of time nor any possession taken by the department will operate as a waiver of any portion the contract or of any power herein reserved or of any right to damages .
a waiver of any breach of the contract will not be held to be a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
num environmental considerations and cooperation with environmental regulatory agencies the contractor will comply with all federal state and local laws and regulations controlling environmental protection .
project specific requirements may be found in the plans and specifications .
the responsibility for obtaining all necessary environmental requirements and permits will fall under the responsibility of the department or the contractor according to the party responsible for securing the source area or site of material or construction activity as described below .
a .
project construction and department directed work activities outside plan work limits for project construction work specifically addressed in the plans and department directed work activities that disturb soil and are not specifically addressed in the plans the department will obtain all required environmental clearances .
if the contractor discovers finds locates or becomes aware of any cultural or historical site or other unanticipated environmental effect the contractor will immediately suspend operations at the site or sites and will immediately notify the engineer .
the legal relations and responsibility to public num page num engineer will contact the departments environmental engineer to determine an appropriate course of action .
the contractor will aid and assist in any salvage or preservation program as directed within the plan work limits .
additional work and expenses caused by compliance with requests for assistance will be considered as extra work in accordance with provisions of section num .
the contractor will aid and assist in any salvage or preservation program as directed within the project limits .
additional work and expenses caused by compliance with requests for assistance will be considered as extra work in accordance with provisions of section num .
the contractor will install erosion and sediment control measures to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants resulting from construction activities .
the contractor will not cross streams rivers or other waterways with construction equipment except at temporary stream crossing structures approved by the engineer .
construction activities within wetland areas are prohibited except for those designated within the construction limits and specifically addressed in the plans and the us army corps of engineers num permit .
the contractor will properly handle store and dispose of litter construction debris construction chemicals and concrete washout to minimize pollutants entering storm water discharges .
the contractor will maintain a num foot minimum buffer zone of undisturbed soil ground cover vegetation around streams and wetlands material sources stockpile sites storage areas and waste areas .
if project circumstances prevent the contractor from maintaining the minimum num foot buffer zone the contractor will provide additional erosion and sediment controls as noted in the swppp .
b .
material sources stockpile sites storage areas and waste sites and contractor work sites outside of plan work limits the contractor will not use material sources stockpile sites storage areas and waste sites for the project or contractor work sites outside of plan work limits prior to the responsible party obtaining the required environmental clearances .
num .
department designated and designated option for department designated and designated option material sources stockpile sites storage areas and waste sites the department will obtain all required environmental clearances .
if the contractor discovers finds locates or becomes aware of any cultural or historical site or other unanticipated environmental effect the contractor will immediately suspend operations at the site or sites and will immediately notify the engineer .
the engineer will contact the departments environmental engineer to determine an appropriate course of action .
num legal relations and responsibility to public page num the contractor will aid and assist in any salvage or preservation program as directed within department designated areas .
additional work and expenses caused by compliance with requests for assistance will be considered as extra work in accordance with provisions of section num .
num .
contractor furnished for contractor furnished material sources material processing sites stockpile sites storage areas staging areas plant sites and waste sites and contractor work sites outside of plan work limits including but not limited to off project private work the contractor is responsible to obtain all required environmental clearances .
the contractor is encouraged to consider the use of locations previously cleared or disturbed by farming mining or construction activities .
the contractor must obtain the necessary clearances prior to the contractors use of area for the project .
the contractor is responsible for the arrangement and payment of specialized environmental consultants necessary to perform this work .
the following clearances are required a .
cultural resources clearance all earth disturbing activities not designated within the plans require a cultural resources clearance .
the contractor will arrange and pay for a cultural resources survey a records search or both .
a record search may be sufficient for clearance however a cultural resources survey by a qualified archaeologist may be required .
the contractor may obtain a list of individuals with professional qualifications to perform this work from the south dakota state historical society .
for work activities outside of the plan work limits the contractor must submit the cultural resources clearance to the engineer prior to beginning any earth disturbing activity .
the department will not be responsible for costs incurred by the contractor or for delays or other inconveniences encountered in obtaining the cultural resources clearance .
cultural resources clearance will not relieve the contractor of the responsibility of complying with all laws and regulations which govern the salvage and preservation of any cultural resources discovered during execution of the work .
if the contractor discovers finds locates or becomes aware of any cultural or historical site or other unanticipated environmental effect during construction operations the contractor will immediately suspend construction operations at the site or sites and will immediately notify the engineer .
the engineer will contact the departments environmental engineer to determine an appropriate course of action .
legal relations and responsibility to public num page num the contractor will aid and assist in any salvage or preservation program as directed .
the contractor will pay all costs related to additional work and expenses caused by compliance with requests for assistance .
b .
us army corps of engineers num permit and south dakota department of environment and natural resources num water quality certification soil disturbing activities outside the plan work limits in or around waters of the united states which include jurisdictional streams and wetlands may require a num permit from the us army corps of engineers coe and a num water quality certification from the south dakota department of environment natural resources denr .
the contractor is responsible to coordinate with the coe and denr for a determination on the need for a num permit or num certification .
for regulatory purposes under the clean water act the term wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions .
wetlands generally include swamps marshes bogs and similar areas .
the department will not make payment for costs associated with obtaining the required clearances and permits for wetlands .
c. structure work over or within waterways the contractor will prevent construction waste and debris from bridge construction or demolition from entering or being placed into wetlands streams rivers and lakes .
the contractor will perform excavation dewatering and removal of temporary works in waterways in such a manner as to prevent siltation .
if deemed necessary by the engineer the contractor will pump water from cofferdams to a settling basin or a containment unit .
the contractor will perform operations required within rivers and streams specifically jetting or spudding within silt containment areas cofferdams silt fence sediment barriers or other devices to minimize migration of silt off the project .
d. temporary work in wetlands whenever temporary work is required in wetlands the contractor must submit a plan to the engineer for approval that utilizes temporary structures timber soil with geotextile fabric or other suitable matting .
the plan must include erosion and sediment controls in accordance with the specifications .
the contractors plan must include a schedule for installation and removal of temporary materials so a field inspection can certify the materials were properly removed and the area properly restored .
the contractor is responsible for any corrective action required to complete this work .
num legal relations and responsibility to public page num num sound control requirements the contractor will comply with all local sound control and noise level rules regulations and ordinances which apply to any work performed pursuant to the contract .
all engines used for any purpose on the job or related to the job will be equipped with a muffler of a type recommended by the manufacturer and maintained in a satisfactory working condition .
num americans with disabilities act the contractor by signing and submitting a bid proposal will provide services in compliance with the americans with disabilities act and any amendments .
prosecution and progress num page num num subcontracting the contractor will not subcontract the contract or contracts in whole or in part without the engineers prior written consent .
the contractor will submit any request to subcontract on the form provided by the engineer dotnum .
the contractor will also submit on the form provided by the engineer any request by any subcontractor to subcontract to a lower tier subcontractor .
the contractor will obtain the engineers approval of a subcontractor before the subcontractor starts any work .
the contractor may subcontract up to num of the original contract amount based on the contract unit prices but must perform not less than num of the total amount of the original contract with the contractors own organization .
the contractors own organization includes the following workers employed and paid directly by the contractor equipment owned or rented by the contractor and materials purchased by the contractor for the contractors use in performing contract work .
the contractors own organization does not include any employee paid by any equipment owned by or materials purchased by or incorporated into work of any subcontractor assignee or agent of the contractor .
the term subcontract does not include the following num the production of any material outside the project limits including but not limited to the production of sand gravel crushed stone batched concrete aggregates ready mix concrete offsite fabricated structural steel other offsite fabricated items and any materials delivered by established and recognized commercial plants or num delivery of these materials to the work site from an offsite location in vehicles owned or operated by such plants or by recognized independent or commercial hauling companies .
project limits are defined as being within num mile of the project proper .
any item designated in the contract as a specialty item may be performed by subcontract and the cost of any designated specialty item performed by subcontract will be deducted from the total amount of the original contract before computing the num amount of work required to be performed by the contractors own organization .
the contractor will include all pertinent provisions of the prime contract in every subcontract .
no subcontract will relieve the contractor of the contractors responsibilities and liability under the contract and bonds .
num notice to proceed the department will provide a written notice to proceed to the contractor within num business days following the receipt from the contractor of the signed contract and related documents .
the contractor will not begin work prior to the date of the notice to proceed .
num prosecution and progress the contractor will include the proposed starting date with the signed contract .
the contractor will provide sufficient materials equipment and labor to complete the project within the contract time set forth within the contract .
should the contractor discontinue the work for any reason the contractor will provide at least a numhour notice to the engineer prior to resuming operations .
num prosecution and progress page num num limitation of operations the contractor will conduct the work in a manner and sequence to minimize interference with traffic giving due consideration to the location of detours and to the provisions for handling traffic .
the engineer may require the contractor to finish a particular section of work before starting any additional section if in the engineers opinion the opening of the section to be finished is essential for the public convenience .
num character of workers methods and equipment the contractor will employ workers who have sufficient skill and experience to perform the work assigned to them and operate the equipment required to perform the work .
the contractor will use equipment of appropriate size and sufficient mechanical condition to meet requirements of the work and to produce a satisfactory quality of work .
the contractor will not use equipment which will cause damage to the roadway adjacent property or other highways .
when the method or equipment to be used is specified in the contract the contractor will not use another method or equipment in the performance of the work without the departments written authorization .
the contractor will request this authorization in writing including a full description of the method and equipment proposed and the contractors justification for the proposed change .
if the engineer determines the contractors proposal would meet contract requirements the engineer may allow the contractor to work using the substitute method or equipment .
if the engineer later determines the work produced does not meet contract requirements the contractor will discontinue the use of the substitute method or equipment and will complete the remaining work with the methods and equipment specified .
the engineer may require the contractor at the contractors expense to remove and replace or repair deficient work to the specified quality .
no authorized change in method or equipment will be a basis for adjusting the payment for the work involved or the contract time .
num determination of contract time the department will state the time or times allowed for the completion of the work included in the contract .
the department will use working day count calendar day count fixed calendar date or a combination of day count and fixed calendar date as the method for specifying the contract time or times .
the department will define completion of the work either as a field work completion requirement or as a combination of a substantial completion and field work completion requirement .
if no substantial completion requirement is stated the contractor will have until the field work completion requirement to complete all contract work .
unless otherwise specified the department will consider the work substantially complete when all lanes are open to unimpeded traffic and the contractors work will not impede traffic again .
for the purposes of field work completion the department will consider the field work complete when in the engineers sole discretion all contract work is complete including all cleanup work .
prosecution and progress num page num when the contractor meets the requirements for the field work completion of the project the contractor will notify the area office in writing that the work is ready for the acceptance of field work to be issued .
when the engineer determines the field work is complete the contract time count for field work completion will cease .
the contract time count will resume when the contractor resumes work for any reason or when in accordance with section num repairs rework or other activities are ordered for work specified in the contract .
a .
working day count contract when the contract time is specified as a working day count contract time will be the working day duration allowed for the completion of the specified work specified as either a field work completion requirement or a combination of a substantial completion and a field work completion requirement on the project .
the area engineer will except for the period between december num and march num inclusive and during periods of suspension furnish the contractor a biweekly statement showing the number of working days counted for the preceding two weeks .
if the contractor elects to work in the period between december num and march num inclusive the area engineer will furnish the contractor a biweekly statement showing the number of days counted for the preceding two weeks .
the area engineer will only furnish a biweekly statement for the twoweek periods the contractor elects to work .
the biweekly statement will be deemed to have been accepted by the contractor as correct unless the contractor within num calendar days of the biweekly statement date files a written protest with the area engineer clearly setting forth in what respect the contractor feels the biweekly statement is incorrect .
if the area engineer and the contractor do not reach an agreement on any statement of working days the area engineer will refer the statement and the written protest to the region engineer for review and final decision .
a working day is any calendar day between april num and november num inclusive except saturdays and holidays .
if a contractor utilizes a saturday or holiday for construction work that day will be considered a working day .
the contractor will not perform work requiring inspection by the department on holidays without written permission from the region engineer except to make emergency repairs or to provide proper protection of the work such as curing of concrete .
written permission from the region engineer will not be required to perform work requiring inspection by the department on the second monday in october .
a day designated by the governor of this state as an administrative leave day for state employees will be considered for working day purposes the same as saturdays .
all other days between december num and march num inclusive will be considered for working day purposes the same as saturdays .
a working day will be counted on days when the contractor could be working on a controlling item but elects not to work or elects to work elsewhere .
when the contractor is working on a controlling item the department will determine if a full working day or a onehalf working day will be counted .
a full working day will be counted for any day described as a working day in the foregoing on which conditions are such that the contractor would be expected to do or does num hours or more of work on the controlling item .
a num working day will be counted for any day described as a working day in the foregoing on which conditions are such that the contractor would be num prosecution and progress page num expected to do or does at least num hours but not more than num hours work on the controlling item .
num of a working day will be counted on saturdays or a day designated by the governor of this state as an administrative leave day in the foregoing that the contractor elects to work at least num hours but not more than num hours .
a full working day will be counted for a holiday that the contractor elects to work regardless of duration .
the engineer will determine which days are working days .
when the contractor is or could be working on the controlling item but in the judgment of the engineer weather or job conditions beyond the contractors control are such that the contractor could or does work at least num hours but not more than num hours on the controlling item or the contractors efficiency is materially reduced the engineer may count num of a working day .
the department will not count a working day under the following conditions num .
when adverse weather prevents the contractor from performing at least num hours of work on the controlling item num .
when job conditions due to recent weather prevent work on the controlling item num .
when work has been suspended by an act or omission of the department num .
when a strike lockout or extraordinary delay in the delivery of materials not due to any fault of the contractor suspends work on the controlling item or num .
when seasonal limitations cause suspension of work on the controlling item .
if the contractor does not complete the work within the number of working days allowed the biweekly statement will note those working days counted in excess of the working day count requirement .
the biweekly statement will be deemed to have been accepted by the contractor as correct unless the contractor within num calendar days of the biweekly statement date files a written protest with the area engineer clearly setting forth in what respect the contractor feels the biweekly statement is incorrect .
if the area engineer and the contractor do not reach an agreement on any statement of working days the area engineer will refer the statement and the written protest to the region engineer for review and final decision .
when the contractor has met the requirements for the substantial completion of the project the working day count for substantial completion will cease .
when the contractor has met the requirements for the field work completion of the project the working day count for field work completion will cease .
the working day count will resume when the contractor resumes work for any reason or when in accordance with section num repairs rework or other activities are ordered for work specified in the contract .
b .
calendar day count contract when the contract time is specified as a calendar day count contract time will be the calendar day duration allowed for the completion of the prosecution and progress num page num specified work specified as either a field work completion requirement or a combination of a substantial completion and a field work completion requirement on the project .
the area engineer will except during periods of suspension furnish the contractor a bi weekly statement showing the number of calendar days counted for the preceding two weeks .
the biweekly statement will be deemed to have been accepted by the contractor as correct unless the contractor within num calendar days of the biweekly statement date files a written protest with the area engineer clearly setting forth in what respect the contractor feels the biweekly statement is incorrect .
if the area engineer and the contractor do not reach an agreement on any statement of calendar days the area engineer will refer the statement and the written protest to the region engineer for review and final decision .
the contractor will not perform work requiring inspection by the department on holidays without written permission from the region engineer except to make emergency repairs or to provide proper protection of the work such as curing of concrete .
written permission from the region engineer will not be required to perform work requiring inspection by the department on the second monday in october .
if the contractor does not complete the work within the number of calendar days allowed the biweekly statement will note those calendar days counted in excess of the calendar day count requirement .
the biweekly statement will be deemed to have been accepted by the contractor as correct unless the contractor within num calendar days of the biweekly statement date files a written protest with the area engineer clearly setting forth in what respect the contractor feels the biweekly statement is incorrect .
if the area engineer and the contractor do not reach an agreement on any statement of calendar days the area engineer will refer the statement and the written protest to the region engineer for review and final decision .
the department will not count a calendar day under the following conditions num .
when work has been suspended by an act or omission of the department or num .
when a strike lockout or extraordinary delay in the delivery of materials not due to any fault of the contractor suspends work on the controlling item .
when the contractor has met the requirements for the substantial completion of the project the calendar day count for substantial completion will cease .
when the contractor has met the requirements for the field work completion of the project the calendar day count for field work completion will cease .
the calendar day count will resume when the contractor resumes work for any reason or when in accordance with section num repairs rework or other activities are ordered for work specified in the contract .
c. fixed calendar date contracts when the contract time is specified as a fixed calendar date contract time will be the date when the specified work specified as either a field work completion requirement or a combination of a substantial completion and a field work completion requirement on the project shall be completed .
if the contractor does not complete the work by the date specified the area engineer will keep a record num prosecution and progress page num of working days as defined in this section counted after that date and furnish the contractor a biweekly statement showing the number of days counted for the preceding two weeks .
the biweekly statement will be deemed to have been accepted by the contractor as correct unless the contractor within num calendar days of the bi weekly statement date files a written protest with the area engineer clearly setting forth in what respect the contractor feels the biweekly statement is incorrect .
if the area engineer and the contractor do not reach an agreement on any statement of working days the area engineer will refer the statement and the written protest to the region engineer for review and final decision .
a working day will be defined as any calendar day between january num and december num inclusive except saturdays or holidays .
if a contractor utilizes a saturday or holiday for construction work that day will then be considered a working day .
the contractor will not perform work requiring inspection by the department on holidays either prior to or after the completion date without written permission from the region engineer except to make emergency repairs or to provide proper protection of the work such as curing of concrete .
written permission from the region engineer will not be required to perform work requiring inspection by the department on the second monday in october .
days designated by the governor of this state as administrative leave days for state employees will be considered for working day purposes the same as saturday .
a working day will be counted on days when the contractor could be working on a controlling item but elects not to work or elects to work elsewhere .
a full working day will be counted for any day described as a working day in the foregoing on which conditions are such that the contractor would be expected to do or does num hours or more of work on the controlling item .
a num working day will be counted for any day described as a working day in the foregoing on which conditions are such that the contractor would be expected to do or does at least num hours but not more than num hours work on the controlling item .
num of a working day will be counted on saturdays that the contractor elects to work at least num hours but not more than num hours .
a full working day will be charged for a holiday or a day designated by the governor of this state as an administrative leave day described in the foregoing that the contractor elects to work regardless of duration .
the engineer will determine which days are working days .
when the contractor is or could be working on the controlling item but in judgment of the engineer weather or job conditions beyond the contractors control are such that the contractor could or does work at least num hours but not more than num hours on the controlling item or the contractors efficiency is materially reduced the engineer may count num of a working day .
the department will not count a working day under the following conditions num .
when adverse weather prevents the contractor from performing at least num hours of work on the controlling item num .
when job conditions due to recent weather prevent work on the controlling item prosecution and progress num page num num .
when work has been suspended by an act or omission of the department num .
when a strike lockout or extraordinary delay in the delivery of materials not due to the fault of the contractor suspends work on the controlling item or num .
when seasonal limitations cause suspension of work on the controlling item .
when the contractor has met the requirements for the substantial completion of the project the working day count for substantial completion will cease .
when the contractor has met the requirements for the field work completion of the project the working day count for field work completion will cease .
the working day count will resume when the contractor resumes work for any reason or when in accordance with section num repairs rework or other activities are ordered for work specified in the contract .
num extension of contract time contract time is based on the estimated quantities as defined in section num .
if completion of the contract requires performance of extra work or work on items with an increase in quantities that will take additional time to complete the contract time will be extended in the same proportion as the cost of increased work bears to the total original contract amount .
if the contractor feels the time extension based on this monetary basis alone is insufficient for the increased work involved the contractor may submit to the engineer written notification of a time extension request containing a narrative justification citing the basis for the time extension .
the time extension request must cite how the increased work delays the completion of the entire project .
the contractor will submit this information as soon as possible after the increased work has been performed and prior to the expiration of the contract time as extended .
the contractor will immediately notify the engineer in writing if it becomes evident there will be a delay in obtaining critical materials .
delay which the contractor could have foreseen or prevented including but not limited to delay in delivery of materials from the supplier or fabricator or material delayed for reasons of late ordering financial considerations or other causes will be deemed to have been within the contractors control and will not be considered as a basis for granting additional time .
delay which the contractor could not have foreseen or prevented including but not limited to delay in delivery of materials due to an unusual market condition caused by an industrywide strike national disaster area wide shortage or other reason beyond the control of the contractor subcontractor or supplier will be considered a basis for granting additional time .
if for reasons beyond the contractors control the work can not be completed within the contract time as specified or as extended according to the provisions of this section the contractor may submit to the engineer written notification of a time extension request containing a narrative justification citing the basis for the time extension .
the time extension request must cite how the reasons of delay beyond the contractors control delays the completion of the entire project .
the contractor will submit this information as num prosecution and progress page num soon as possible after the contractor is aware of the delay and prior to the expiration of the contract time as extended .
if the department finds the work was delayed because of conditions beyond the control and without the fault of the contractor the engineer may extend the time for completion in such amount as the conditions justify .
the contractors claim that insufficient time was specified is not a valid reason for extension of time .
allowance will not be made for delay or suspension of the work due to the fault of the contractor .
following the substantial completion of the project or the completion of all field work if no substantial completion date is specified the engineer will furnish the contractor a partially completed contract claim form dotnum .
the contractor will complete the remainder of the contract claim form with the following information num .
a narrative justification citing the basis for the time extension including the number of days requested num .
a signed statement that the information furnished is true and fully documented and num .
permission for the department or the departments authorized representative to examine all contractor records concerning this time extension request .
the contractor will submit the completed contract claim form to the engineer within num calendar days of receiving the partially completed form .
the area engineer will review the request and forward the completed contract claim form to the region engineer for determination .
within num calendar days of the contractor submitting the completed contract claim form to the engineer the region engineer will notify the contractor of the region engineers determination .
if the region engineer does not approve the request in full the contractor may elect to have the request reviewed by the department claim review panel .
the result of the request for time extension will be deemed to have been accepted by the contractor as correct unless the contractor within num calendar days of the date of the region engineers result notification of the request for time extension files a written protest with the area engineer stating the contractor does not accept the partial granting or denial of the contractors request for time extension .
if the contractor does not agree with the partial granting of time or denial and the contractor elects to have the request reviewed by the department claim review panel the request will then be forwarded to the secretary of claim review panel for resolution by the claim review panel in accordance with the provisions of section num .
prosecution and progress num page num any time extension for completion granted will then be in full force and affect the same as though it were the original time for completion .
num failure to complete on time if the contractor does not complete the work within the required time provided in the contract or as extended by formally approved extensions granted by the department the department will deduct an amount pursuant to the following schedules from any amount due or that may become due the contractor for each working day or calendar day for calendar day count contracts the work remains incomplete .
the department will use the amount shown in the schedules per working day in all cases except when the contract time is specified on a calendar day count basis .
when the contract time is specified on a calendar day count basis the department will use the amount shown per calendar day .
the amount deducted will be considered not as a penalty but as liquidated damages due the department from the contractor by reason of added cost to the department for contract administration resulting from the work not being completed within the required time .
the department may permit the contractor to complete the work covered by the terms of the contract after the expiration of the contract time including any extensions .
this will in no instance be construed as a waiver by the department of rights or obligations under the contract .
a .
table a schedule of liquidated damages will be used in the following instances num .
when the contractor does not complete the work within the time specified or extended for the substantial completion of the project .
in this instance the engineer will use the value in table a for each day after the time specified or extended for substantial completion of the work until the contractor substantially completes the work or num .
when the contractor does not complete all work required for the field work completion of the project specified or extended in cases where substantial completion is not specified .
num prosecution and progress page num schedule of liquidated damages table a original contract amount amount of liquidated damages from more than to and including per calendar day per working day calendar day count contracts working day count or fixed completion date contracts num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num over num num num b .
table b schedule of liquidated damages will be used when substantial completion is specified and has been met but the contractor does not complete all work required for the field work completion within the time specified or extended for the field work completion of the project .
in this instance the engineer will use the values in table b for each day after the time specified or extended for field work completion until the contractor completes all work required for the field work completion of the project .
schedule of liquidated damages table b original contract amount amount of liquidated damages from more than to and including per calendar day per working day calendar day count contracts working day count or fixed completion date contracts num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num over num num num if the contractor does not meet the contract time requirements for both the substantial and field work completion simultaneously only the values shown in the schedule of liquidated damages table a will be used .
prosecution and progress num page num num suspension of work ordered by the engineer if the performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the engineer in writing for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the contractor believes that additional compensation or contract time or both is due as a result of such suspension or delay the contractor must submit to the engineer in writing a request for adjustment within num calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume work .
the request must set forth the reasons and support for such adjustment .
upon receipt the engineer will evaluate the contractors request in accordance with section num or section num .
if the engineer agrees that the cost or time or both required for the performance of the contract has increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor the contractors suppliers or subcontractors at any approved tier and not caused by weather the engineer will make an adjustment excluding profit and modify the contract in writing accordingly .
the contractor will be notified of the engineers determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
no contract adjustment will be allowed unless the contractor has submitted the request for adjustment within the time prescribed .
no contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause to the extent that performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause or for which an adjustment is provided or excluded under any other term or condition of this contract .
num default and termination of contract if the contractor a .
does not perform the work with sufficient resources to assure the prompt completion of the work b .
does not perform the work in accordance with the contract or neglects or refuses to remove and replace rejected materials or unacceptable or unsuitable work c. discontinues the prosecution of the work d. does not resume work which has been discontinued within a reasonable time after notice to do so e. becomes insolvent or is declared bankrupt or commits any act of bankruptcy or insolvency f. allows any final judgement to remain unsatisfied for a period of num calendar days g. makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors without the departments approval or h. does not carry on the work in an acceptable manner num prosecution and progress page num the engineer will give written notice to the contractor and the contractors surety of such delay neglect or default .
if the contractor or surety does not comply within num calendar days after the date of the written notice the department will have full power and authority without violating the contract to terminate the contract and take the prosecution of the work out of the hands of the contractor .
the department may use materials on the project and may enter into an agreement to complete the contract according to the terms and provisions thereof or use such other methods as recommended by the engineer for the completion of this contract .
costs and charges incurred by the department together with the cost of completing the work under contract will be deducted from monies due or which may become due said contractor .
if such expense exceeds the sum which would have been payable under the contract the contractor and the surety will be liable and will pay to the department the amount of such excess .
num termination of contract the department may by written order terminate the contract or any portion thereof after the department determines that for reasons beyond the departments or contractors control the contractor is prevented from proceeding with or completing the work as originally contracted for and termination would be in the public interest .
reasons for termination may include but not be limited to executive orders of the president relating to prosecution of war or national defense national emergency which creates a serious shortage of materials orders from duly constituted authorities relating to energy conservation restraining orders or injunctions obtained by thirdparty citizen action resulting from national or local environmental protection laws or where the issuance of such order or injunction is primarily caused by acts or omissions of persons or agencies other than the contractor .
when the department terminates a contract effective on a certain date the department will pay for items of work completed as of that date at the contract bid price .
the department will pay for partially completed work either at agreed prices or by force account methods .
the department will pay for eliminated items as provided in section num .
the department may at the departments option purchase from the contractor at actual cost delivered to a prescribed location acceptable materials obtained by the contractor which have not been incorporated into the project or otherwise disposed of as mutually agreed .
the department may consider reimbursement for organization of the work other overhead expense when not otherwise included in the contract and moving equipment and materials to and from the job the intent being an equitable settlement with the contractor .
the department will not consider the loss of anticipated profits in the settlement .
the contractor will make all cost records available to the department for determining validity and amount of each item claimed and to provide a basis for negotiating an equitable settlement .
prosecution and progress num page num the departments termination of a contract in whole or in part will not relieve the contractor of contractual responsibilities for the work completed nor will it relieve the surety of its obligation for and concerning any just claim arising out of the work performed .
num prosecution and progress page num this page intentionally left blank measurement and payment num page num num measurement of quantities a .
general the bid schedule specifies the unit of measure for each contract item .
the engineer will measure accepted quantities of work for each contract item in accordance with this section and the method of measurement subsection in the relevant specifications .
in the case of a discrepancy the method of measurement in the relevant specifications supersedes the method of measurement in this section .
unless the contract specifies otherwise the engineer will measure the actual quantity of accepted work for each contract item .
a station when used as a definition or term of measurement will be num linear feet .
the term ton will mean the short ton consisting of num pounds .
when the contract item has a lump sum unit the contract unit price is full compensation for the contract item .
the method of measurement and computation to be used in determination of quantities of material furnished and of work performed under the contract will be those methods generally recognized as conforming to good engineering practice .
b .
area the engineer will make longitudinal measurements for area computations horizontally with no deductions for individual fixtures having an area of num square yard or less .
the engineer will make transverse measurements for area computations by the neat dimensions shown on the plans or ordered in writing by the engineer .
c. structures the engineer will measure structures according to neat lines shown on the plans or as altered to fit field conditions except as otherwise provided in these specifications .
d. linear units the engineer will measure items which are measured by the foot including but not limited to pipe culverts guardrail and underdrains parallel to the base or foundation upon which such structures are placed except as otherwise provided in these specifications .
e. volume for volume calculations the engineer will use the average end area method the prismoidal method the truckvehicle method or other acceptable method .
in computing volumes of excavation the engineer will use the average end area method or alternate computation methods in the engineers sole discretion .
f. truckvehicle volume when using the truckvehicle method the engineer will measure the volume in a vehicle at the point of delivery .
the contractor will use vehicles which allow easy and accurate measurement of the contents .
the engineer may direct the contractor to level the loads at the point of delivery to determine the actual volume of the load .
the contractor will not exceed the legal load limits for the gross weight .
num measurement and payment page num g. standard manufactured materials the thickness of plates and galvanized sheet metal used in the manufacture of corrugated metal pipe metal plate pipe culverts and arches and metal cribbing will be specified and measured in decimal fractions of inches .
the term gauge when used to refer to the measurement of wire will mean the wire gauge which will be specified and measured in decimal fractions of inches in accordance with the applicable specifications .
when standard manufactured items are specified such as fence wire plates rolled shapes or pipe conduit and these items are identified by size gauge unit weight or section dimensions the engineer will consider this identification to be nominal weights or dimensions .
unless more stringently controlled by tolerances in cited specifications the engineer will accept manufacturing tolerances established by the industries involved .
h. material weight num .
general the engineer will measure asphalt materials by the ton .
the engineer may accept validated refinery weigh tickets accompanying bituminous materials transported from the refinery in truck transports for measurement purposes .
the engineer will weigh asphalt materials shipped by rail in a manner determined by the engineer prior to use on the project .
the engineer will measure cement by the hundred weight .
the contractor will weigh materials on a certified scale and will issue weigh tickets .
the contractor will provide a scale operator to operate the scale and perform accuracy checks .
the contractor will furnish dust proof and watertight scale houses with satisfactory lighting and heating equipment .
anytime during production the engineer may call for checks such as the accuracy check or adding known weights to the scale .
a .
scale certification the contractor will provide the engineer with a letter or seal of certification performed by a state scale inspector a licensed private testing company or a qualified representative of the scale manufacturer .
the department will certify portable platform scales and loader scales .
the department will use an accuracy check to certify portable platform scales and loader scales .
measurement and payment num page num b .
accuracy except as provided elsewhere in the specifications scales will be accurate within num at any point throughout the range of use of the scale .
for asphalt plant scales the num accuracy will be based on the net weight .
c. accuracy check the contractor will weigh a loaded truck on the nearest certified scale .
the contractor will weigh the same loaded truck on the contractors scale in at least two different positions and three if possible .
the rear wheels should be positioned first on one end of the scale and then the other end .
if the scale is long enough weigh the truck again with the rear wheels in the center of the platform .
the weights obtained must all be within num of the weight obtained on the certified scale .
a piece of equipment with a fixed known weight may be used to ensure the scale accuracy at the same rate specified above provided the piece of equipment being used to check the scale accuracy is fully fueled free of mud and dirt and weighs at least num of the maximum weight to be applied to the scale during the life of the project .
num .
trucks prior to performing hauling operations the contractor will provide the engineer with a list containing the following information for each truck that will be hauling on the project a .
truck trailer and pup identification numbers or license number b .
maximum allowable gross weight for the configuration to be used on the project c. fully fueled tare weight including date and time of current tare d. number of tires per axle and tire sizes and e. axle spacing .
the engineer may perform checks to verify the information provided by the contractor .
the contractor will tare each unit fully fueled before hauling to the project and once a week thereafter .
the contractor will furnish the engineer with a printout of each tared unit .
the printout will include the tare weight time and date .
the engineer will verify the tare weight within one week of commencing use on the project and a minimum of once per project thereafter .
tractortrailer combinations and truckpup combinations may be weighed separately without uncoupling .
the scale approaches will be level for a minimum of num feet or as approved by the engineer so the trailer or pup unit coupling does not transfer significant weight to the tractor or primary hauling unit to allow for accurate weighing .
each truck used to haul material being paid for by weight will bear a plainly legible identification and will be weighed empty at such times as the engineer directs .
num .
contractor computerized scales the contractor will perform and document scale accuracy checks at the frequency outlined below on all computerized scales used on num measurement and payment page num the project and will submit a copy of the documentation to the engineer once each week a .
balance for zero load the contractor will perform this test twice daily .
b .
accuracy check the contractor will check the scale accuracy prior to weighing material for payment and then once each week thereafter .
the contractor will rerun the accuracy check if the scale is moved .
num .
portable platform scales the contractor will recertify a platform scale if the platform scale is moved or sits over the winter months .
num .
stationary commercial scales and plants the contractor may use a commercial scale or plant if the scale has been certified within the previous num months .
all other checks may be omitted .
num .
portable plant scales the contractor will recertify a plant scale if the plant is moved or sits over the winter months .
num .
belt scales the accuracy check will consist of the contractor weighing an empty truck on the nearest certified scale to determine the tare then loading the truck using the belt scale then reweighing the truck on the same certified scale .
the weight obtained from the belt scale must be within num of the net weight obtained on the certified scale .
the contractor will perform the accuracy check prior to weighing the material for payment and then once each week thereafter .
num .
loader scales a contractor may use a loader scale on contracts if the quantity per line item of granular material to be weighed for payment is less than num tons .
the bucket used for certification and calibration will be the bucket used on the project .
the contractor will rezero the weight of the bucket as needed .
the accuracy check will consist of the contractor weighing an empty truck on the nearest certified scale to determine the tare then loading the truck using the loader scale in dynamic mode then reweighing the truck on the same certified scale .
the weight obtained from the loader scale must be within num of the net weight obtained on the certified scale .
the contractor will perform the accuracy check prior to weighing the material for payment and then once each week thereafter .
the contractor may use an object with a fixed known weight to ensure the scale accuracy at the same rate specified above provided the object being used to check the scale accuracy weighs at least num of the maximum weight being applied to the scale .
the loading area will be level .
operation of the loader scale will be as recommended by the manufacturer for accurate weighing .
measurement and payment num page num num .
automated scale tickets the contractor will supply all scales with a computerized automated ticketing capability for all materials weighed for measurement and payment unless otherwise specified in the plans .
the contractor will be responsible for the operation of the weighing system .
the weighing system will automatically print the weigh tickets when the truck or pup identification number is entered into the system .
the printed ticket will contain the following information a .
ticket number b .
project number or pcn c. date and time material is weighed d. material identification bid item number or bid item description e. material source f. truck and pup identification numbers or license number g. maximum allowable gross weight h. gross weight i .
fully fueled tare weight including date and time of current tare j .
net weight k. net weight allowed loader scale only l. net weight loaded loader and belt scales only and m. spread .
the ticket will contain the necessary information required by this section unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
the contractor will assure the tickets are clear and legible during the duration of the project .
the contractor will also provide a daily summary of the material hauled to the project unless otherwise allowed by the engineer .
num .
automated weighing system the automated weighing system must be capable of providing a security password allowing only authorized department and supervisory contractor personnel access to maximum allowable gross weight tare weight and net weight allowed loader and belt scales only input data and allowing only these authorized personnel to print the daily load summary by material type .
the automated weighing system must generate a single ticket when tractortrailer units can not be simultaneously weighed and must generate a separate ticket for pups when the truckpup combination can not be simultaneously weighed .
the contractor will use truck and pup combinations in such a manner that correct gross tare weights and net weight allowed loader and belt scales only are entered into the automated weighing system .
the contractor will change or substitute a pup only after the engineer has been notified and the maximum allowable gross weights and tare weights or net weight allowed loader and belt scales only are properly num measurement and payment page num entered into the automated weighing system and can accurately accommodate this type of change .
the contractor will program the automated weighing system so that when an overweight illegal load is on the scale a ticket will not be printed and an overload message with the gross weight will be displayed so that the overload amount is known allowing guidance to reduce the load prior to reweighing and ticket printing .
the contractor will program the loader scale so that when the net weight loaded is over the net weight allowed the loader operator may adjust the weight of the material in the bucket to allow the net weight loaded not to exceed the net weight allowed .
the automated weighing system must automatically print the weigh ticket for each load of material when the truck driver or qualified contractor scale person enters the truck or pup identification number .
the contractor will keep the weigh ticket with each load of material delivered to the project and will present the weigh ticket to the engineer prior to unloading the material .
the automated weighing system will provide the engineer with a printed daily summary of the individual net weights with truck and pup identification numbers and the daily total weight by material type .
all equipment materials labor and incidentals required for the automated weighing system and scales will be incidental to the related contract items .
num .
inoperable automated weighing system if the automated weighing system becomes inoperable during the work shift the department will allow the contractor to continue if the contractor furnishes a scale operator to perform the weighing duties according to the specified requirements .
if the automated weighing system is not fully operational within num working days following the effected work shift the contractor will not be allowed to continue .
if the automated weighing system becomes inoperable the contractor will furnish an experienced scale operator fully capable of accurately operating a permanent commercial scale or a portable automated scale system .
the contractor furnished scale operator is subject to the engineers approval .
if a loader scale or belt scale becomes inoperable during the work shift the contractor may not complete the effected work shift unless another certified scale is available .
i .
weight and volume conversion when requested by the contractor and approved by the engineer the engineer will convert weight measurement to volume measurement or volume measurement to weight measurement for payment purposes .
the engineer and the contractor will agree to factors for conversion before using this method of measurement of pay quantities .
measurement and payment num page num j .
timber the engineer will measure timber by the thousand board foot measure of material incorporated in the work .
the engineer will base measurement on nominal widths and thicknesses and the extreme length of each piece .
k. lump sum items the term lump sum when used as an item of payment will mean complete payment for the work described in the contract .
when a complete structure or structural unit in effect lump sum work is specified as the unit of measurement the engineer will construe the unit to include necessary fittings and accessories .
l. equipment rental the engineer will measure rental of equipment in hours of actual working time of the equipment within the limits of the project except when special conditions make some other method of measurement desirable .
num scope of payment the contractor will receive and accept compensation provided for in the contract as full payment for furnishing materials and for performing work under the contract in a complete and acceptable manner and for risk loss damage or expense of whatever character arising out of the nature of the work or the prosecution thereof subject to the provisions of section num .
payment for an item of work will include full compensation for furnishing labor materials equipment and incidentals required to complete the work not specifically measured and paid for under a separate bid item .
if the basis of payment clause in the specifications relating to unit price in the bid schedule requires the said unit price cover and be considered compensation for certain work or material essential to the item this same work or material will not also be measured or paid for under any other pay item which may appear elsewhere in the specifications .
num payment for extra haul of materials if through no fault of the contractor increase in the average haul provided in the contract results when subgrade subbase base course or surfacing materials including clay and filler can not be secured and used as shown on the plans or through a change in the plans the engineer will adjust the rate per ton mile at the rate specified in the special provision for price schedule for miscellaneous items .
average haul provided in the contract is obtained by dividing the haul units shown in the contract for a material by the contract quantity of the material .
payment for extra haul as provided in this specification will be full compensation for moving equipment delays in operation additional labor equipment and other costs involved .
the engineer will include extra haul as a new item on a construction change order and approval must be obtained prior to performing the work .
num compensation for altered quantities when the accepted quantities of work vary from the estimated quantities in the contract the contractor will accept payment at the original contract unit prices for the accepted quantities of work as payment in full .
the engineer will make no allowance for increased expense except as provided in section num .
engineer will make no allowance for loss of expected reimbursement or loss of anticipated profits .
num measurement and payment page num num extra and force account work the department may agree to pay for extra work performed in accordance with the requirements and provisions of section num at the agreed prices stipulated in the order authorizing the extra work dotnum .
in the absence of agreement the department may require the contractor to perform extra work on a force account basis to be compensated in the following manner a .
labor for labor and supervisor in direct charge of the specific operations the contractor will receive the rate of wage agreed upon in writing before beginning work or the actual rate paid in the event actual rate paid is less than the agreed rate for each hour said labor and supervisor are actually engaged in such work .
if a laborer or supervisor is paid for overtime during a calendar week and the laborer or supervisor is employed for part of that period on force account work the department will pay to the contractor a percentage of that portion of the overtime payment determined by the ratio which the total hours worked on force account during the week bears to the total hours worked during that week .
the department will pay at num overtime incurred due to the department requiring the contractor to do force account work during periods not normally worked .
to allow the engineer to verify wages paid and prorate overtime the contractor will furnish to the engineer certified payrolls during the period force account work is in progress .
the department will also pay the contractor an amount equal to num of the sum for labor as compensation for administrative and overhead costs .
b .
insurance and tax the department will pay the contractor the actual cost of property damage liability and workers compensation insurance premiums unemployment insurance contributions and social security taxes on the force account work with no percentage added .
the contractor will furnish the engineer with satisfactory evidence of the rate or rates paid for such insurance and tax .
in lieu of furnishing itemized statements to substantiate the costs of property damage liability and workers compensation insurance premiums unemployment insurance contributions and social security tax the contractor may elect to receive an amount equal to num of the actual labor costs excluding the num for administrative and overhead costs as compensation for those costs .
c. materials the department will pay the contractor the actual cost of materials accepted by the engineer and incorporated into the project including transportation charges paid by the contractor exclusive of equipment rentals as set forth in section num d. the department will add num to material and transportation costs as compensation for administrative and overhead costs .
d. equipment the department will pay the contractor for machinery and special equipment including fuel lubricants and transportation costs authorized by the engineer .
the department will pay these costs at the rates set forth in the south dakota equipment rental rates book which is currently established as the rental rate blue measurement and payment num page num book published by equipmentwatch a division of penton media inc. to determine an hourly rate the department will divide the monthly rate by num .
the department will adjust this rate for regional factors age and operating expenses as set forth in the rental rate blue book .
standby rates will apply when the work requires a piece of equipment not already on the project be brought in and through no fault of the contractor the equipment is on standby status .
standby rates will be num of the normal base rates without the operating expenses .
standby rates will not exceed num hours per day or num hours per week .
when a unit works for a portion of a day and is on standby for a portion the total time allowed will not exceed num hours for that day .
the costs for move in and move out of equipment not already on the project will be at standby rates .
this is in addition to the applicable rates for the hauling unit moving in and returning empty to its point of origin .
equipment will be paid for at invoice prices if necessary equipment is not of a type owned by the contractor or if equipment is available in the area at a cost less than the cost of paying force account including move in and move out for contractor owned equipment .
e. miscellaneous the engineer will make no additional allowance for general superintendence or other costs for which no specific allowance is provided in these specifications .
f. compensation the contractors representative and the engineer will compare records of the cost of work done as ordered on a force account basis .
g. statements the department will pay for work performed by force account based on itemized statements of the cost of such force account work detailed as follows num .
name classification date daily hours total hours rate and extension for each laborer and foreman num .
designation dates daily hours total hours rental rate and extension for each unit of machinery and equipment num .
quantities of materials prices and extensions num .
transportation of materials and num .
cost of property damage liability and workers compensation insurance premiums unemployment insurance contributions and social security tax .
the contractor will support each statement by attaching paid invoices for rented equipment and materials used including transportation charges .
however if materials used on the force account work are not specifically purchased for such work but are taken from the contractors stock the contractor will furnish an affidavit certifying the num measurement and payment page num following the materials were taken from the contractors stock the quantity claimed was actually used and the price and transportation claimed represent the actual cost to the contractor .
h. subcontracting when a subcontractor performs work on a force account basis in accordance with the provisions of an extra work order the engineer will allow the prime contractor a percentage for the administrative expenses incurred in connection with the work .
this administrative allowance will be based on the following table and is applicable to charges for labor and materials only and will be applied to all charges and added percentages specified in paragraphs a and c above .
bid items in the original contract are not eligible for this administrative allowance .
num to num num num to num num plus num of excess over num num and over num plus num of excess over num i .
profit the department will add num to the sum of items a through c for profit .
j .
excise tax the department will add applicable excise tax due to the south dakota department of revenue .
the department will compute the excise tax from the final total of items a through i .
num eliminated items if the engineer finds items contained in the contract unnecessary for the completion of the work the engineer will eliminate these items from the contract by written order to the contractor .
this elimination of items will not invalidate the contract or be cause for any action against the department .
if an item is eliminated the department will reimburse the contractor for work completed and all costs incurred together with the cost of transportation of materials prior to said notification and the cost related to return of unused materials to the supplier .
in lieu of reimbursement for the return of eliminated material the department may elect to purchase this material at the contractors actual cost .
the department will not make payment due to elimination of pile shoes regardless of work done or materials purchased by the contractor prior to notification of the elimination of this item .
num progress payments the department will make partial payments at least once each month as the work progresses if the total value of work done since the last estimate amounts to num or more .
the department will make partial payments twice each month if the amount of work performed is sufficient to warrant such payment .
the contractor may submit items and quantities that may warrant the engineers consideration for payment on an estimate .
the departments payments will be based upon estimates prepared by the engineer of the value of the work performed and materials complete in place in accordance with the contract and for materials delivered in accordance with section num .
progress payments will not constitute acceptance of the work .
measurement and payment num page num from the total amount determined payable the engineer will deduct payments due the landowner as provided under section num .
for each working day or calendar day counted after the contract time specified for the work as extended the engineer will retain the appropriate amount shown in the schedule of liquidated damages section num from the amount payable .
num payment for materials delivered to project the department will not pay for materials delivered to or stockpiled on the project until incorporated in the work in final position except as specified hereinafter .
the department may make partial payments upon the contractors written request on specific items which will form a part of the completed work and which are stockpiled in a manner and location satisfactory to the engineer .
the department will not pay for structural or reinforcing steel prior to fabrication except the department may make partial payment on structural steel to be used in bridge girders when requested in writing by the contractor .
the department will make partial payment only for structural steel delivered to and stockpiled at the fabrication shop .
the contractor may request partial payment for structural steel for bridge girders only once throughout the duration of the project .
the department may pay for mulch and seed provided the contractor has satisfactory precautions in place to ensure proper storage .
if stored materials are lost or damaged the contractor will repair and replace the lost or damaged materials .
if the department has made prior payment the department will deduct the amount allowed in whole or a proportionate part from the next partial payment until the materials have been satisfactorily repaired or replaced .
the department will pay for stockpiled materials on the basis of the quantities placed in storage .
the rate of payment will be on the basis of actual costs as evidenced by a delivery invoice or other satisfactory evidence of cost furnished by the contractor .
the payment will not exceed the contract amount or contract unit price for the item involved .
the contractor must supply a delivery invoice or invoices for all stockpiled materials except materials manufactured by the contractor which the department will pay according to the percentage established in the following table .
num measurement and payment page num spec ref .
contract bid item type of material payment unit rate of pay contract unit price num num gravel ton num num asphalt concrete mineral aggregate ton num num pccp coarse agg .
ton fine agg .
ton num num num structural concrete crushed gravel or rock ton num num various items depending on material involved .
the contractor will furnish paid invoices for all stored manufactured or fabricated materials that have not been incorporated into the permanent work within num calendar days from the date payment was requested .
the paid invoice will include a notarized statement from the supplier or fabricator certifying that payment has been received .
in the event a paid invoice is not received the quantity of any previously allowed material remaining in storage will be deducted from the next progress estimate and further allowance will not be made until the material is incorporated into the work .
num final acceptance and final payment when the department has made acceptance of field work as prescribed in section num and the contractor has provided all project documentation the engineer will prepare the final estimate of the quantities of work performed .
after the engineer determines the final estimate the department will pay the contractor the entire sum found to be due after deducting previous payments and amounts to be retained or deducted under the provisions of the contract .
prior partial estimates and payments will be subject to correction in the final estimate of payment .
final payment will be due num calendar days after the date shown on the region engineers letter of final acceptance .
the department will add interest to payments in excess of num which are due the contractor and remain unpaid num calendar days after the date shown on the region engineers letter of final acceptance .
interest will accrue at a rate of num per annum for the time period after the noted num calendar days until final payment is made .
num mobilization mobilization consists of preparatory work and operations including but not limited to the necessary movement of personnel equipment and incidentals to the project site for the establishment of offices buildings and other facilities necessary for work on the project for work and operations which must be performed and for cost incurred before starting work on the various contract items on the project site .
when an item for mobilization is included in the bid proposal the department payment at the contract lump sum price will be considered full compensation for mobilization costs .
measurement and payment num page num the department will make partial payments on the following schedule a .
when the contract has been fully executed by parties thereto the department will make a partial mobilization payment as determined by the following schedule except the payment will not exceed num of the total amount bid for mobilization .
num .
contract amounts up to and including num .
payment in an amount equal to num of contract amount .
num .
contract amounts in excess of num .
payment in an amount equal to num. plus num of contract amount in excess of num .
b .
when num or more of the original contract amount is earned an additional amount will be paid to bring the total payment for mobilization to num of the amount bid .
c. when num or more of the original contract amount is earned an additional amount will be paid to bring the total payment for mobilization to num of the amount bid .
d. when num or more of the original contract amount is earned an additional amount will be paid to bring the total payment for mobilization to num of the amount bid .
e. when num or more of the original contract amount is earned a final payment will be made to bring the total payment for mobilization to num of the amount bid .
when an item for mobilization is not included in the proposal this work will be considered as incidental to the various contract items .
num freight rates bidders will fully inform themselves as to the source of supply of acceptable materials needed for the performance of the work and as to carrier rates and other transportation costs and facilities for these materials before submitting proposals .
changes in carrier rates or in the cost of other transportation facilities used for materials during the life of the contract will not constitute cause for a claim for additional compensation .
num fuel cost adjustment the engineer will determine compensation adjustments for motor fuels and burner fuels consumed in prosecuting the work in accordance with the following provisions a .
general the engineer will assess compensation adjustments for the cost of the motor fuels and burner fuels whenever the current fuel index cfi is outside the range of num to num of the base fuel index bfi .
the engineer will only make compensation adjustments for burner fuel when asphalt concrete bid items are paid for on the estimate .
num measurement and payment page num the contractor is not required to notify the department at the time of submitting a bid proposal whether the contractor will or will not participate in the fuel cost adjustment program .
prior to execution of the contract the successful bidder must submit a completed fuel adjustment affidavit form dotnum included in the proposal or available from the department to the department for approval .
determination of whether to participate in the fuel adjustment program is the decision of the prime contractor .
if the prime contractor decides not to participate or if the prime contractor has a fixed fuel cost for any of the fuel types the department will make no compensation adjustment for the subcontractors .
if the prime contractor chooses to participate in the fuel cost adjustment program the fuel adjustment affidavit form dotnum must include the anticipated fuel cost of subcontractors .
if compensation adjustments are made the prime contractor will ensure all subcontractors including second and lower tier are included in the adjustments in proportion to the percentage of work and anticipated fuel cost by that subcontractor .
each week the department will record the average wholesale price for num fuel oil diesel regular unleaded gasoline and propane lpg freight on board fob south dakota terminals as listed in the oil price information service opis publication .
the bfi price for motor fuels and burner fuel to be used in the contract will be the average of the recorded wholesale fuel prices for the four most recent weekly reporting periods prior to the week of the bid letting .
the cfi price for motor fuels and burner fuel to be used for each progress payment will be the average for the recorded wholesale fuel prices for the four most recent weekly reporting periods available at the time when the progress payment is prepared .
burner fuel adjustment will use the bfi and cfi as determined for num fuel oil diesel except when the contractor lists the burner fuel as propane lpg on the fuel adjustment affidavit form dotnum .
in that case the bfi and cfi will be as determined for propane lpg .
the engineer will not assess compensation adjustments for fuel items which the contractor has obtained a fixed fuel cost or if the contractor elects not to participate in fuel adjustments on the fuel adjustment affidavit form dotnum .
fixed fuel costs are defined as a fuel cost that has been set and will remain the same for the entire length of the contract .
the engineer may make compensation adjustments in accordance with these provisions on progress payments without a prior approved construction change order .
b .
fuel cost percentage change the engineer will determine the biweekly change in fuel cost percentage by equation num as follows measurement and payment num page num equation num y z x x y z x y z x y z bfi bfi cfi change x motor fuel diesel y motor fuel unleaded z burner fuel changex y z percent change in the respective fuel price compared to the base fuel index price set for the contract .
cfix y z current fuel index price for the respective fuel type .
bfix y z base fuel index price for the respective fuel type .
c. contract fuel percentage for the purpose of determining fuel cost adjustment the engineer will determine a percent of contract for motor fuel diesel and motor fuel unleaded based on the original contract prices .
the engineer will adjust burner fuel based on the original contract prices of the plant mix asphalt concrete pavement bid items .
the percent of the contract will remain the same throughout the length of the contract .
no changes to this percentage will be allowed for any reason .
the sum of the individual fuel costs shall not exceed num of the original contract cost .
the engineer will determine the percent of the contract by equation num as follows equation num num x original contract cost affidavit cost contract y z x x y z x y z x motor fuel diesel y motor fuel unleaded z burner fuel contractxyz percent of contract for each respective fuel item .
affidavit costxyz cost from fuel adjustment affidavit form dotnum original contract costxy total of the original contract bid cost excluding lane rental and part b of the bid when ab bidding is used if applicable .
original contract costz total original contract cost for all plant mix asphalt concrete pavement bid items combined excluding bid items for asphalt binder stabilizing additive and hydrated lime .
only num measurement and payment page num bid items measured by the ton will be included in the calculation .
d. compensation adjustment the engineer will determine the compensation adjustments for motor fuel diesel motor fuel unleaded and burner fuel separately .
the engineer will base the calculation on the current engineers pay estimate the percent of the contract for each of the respective fuel items and the portion of the cfi price that falls outside the num to num range of the bfi price .
when the changex y z from equation num is greater than num the engineer will determine the compensation for each item by equation num as follows equation num .num num num . x y z x y z x y z x y z x change x estimate cost contract fca x motor fuel diesel y motor fuel unleaded z burner fuel fcaxyz fuel cost adjustment for the respective fuel item for the current engineers estimate .
contractxyz percent of contract for each respective fuel item from equation num .
estimate costxy amount to be paid on the biweekly pay estimate excluding all pay adjustments made for incentive disincentive price adjustments pay factor adjustments liquidated damages and royalties .
estimate costz amount to be paid on the biweekly pay estimate for all plant mix asphalt concrete pavement bid items combined excluding bid items for asphalt binder stabilizing additive hydrated lime sawing and sealing joints compaction samples and all pay adjustments made for incentive disincentive price adjustments pay factor adjustments liquidated damages and royalties .
the engineer will only include asphalt concrete bid items measured by the ton in the calculation .
changexyz change in the respective fuel price compared to the bfi price from equationnum .
when the changexyz from equation num is less than num the engineer will determine the compensation adjustment for each item by equation num as follows measurement and payment num page num equation num .num num num . x y z x y z x y z x y z x change x estimate cost contract fca x motor fuel diesel y motor fuel unleaded z burner fuel fcaxyz fuel cost adjustment for the respective fuel item for the current engineers estimate .
contractxyz percent of contract for each respective fuel item from equation num .
estimate costxy amount to be paid on the biweekly pay estimate excluding all pay adjustments made for incentive disincentive price adjustments pay factor adjustments liquidated damages and royalties .
estimate costz amount to be paid on the biweekly pay estimate for all plant mix asphalt concrete pavement bid items combined excluding bid items for asphalt binder stabilizing additive hydrated lime sawing and sealing joints compaction samples and all pay adjustments made for incentive disincentive price adjustments pay factor adjustments liquidated damages and royalties .
the engineer will only include asphalt concrete bid items measured by the ton in the calculation .
changexyz change in the respective fuel price compared to the base fuel index price from equationnum .
e. payment the engineer will determine adjustments on biweekly progress payments based on when the completed work is paid for not when the work is completed .
the engineer will make adjustments by utilizing the following lump sum line items motor fuel cost adjustment diesel motor fuel cost adjustment unleaded burner fuel cost adjustment propane and burner fuel cost adjustment diesel .
num prompt payment and retainage the contractor will pay subcontractors or suppliers within num calendar days of receiving payment for work that is submitted for progress payment by the department .
if the contractor elects to utilize retainage on subcontract work the retainage will be released within num calendar days after the work is satisfactorily completed .
a subcontractors work is satisfactorily completed when all of the tasks called for in the subcontract have been accomplished paid for and documented in accordance with the contract .
the required documentation may include but is not limited to certified payrolls material certifications haul road releases pit releases warranties operating manuals product literature and verification of final quantities .
the maximum amount permitted for retainage for any subcontract will be num of each progress payment .
num measurement and payment page num the prompt payment and release of retainage applies to all tiers of subcontracts .
if the contractor withholds payment beyond these time periods the contractor will submit written justification to the engineer upon request .
if the engineer determines a subcontractor or supplier has not received payment due without just cause the department may withhold future estimated payments and may direct the prime contractor to make such payment to the subcontractor or supplier .
prompt payment and release of retainage deviations will be subject to price adjustments as specified in section num .
division ii num construction details part a earthwork clearing and grubbing page num num description this work consists of clearing grubbing removing and disposing of vegetation and debris within the limits of the rightofway borrow and easement areas except objects designated to be removed in accordance with other sections of these specifications .
num materials not specified num construction requirements before clearing activities begin the contractor shall contact the engineer to determine the limits of clearing for the project .
the engineer will establish rightofway lines and construction lines and designate trees shrubs plants and other objects to remain .
vegetation and objects designated to remain shall be preserved free from injury or defacement .
if the contractor injures or defaces any item designated to remain the contractor shall replace the designated item with an item of the same size and type at the contractors expense .
surface objects trees stumps roots and other protruding obstructions designated for removal shall be cleared and grubbed including mowing as required .
when authorized the contractor may leave stumps and nonperishable solid objects extending more than num feet below subgrade or slope of embankments provided the stumps and nonperishable solid objects do not extend more than num inches above the finished ground line or low water level .
in embankment areas holes resulting from the removal of obstructions shall be backfilled with suitable material and compacted in accordance with section num b.num .
burning if permitted shall be done in accordance with applicable laws ordinances and regulations .
perishable material shall be burned under the contractors constant care and in a manner that will not jeopardize the surrounding vegetation adjacent property or anything designated to remain .
materials debris residue from burning and unburned perishable materials shall be satisfactorily disposed of .
if disposal is by burial a cover of at least num inches shall be provided and the area shall be shaped to present a pleasing appearance .
if the disposal location is off the project the contractor shall make arrangements with property owners in writing for obtaining suitable disposal locations .
these sites shall be outside the limits of view from the project .
the cost involved shall be incidental to the corresponding items listed in section num .
timber which can be utilized for logs posts poles ties or cordwood shall be considered as merchantable timber and shall be the property of the previous landowner .
when specified in the contract the timber shall be trimmed cut into merchantable lengths and neatly piled num clearing and grubbing page num adjacent to the rightofway at designated locations .
the contractor will not be required to cut merchantable timber into lengths shorter than num feet .
low hanging unsound or unsightly branches on remaining trees or shrubs shall be removed .
branches of trees extending over the roadbed shall be trimmed to give a clear height of num feet above the roadbed surface .
branches of trees extending over the sidewalk shall be trimmed to give a clear height of num feet above the sidewalk surface .
trimming shall be done in accordance with good tree trimming practices .
num method of measurement measurement for clearing and grubbing trees and stumps over num inches in diameter will be on a per each basis by actual count of such trees and stumps removed and disposed of .
the diameter of trees and stumps will be measured num feet above the ground .
old stumps extending less than num feet above the ground will not be counted .
no more than one tree will be counted from any stump .
when the contract stipulates that payment will be made for clearing on a lump sum basis no separate measurement will be made .
num basis of payment the removal of trees and stumps will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
when the removal of trees and stumps is not included in the contract the removal of trees and stumps will be incidental to the lump sum price for clearing .
the lump sum payment for clearing will be full compensation for removal and disposal of vegetation and debris .
removal of structures and obstructions num page num num description this work consists of removal and disposal of buildings fences structures pavements abandoned pipe lines pipe culverts other obstructions which are not designated or permitted to remain and other obstructions which are not removed and disposed of under other items in the contract .
this work shall also include the salvaging of designated materials and backfilling the resulting trenches holes and pits .
num materials not specified num construction requirements designated salvageable material shall be carefully removed in sections or pieces which may be readily transported and shall be stored at places specified .
unusable perishable material shall be destroyed .
nonperishable material may be disposed of outside the limits of view from the project with written permission of the property owner .
pipe shall be removed and disposed of as nonperishable material .
basements or cavities left by structure removal shall be filled to the level of the surrounding ground and if located in an area of an embankment or other structure shall be compacted under the same specification as the embankment .
in other areas the fill material shall be compacted as necessary to preclude undue settlement and shall be slightly mounded .
concrete basement floors and similar structures shall be broken up to prevent entrapment of water .
the contractor shall be responsible for the disconnection and capping of all utility services to the building .
bridges culverts and other drainage structures used by traffic shall not be removed until satisfactory arrangements have been made to accommodate traffic .
the substructures of existing structures shall be removed down to the natural stream bottom .
those parts outside the stream shall be removed down to num foot below the finished ground elevation .
when portions of existing structures are within the limits of a new structure these portions shall be removed as necessary to accommodate the construction of the proposed structure .
all designated salvageable steel or wood bridges shall be dismantled without damage .
structures designated to become the property of the contractor shall be removed from the rightofway .
blasting or other operations necessary for the removal of an existing structure or obstruction which may damage new construction shall be completed prior to placing the new work .
pipe to be reset shall be removed transported to the site of installation and stored so there will be no damage before resetting .
the contractor will be required to replace sections of pipe damaged by negligence at the contractors own expense .
num removal of structures and obstructions page num in removing curb gutter sidewalk and similar structures where portions of the existing structures are to be left in the finished work the old structure shall be removed to an existing joint or sawed and chipped to a true line with a vertical face .
where new pcc pavement or new ac pavement is placed adjacent to existing ac or pcc pavement the existing pavement shall be sawed full depth to a true line with a vertical face .
when removing manholes catch basins or drop inlets any functioning sewer lines connected to them shall be rebuilt and properly connected .
satisfactory bypass service shall be maintained during construction operations .
num method of measurement when the contract stipulates that payment will be made for removal of obstructions on a lump sum basis no separate measurement will be made .
when the contract stipulates that payment will be made for the removal of specific items on a unit basis measurement will be made by the unit stipulated in the contract .
when removal of pipe is to be made on a unit basis the quantity will be measured in linear feet .
end sections will be measured in linear feet as part of the overall length of pipe unless otherwise stipulated in the contract .
where curb and gutter adjoins portland cement concrete pavement to be removed the curb and gutter will be considered as pavement and will be measured as such .
num basis of payment removal of obstructions on a lump sum basis will be paid for as per section num .
removal of pipe not designated for salvage will be paid for as per section num .
variance from plan shown pipe removal quantities locations or dimensions will not be cause for adjustment in payment for incidental work .
payment for removal of obstructions on a unit basis will be made under the contract item remove payment for removal of obstructions by either lump sum or on a unit basis will be full compensation for removal and disposal of such items excavation and subsequent backfill incidental to the removal .
payment will also include salvage of materials removed and their custody preservation storage on the rightofway and disposal as specified .
when the contract does not include bid items for removal of structures and obstructions as set out in this section the cost for this work shall be incidental to the various other contract items .
roadway and drainage excavation num and embankment construction page num num description this work consists of excavation placement and disposal of material necessary for the construction of the roadway including hauling watering and when required the placement of select subgrade topping .
num materials a. unclassified excavation all materials except those classified as unclassifiedrock excavation rock excavation muck excavation unclassified excavation digouts option borrow excavation contractor furnished borrow excavation borrow unclassified excavation and other removal items paid for under section num encountered during the construction of the work regardless of the nature of the material or manner in which the material is removed will be considered unclassified excavation .
b. unclassifiedrock excavation unclassifiedrock excavation consists of the excavation and placement of both soil and rock when both are anticipated throughout the project area .
this item differs from unclassified excavation in that an undetermined quantity of rock shall be excavated in addition to the materials included in unclassified excavation .
c. rock excavation rock excavation shall consist of a sound solid mass of mineral matter in place and of such hardness and texture that the mass can not be loosened or broken down by ripping in a single pass with a tractor mounted hydraulic ripper equipped with one digging point .
the ripper and tooth shall be of a standard design adequately sized and used with a large crawler type tractor rated between num and num net fly wheel horsepower operating in low gear with sufficient downward force on the ripper .
d. muck excavation muck excavation consists of the removal and disposal of saturated organic mixtures of soils and organic matter which requires additional work or equipment not normally required for unclassified excavation .
e. unclassified excavation digouts unclassified excavation digouts consists of the removal and disposal of unstable material below an existing surface on which surfacing material is to be placed .
f. option borrow excavation material furnished by the department from a pit or other source .
the contractor may use this material at the contractors option .
g. contractor furnished borrow excavation material furnished by the contractor from a pit or other source .
h. borrow unclassified excavation material furnished by the department from a pit or other source .
the contractor must use this material .
i .
select subgrade topping sources of selected subgrade topping material will be confined to the areas specified .
the upper num inches of sodded areas materials with high num roadway and drainage excavation and embankment construction page num humus or silt content and outwashed material in poorly drained areas will not be acceptable .
unsatisfactory material found within the specified sources shall not be used as select subgrade topping .
j .
undercutting undercutting shall consist of excavating replacing and compacting the material immediately below the finished subgrade surface at locations specified and to the depth specified .
k. water water shall be furnished by the contractor and shall be free from injurious matter .
l. pit run pit run shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements the excavation and embankments for the roadway intersections and entrances shall be finished to smooth and uniform surfaces .
materials shall not be wasted without written permission .
grading operations shall be conducted so that material outside of the limits of slopes will not be disturbed .
prior to beginning grading operations in any area clearing and grubbing shall have been performed in accordance with section num .
borrow material shall not be used until all roadway excavation has been placed in the embankment unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
if using borrow material causes a waste of mainline excavation the volume wasted shall be deducted from the volume measured in the borrow area .
unsuitable material encountered in the subgrade or slopes shall be removed and the area backfilled to the finished graded section with approved material .
operations shall be conducted so the engineer can take necessary cross sectional measurements before excavation and before the backfill is placed .
unsuitable material shall be disposed of at locations acceptable to the engineer .
a disk designed and constructed for construction purposes shall be in use while embankment is being placed processed or dried .
the disk shall be a tandem disk approximately num feet wide with num disk blades approximately num inches in diameter per row and shall weigh approximately num pounds .
this requirement will be waived for anum and anum soils .
the subgrade shall be finished to within minus num feet to plus num feet from the design grade and typical section shown in the plans and to within num of the typical section cross slope .
the quarter crown within any num foot transverse length shall not exceed num feet when measured with a straight edge string line or by other suitable equipment .
the centerline shall be finished to a transverse distance within num feet of the plans shown location of centerline .
the following are definitions for the succeeding three paragraphs only earth moving operations the removal of surfacing or topsoil .
roadway and drainage excavation num and embankment construction page num sediment control sediment control shall include but is not limited to placing silt fence inlet protection and perimeter controls .
erosion control erosion control shall include but is not limited to placing seed erosion control blanket erosion control wattles turf reinforcement mat and erosion bales and spreading topsoil .
the contractor shall not begin earth moving operations until all sediment control measures are placed beyond the work limits but within the rightofway and easements .
the contractor shall not begin earth moving operations in the numrd mile until placement of granular base material has begun in the numst mile or as specified in the plans .
the contractor shall not begin earth moving operations in a numrd mile until erosion control measures within the work limits have begun in the numst mile .
when plans call for prime the prime application shall closely follow the base finishing operation and at no time shall the prime operation be more than num miles from the base finishing operation .
the cure time for the processed base prime and blotting sand application will be determined by the engineer .
a. excavation the unclassified excavation quantities will not be increased or decreased to reflect whether salvaged material was taken from cut or fill sections .
num .
classification of excavation authority to identify and define the physical characteristics which determine classification shall be the engineers .
num .
salvage of topsoil topsoil shall be removed from designated areas as described in section num .
topsoil that is not designated to be used shall be placed in the embankment as described in section num b.num .
num .
undercutting and material selection when specified select materials shall be utilized to improve the roadbed .
the work shall be performed in such manner that suitable materials may be selected removed separately and deposited in the roadbed within the limits and elevation required .
on specified density projects the contractor shall undercut to the limits specified .
on ordinary compaction projects where no undercut is specified the contractor shall scarify the exposed subgrade surface for the width of the subgrade to a depth of num inches below the subgrade and recompact to the required density in cut sections .
in embankments less than num feet not including subbase gravel the contractor shall scarify the width of the subgrade to a depth of num inches below the existing ground surface and recompact .
sod existing in the top num inches of subgrade shall be removed and replaced with satisfactory material .
num roadway and drainage excavation and embankment construction page num b. embankment num .
preparation of embankment areas sod which is not salvaged shall be thoroughly disked .
when undercutting is not required and an existing compacted road surface containing granular material lies within num feet of the subgrade surface the old road surfacing shall be scarified to a depth of at least num inches and recompacted .
num .
placing embankment sod and topsoil used in the embankment shall be thoroughly disked and pulverized .
sod and topsoil shall be placed in the fill slopes outside the shoulders of the subgrade or spread in the lower num foot of the fill between the roadbed shoulder lines provided it is at least num feet below the top of the subgrade .
sod or topsoil shall not be placed within num feet of pipe or within num feet of box culverts or bridges .
rocks broken concrete or other solid materials shall not be placed in areas where piling is to be driven or in areas that would interfere with the construction of other structures .
embankments constructed through lakes or swamps shall be constructed by end dump methods to an elevation that permits the use of normal construction methods .
this elevation will be determined by the engineer and will be subject to moisture and density requirements .
roadway embankment of earthen material shall be placed in horizontal layers not exceeding a loose depth of num inches and shall be compacted before the next layer is placed .
material may be placed in lifts greater than num inches provided test results verify that the specified density for the entire depth of the lift is obtained .
effective spreading equipment shall be used on each lift to obtain uniform thickness prior to compacting .
each lift shall be thoroughly mixed to provide uniform moisture distribution .
as the compaction progresses continuous leveling and manipulating will be required to assure uniform moisture and density .
construction equipment shall be routed uniformly over the entire surface of each layer .
when embankment is placed and compacted on hillsides against existing embankments or when embankment is built half width at a time slopes steeper than num shall be continuously benched as the embankment is built in horizontal layers .
benching shall be of sufficient width to permit operations of placing and compacting equipment .
each horizontal cut shall begin at the intersection of the original ground and the vertical sides of the previous cuts .
excavated benching material shall be recompacted along with the new embankment material .
when excavated material consists predominantly of rock that can not be placed in num inch layers without crushing pulverizing or further breaking down the rock such material may be placed in the embankment in layers not to exceed the thickness of the average size of the larger rocks or num feet whichever is less .
each layer shall be leveled and smoothed by distribution of spalls and finer fragments of earth .
specified density will not be required .
the material shall be satisfactorily compacted .
these roadway and drainage excavation num and embankment construction page num layers shall not be constructed above an elevation num foot below the finished subgrade .
any rock in excess of num feet in any dimension that is placed in the embankment will be positioned outside the finished subgrade shoulder and covered with a minimum of num feet of embankment .
these rocks will be placed individually and spaced far enough apart to allow for compaction equipment to compact the embankment directly adjacent to the rock .
in excavated areas composed mainly of bentonite or unstable material additional undercutting to a depth necessary to stabilize the areas shall be required .
excavated material which does not contain bentonite may be used to reconstruct undercut sections below the selected subgrade topping zone and the entire section when no selected subgrade topping is specified .
exposed rock that can not be handpassed through a num inch square opening within the rightofway and easement areas shall be disposed of .
the top num inches of embankments shall be free of rock fragments and stone that can not be handpassed through a num inch square opening .
field and farm entrances ditch and channel blocks and dikes shall be constructed and compacted as directed .
berms for structures requiring slope protection shall be finished to grade with num foot tolerance to provide a positive support for the slope protection .
other berms will be neatly finished to the same tolerance specified for embankment .
when portions of foundations for box culverts are constructed of embankment the embankment shall be constructed to the flow line grade as specified .
the contractor shall be responsible for the stability of embankments prior to acceptance and shall repair any portions which have failed .
embankment shall not be constructed on frozen ground and frozen material shall not be used in construction of embankments .
num .
compaction unless the plan notes indicate otherwise specified density method shall be the method of compaction used .
a .
specified density method soil shall be compacted within the moisture specification range in accordance with table num unless otherwise specified .
optimum moisture will be determined in accordance with sd num .
moisture tests will be determined by sd num .
num roadway and drainage excavation and embankment construction page num table num optimum moisture of embankment soil density specification percent of maximum dry density moisture specification percent of optimum moisture num to num num or greater num to num num or greater num or greater num to num excess moisture in the embankment material shall be removed by drying operations .
earth embankment shall be compacted to the percentage of maximum dry density specified in table num as determined by sd num unless otherwise specified .
roadway embankment within the area bounded by the toe of the berm slope and extending to a line num feet from the bridge end shall be compacted to a minimum of num of maximum dry density as determined by sd num .
soil used to construct the embankment in this area shall have an optimum moisture of less than num .
density shall be determined in accordance with sd num sd num or sd num .
prior to placement of granular surfacing materials the upper num inches of subgrade shall be reworked and recompacted to moisture and density requirements .
this requirement shall be waived for anum and anum soils .
material retained on a num inch sieve will be considered durable when after soaking in water for num hours this retained material can not readily be broken with the fingers and passed through the sieve .
when embankment contains over num by weight of durable material passing an num inch square opening and retained on a num inch sieve specified density requirements will be waived .
the embankment shall be compacted with sheepsfoot or other approved rollers to the satisfaction of the engineer .
moisture requirements will be determined in accordance with sd num except the optimum and field moisture will be determined using material passing a num inch sieve .
when anum soil gravelly is encountered density requirements shall be adhered to the moisture content shall be as needed to obtain density .
if the material does not contain enough fines to allow for conventional density testing sd num or sd num the material shall be compacted as specified for anum and anum soils .
when anum soil fine sand or anum num soil consisting of primarily fine one grain size sandy material is encountered specified density requirements will be waived .
embankment shall be spread in layers not exceeding an num inch loose depth and adequately compacted with approved vibratory or pneumatic rollers at the moisture content needed to obtain stability .
roadway and drainage excavation num and embankment construction page num b .
ordinary compaction method compaction may be accomplished with any type of equipment which will give uniform satisfactory results .
a rolling procedure shall be established which will produce densities conforming to table num in section num b.num.a unless otherwise specified .
sufficient tests will be taken during establishment of the rolling procedure to ensure that the required density is being obtained .
changes in material composition moisture content or compaction equipment may require that changes be made to the established rolling procedure .
soils shall be compacted within the moisture specification range in table num in section num b.num.a unless otherwise specified .
the moisture range will be established during the above rolling procedure .
visual confirmation of moisture content will be sufficient after the rolling procedure testing is completed .
excess moisture in the embankment material shall be removed by drying operations .
the drying under such circumstances shall be carried on until the moisture content is such that the required density can be attained .
each layer shall be satisfactorily compacted before the next layer is placed .
compaction shall be extended to cover the subgrade width in completed cut sections under the same requirements without additional compensation .
cut sections excavated below grade and refilled with the removed excavation or with selected soils shall be compacted in the same manner as embankments .
c. select subgrade topping the contractor shall develop a plan which demonstrates that an adequate quantity of the designated material will be salvaged or reserved for select subgrade topping .
it will be the responsibility of the contractor to follow the established grading plan to the extent that an adequate quantity of material for select subgrade topping will be conserved for use .
the surface upon which the select subgrade topping will be placed shall be constructed to within num foot of the required elevation .
compaction of select subgrade topping shall be by the specified density method .
d. waste and surplus excavation surplus excavation and waste material shall be disposed of as specified or as ordered by the engineer .
excess or unsuitable excavated material including rock and boulders that can not be used in embankments may be placed on the side slopes of the nearest fill and placed to maintain a distinct shoulder line .
waste material shall be placed the maximum distance possible and at least num foot outside and num feet below the finished shoulder elevation .
excavated material which contains bentonite shall be placed in that portion of an embankment section which is more than num feet below the finished subgrade surface in embankment slopes which are outside the subgrade shoulder line or in designated waste areas .
during placement of this material in the embankment the thickness of the total placement in any one area shall be as directed .
num roadway and drainage excavation and embankment construction page num e. unclassified excavation digouts when granular material is used for backfill the excavated area shall extend to a daylight point so that lateral drainage is provided .
the exposed undercut surface shall be compacted prior to backfilling .
the existing gravel shall be salvaged before and replaced after the unstable material has been removed .
f. option borrow excavation suitable materials removed from optioned borrow sources shall be used in the embankments .
optioned borrow sources shall be graded to a neat and sightly appearance in accordance with grades slopes and requirements of the option agreement and to permit accurate measurement of quantities .
g. borrow excavation suitable materials removed from borrow sources shall be used in the embankments .
borrow sources shall be graded to a neat and sightly appearance in accordance with grades slopes and requirements of the plans and to permit accurate measurement of quantities .
h. water sufficient equipment shall be available to apply the quantity of water required to secure the proper compaction before evaporation absorption or drainage prevents or interferes with the specified results .
moisture content of material shall be uniform for the full depth and extent of each layer .
i .
pit run pit run material shall be compacted to num or greater of maximum dry density as determined by the specified density method in layers not exceeding num inches loose depth .
if the material does not contain enough fines to allow for conventional density testing sd num or sd num the material shall be compacted as specified for anum and anum soils .
num method of measurement a. excavation excavation will be measured to the nearest cubic yard .
measurement of excavation will include unsuitable material excavated and removed to obtain proper compaction in cut sections and in foundations for fill sections .
suitable material temporarily removed and replaced to facilitate compaction except undercutting required in section num a.num second paragraph will not be measured for payment .
accepted quantities of excavation will be measured in its original position by cross sectioning .
the area excavated will include overbreakage or slides not due to carelessness of the contractor .
where it is impractical to measure material by this method acceptable methods involving three dimensional measurements or measurement in the hauling vehicle may be used .
with written agreement between the contractor and the department excavation which conforms to the staked lines and grades may be computed using original cross sections and staked sections .
when specified plan quantity will be the measurement for payment provided the project is constructed to the lines and grades specified .
measurements will not be made except those necessary to determine that the work has been performed in conformance roadway and drainage excavation num and embankment construction page num with the plans or to measure changes which increase or decrease quantities .
such areas will be measured differences in quantities computed and deductions or additions made .
when no provisions exist for payment on a contract quantity basis final settlement may be made on a contract quantity basis provided a written agreement between the contractor and the department is executed prior to final measurement .
unclassified excavation to be performed in connection with box culvert construction will be limited to that within the rightofway limits .
the quantity for this unclassified excavation will be plans quantity except as otherwise specified .
b. embankment measurement of embankments will not be made .
c. select subgrade topping measurement will be by plan quantity .
quantities will be based on computed embankment volume plus shrinkage .
if changes in plan dimensions or locations are authorized the final quantity will be determined by the as constructed volume using the shrinkage factor shown on the plans for the particular area of work .
final field measurement will not be made except that required to determine that the work was completed in accordance with plans and to document changes .
material used for construction of the select subgrade topping will also be measured as unclassified excavation .
d. waste this work will not be measured but shall be subsidiary work pertaining to the several classes of excavation .
e. option borrow excavation option borrow excavation will be measured in its original position by cross sectioning .
volumes will be computed in cubic yards .
original cross sections will be taken prior to removal of any material and final cross sections will be taken following replacement of topsoil .
salvaged topsoil from the optioned borrow sources will be included as option borrow excavation .
the quantity of topsoil stockpiled and respread on optioned borrow sources will be determined by measuring the stockpiles prior to removal of the material from the stockpiles .
f. contractor furnished borrow excavation contractor furnished borrow excavation will be measured in its original position by cross sectioning .
volumes will be computed in cubic yards .
original cross sections will be taken prior to removal of any material and final cross sections will be taken following replacement of topsoil .
salvaged topsoil will not be measured .
g. borrow unclassified excavation borrow unclassified excavation will be measured in its original position by cross sectioning .
volumes will be computed in cubic yards .
num roadway and drainage excavation and embankment construction page num original cross sections will be taken prior to removal of any material and final cross sections will be taken following replacement of topsoil .
salvaged topsoil stockpiled from the borrow sources will be included as borrow unclassified excavation .
the quantity of topsoil stockpiled and respread on borrow sources will be determined by measuring the stockpiles prior to removal of the material from the stockpiles .
h. haul measurement of authorized haul will be made based on material being taken from excavation and hauled the shortest distance possible .
the haul distance for material moved from outside the roadway will be measured along the shortest satisfactory route .
the haul distance for material obtained from the roadway and placed inside the roadway shall be measured along the centerline of the roadway .
haul shall be the product obtained by multiplying the number of units of excavation removed from its original position by the mean distance hauled .
the distance between the center of gravity of the excavation and the center of gravity of the embankment shall be the haul distance .
i .
water water will be measured by the thousand gallon mgal .
to the nearest num mgal .
measurement will be by use of calibrated tanks or an approved water metering device which records in gallons .
prior to using any water metering device the contractor shall furnish a certified statement that such device conforms to awwa requirements .
the statement shall show that the device has been calibrated within the past year .
should subsequent measurements prove the measurements are unreliable another certified device producing satisfactory measurements shall be furnished .
the head of each device shall be sealed when calibrated and the absence of such seal shall be cause to prohibit its use .
j .
pit run pit run will be measured to the nearest num ton .
water and materials which are paid for under separate items will not be measured under this item .
num basis of payment a. excavation completed and accepted work will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the class of excavation involved .
payment will be full compensation for excavation construction and compaction of cuts and embankments shaping of slopes finishing of surface disposal of surplus materials completion of subgrade shoulders and roadway and maintenance .
scarifying shaping and recompacting as required under section num a.num shall be incidental to the unit price bid for excavation .
separate payment will not be made .
num .
unclassified excavation excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price for unclassified excavation unless contract items provide for other classes of excavation .
roadway and drainage excavation num and embankment construction page num when no bid item or other mention of rock is shown in the contract and rock is encountered that requires blasting to excavate such rock excavation will be paid for as per section num .
notification shall be given far enough in advance to ascertain the extent and nature of the rock formation before removal is begun .
payment as rock excavation will not be made unless notification is given .
num .
unclassifiedrock excavation unclassifiedrock excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price for unclassifiedrock excavation .
num .
rock excavation when an item for rock excavation is provided payment will be made at the contract unit price .
num .
muck excavation when an item for muck excavation is provided payment will be made at the contract unit price .
num .
unclassified excavation digouts when an item for unclassified excavation digout is provided payment will be made at the contract unit price .
num .
undercutting undercutting as described in section num a.num with corrections made for portions not accomplished and for portions not shown in the plans but ordered by the engineer will be paid for at the contract unit price .
payment will be full compensation for work over and above that normally required for unclassified excavation .
b. embankment embankment will not be paid for directly but shall be subsidiary work pertaining to the several classes of excavation .
c. select subgrade topping select subgrade topping will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for work over and above that normally required for embankment construction .
d. waste waste will not be paid for directly but shall be subsidiary work pertaining to the several classes of excavation .
e. option borrow excavation option borrow excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for excavation and furnishing the material on the project construction and compaction of embankments shaping of slopes finishing of surface completion of subgrade shoulders and roadway maintenance and for furnishing materials except topsoil labor and incidentals required for restoration of the pit .
topsoil stockpiled from the option borrow source will be respread and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard of option borrow excavation and placing topsoil .
when the contractor uses a pit not designated on the plans the payment for topsoil seeding fertilizing and mulching shall be plans quantity of the pit designated on the plans .
num roadway and drainage excavation and embankment construction page num f. contractor furnished borrow excavation contractor furnished borrow excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for excavation and furnishing the material on the project construction and compaction of embankments shaping of slopes finishing of surface completion of subgrade shoulders and roadway maintenance and for furnishing materials labor and incidentals required for restoration of the pit .
topsoil seed fertilizer and mulch for the restoration of the pit shall be incidental to the unit price per cubic yard of contractor furnished borrow excavation .
g. borrow unclassified excavation borrow unclassified excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for excavation and furnishing the material on the project construction and compaction of embankments shaping of slopes finishing of surface completion of subgrade shoulders and roadway maintenance and for furnishing materials except topsoil labor and incidentals required for restoration of the pit .
topsoil stockpiled from the borrow source will be respread and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard of borrow unclassified excavation and placing topsoil .
h. haul this work will not be paid for directly but shall be subsidiary work pertaining to the several classes of excavation .
when through no fault of the contractor changes cause an increase in the necessary haul the resulting additional haul total length of haul less average plan shown haul for the entire project will be paid at the price established in the special provision for price schedule for miscellaneous items .
i .
water water will be paid for at the contract unit price per thousand gallons mgal .
j .
pit run pit run will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and placing materials labor equipment and all incidentals required .
dust control num page num num description this work shall consist of the application of a magnesium chloride solution or a calcium chloride solution to a prepared surface for dust control .
num materials dust control materials shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements dust control chlorides shall be uniformly applied under pressure in liquid form by mechanical equipment .
the equipment must be such that the application rate can be set determined and changed as required .
the rate of application shall be num pounds per square yard of surfacing .
this weight shall be the anhydrous weight of calcium chloride or magnesium chloride in the solution as determined from the certificate of compliance .
the material may be applied in one or two applications .
the dust control material shall be blended into the top num to num inches of the gravel surfacing .
the addition of water may be necessary to adequately compact the material .
rolling will be required as determined by the engineer .
additional applications or spot applications may be necessary to maintain dust control .
num method of measurement a .
dust control chlorides calcium chloride and magnesium chloride will be measured by the anhydrous weight in pounds .
the weight of anhydrous material will be based on the actual concentration to the nearest num as determined by the departments materials surfacing central laboratory and the actual weight of the solution applied .
b .
water water will be measured as specified in section num .
num basis of payment a .
dust control chlorides dust control chlorides will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound .
payment shall be full compensation for all equipment labor tools materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
b .
water water will be paid for as specified in section num .
num dust control page num this page intentionally left blank roadway shaping num page num num description this work consists of reshaping an existing surface prior to placement of surfacing material .
num materials not specified num construction requirements this work shall be performed in advance of placement of surfacing material .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to maintain the prepared surface until surfacing has been placed .
a .
surface preparation the upper num inches of granular material shall be scarified reworked shaped and recompacted to the typical section in accordance with section num c. b .
ordinary roadway shaping the existing granular material shall be removed and the upper num inches of the subgrade shall be reworked and recompacted in accordance with section num b.num.a .
after the subgrade is reworked and recompacted the granular material shall be brought back onto the roadway and recompacted in accordance with section num d. on newly constructed earth subgrades the upper num inches of the subgrade shall be reworked and recompacted in accordance with section num b.num.a prior to placing granular materials .
this requirement shall be waived for anum and anum soils .
c. heavy roadway shaping the existing granular material shall be removed and upper num inches of the subgrade shall be reworked and recompacted in a minimum of two lifts in accordance with section num b.num.a .
the engineer may order the contractor to rework and recompact the subgrade to a depth greater than num inches .
if more than num inches of the subgrade is reworked and recompacted the maximum lift thickness during recompaction shall not exceed num inches .
after the subgrade is reworked and recompacted the granular material shall be brought back onto the roadway and recompacted in accordance with section num d. on newly constructed earth subgrades the upper num inches of the subgrade shall be reworked and recompacted in accordance with section num b.num.a prior to placing granular materials .
this requirement shall be waived for anum and anum soils .
d. unclassified excavation digouts unclassified excavation digouts consists of the removal and disposal of unstable material below the required depth of surface preparation ordinary roadway shaping or heavy roadway shaping on which surfacing material is to be placed .
if unstable material is encountered the contractor shall excavate unstable material .
when granular material is used for backfill the excavated area shall extend to a daylight point so lateral drainage is provided .
the exposed undercut surface shall be satisfactorily compacted prior to backfilling .
backfill shall be placed and compacted as directed by the engineer .
num roadway shaping page num the subgrade shall be finished to within minus num feet to plus num feet from the design grade and typical section shown in the plans and to within num of the typical section cross slope .
the quarter crown within any num foot transverse length shall not exceed num feet when measured with a straight edge stringline or by other suitable equipment .
following roadway shaping the centerline shall be finished to a transverse distance within num feet of the plans shown location of centerline .
following surface preparation the centerline shall be finished to a transverse distance within num foot of the plans shown location of centerline .
water shall be furnished by the contractor in accordance with section num .
num method of measurement a .
surface preparation ordinary roadway shaping and heavy roadway shaping surface preparation ordinary roadway shaping and heavy roadway shaping will be measured to the nearest num mile along the centerline of the project .
if additional heavy roadway shaping is required the quantity of heavy roadway shaping will be proportionately increased by the same percentage increase in required depth .
for example heavy roadway shaping to a depth of num inches will be equivalent to num times the quantity of the standard heavy roadway shaping .
on projects involving more than one mainline roadbed each roadbed will be measured based on the project centerline .
when a project centerline is not provided measurement of each roadbed will be based on its construction centerline .
measurement of access roads for rest areas and weigh stations cross roads ramps and service roads will be based on construction lines .
the points where measurement will begin and end will be as shown .
b. unclassified excavation digouts excavation of unstable material will be measured as set forth in section num .
c. water water will be measured in accordance with section num .
granular material other than existing surface gravel used to backfill digouts will be measured to the nearest num ton .
num basis of payment a .
surface preparation surface preparation will be paid for at the contract unit price per mile .
payment will be full compensation for scarifying reworking shaping compacting reprocessing blotters if required equipment labor and incidentals necessary to satisfactorily complete the work .
b .
ordinary roadway shaping and heavy roadway shaping ordinary roadway shaping and heavy roadway shaping will be paid for at the contract unit price per mile .
payment will be full compensation for equipment labor and incidentals necessary to roadway shaping num page num satisfactorily remove the existing surfacing shape replace and compact the materials as specified .
c. unclassified excavation digouts unclassified excavation digouts will be paid for as per section num .
d. water water will be paid for in accordance with section num .
granular material used to backfill digouts will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
the contract unit price shall include all costs associated with furnishing hauling placing and compacting the material .
num roadway shaping page num this page intentionally left blank salvaging stockpiling and placing topsoil num page num num description this work consists of excavating hauling stockpiling depositing and spreading topsoil on prepared areas .
num materials not specified num construction requirements a. salvage topsoil shall be selected from the regular grading areas or from other designated areas .
areas from which topsoil is to be excavated shall be cleared of objectionable vegetation and all litter such as brush rock and foreign material .
topsoil shall be excavated in sufficient volume to cover the designated areas to the required depths .
salvaged topsoil may be stockpiled in convenient locations within the rightofway as approved by the engineer .
the separation of cut and fill piles is not required .
topsoil piles shall be located where the topsoil will not run off into any waterway due to a rain event .
when operations of the contractor do not permit stockpiling of topsoil within the rightof way it shall be the contractors obligation to arrange for stockpile sites at the contractors own expense .
the stockpiles shall be shaped and smoothed to permit accurate measurements .
stockpile areas shall be left in a neat condition .
b .
preparation of roadway areas designated to be covered with salvaged topsoil shall be undercut or underfilled so the finished lines conform to the template lines on the cross sections after the topsoil placement .
the areas receiving topsoil shall be shaped and smoothed prior to placing topsoil .
c. placing topsoil shall be spread evenly and uniformly over the designated areas to the specified depth .
if topsoil is not available in sufficient quantities to cover the designated areas to the plan specified depth the contractor shall spread the available topsoil as required by the engineer .
num method of measurement a. salvaged topsoil measurement for removal of topsoil from its original position will be made in cubic yards .
measurement will not be made unless such removal is designated on the plans or directed by the engineer .
the volume of topsoil will be determined by measuring the topsoil stockpiles .
b .
placing topsoil the cubic yards of topsoil to be measured shall be the quantity of topsoil removed from stockpiles and placed on the designated areas .
measurements will be made prior to removal of the material from such stockpiles .
num salvaging stockpiling and placing topsoil page num num basis of payment a. salvaged topsoil topsoil salvaged from contractor furnished borrow sources will be incidental to the contract unit price per cubic yard for contractor furnished borrow excavation .
topsoil salvaged from option borrow sources will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for option borrow excavation .
topsoil salvaged from designated borrow sources will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for borrow unclassified excavation .
all other topsoil will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for unclassified excavation .
the amount of topsoil that has been added to the option borrow excavation borrow unclassified excavation and unclassified excavation quantity will be indicated on the plans .
the payment will be full compensation for excavation which includes necessary undercutting to provide space for topsoil placement and stockpiling .
separate payment will not be made for haul under this item .
b .
placing topsoil the placement of salvaged topsoil will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for placing topsoil .
topsoil placed on contractor furnished borrow sources will be incidental to the contract unit price per cubic yard for contractor furnished borrow excavation .
this payment shall be full compensation for labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary for removing topsoil from stockpiles hauling depositing spreading and finishing of topsoil .
separate payment will not be made for haul under this item .
obliterating old roads num page num num description this work consists of scarifying plowing grading and harrowing of abandoned roads outside the limits of the new construction .
num materials not specified num construction requirements after opening the new road to traffic the portion of the road to be obliterated shall be graded to a contour which will blend with the contour of the adjoining land .
obliteration and removal shall include flattening the backslopes and embankment slopes so farm cultivation work could be done to the satisfaction of the engineer .
portions of the obliterated road surface to be covered with less than num foot of earth shall be scarified to a depth of not less than num inches .
in areas of rock or rough topography not adaptable to cultivation the desired obliteration and disposal will be detailed on the plans .
num method of measurement the item of obliterating old roads will be measured to the nearest station of num feet along the centerline of the old road .
num basis of payment payment for obliterating old roads will be made at the contract unit price per station inclusive of all labor and equipment required .
num obliterating old roads page num this page intentionally left blank incidental work num page num num description this work includes all incidental items listed in the contract which must be performed to complete the contract .
num materials not specified num construction requirements incidental work will be listed in detail in the plans .
this work shall be performed in a skillful manner to properly facilitate the whole of the work and as directed .
num method of measurement field measurement for the item of incidental work will not be required .
num basis of payment incidental work will be paid for at the contract lump sum price unless changes in work are ordered by the engineer .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment and materials necessary to complete the work .
num incidental work page num this page intentionally left blank part b granular bases and surfacing num granular bases and surfacing page num num description this work consists of providing one or more courses of aggregate on a prepared surface .
num materials a. subbase base course gravel cushion and gravel surfacing shall conform to section num .
granular additives including but not limited to sand and rock may be necessary to produce material of the type specified .
b. clay binder when required for gravel surfacing shall conform to section num .
c. subbase salvaged base course salvaged gravel cushion salvaged and gravel surfacing salvaged shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements a .
general requirements the following processing descriptions shall apply to this work road mix method prior to placement the contractor shall windrow and equalize the materials including water to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the contractor shall use a blade or other suitable equipment to spread the materials .
the contractor shall windrow granular materials dumped on the prepared surface prior to incorporating additives .
central plant mix method prior to placement the contractor shall process and uniformly feed materials including water into the mixer at a predetermined rate .
the plant shall be equipped with positive proportioning devices and shall thoroughly mix the materials .
processed granular material shall be placed in accordance with the following requirements .
num .
mainline granular material placed on the mainline portion of the roadway shall be processed by either road mix method or central plant mix method .
when the material is laid by a spreader the material shall have been previously processed by the central plant mix method .
the material placed shall be limited to the quantity necessary to construct a maximum of a num inch compacted layer .
num granular bases and surfacing page num num .
shoulders granular material placed on the shoulder portion of the roadway shall be processed and placed in accordance with the following a .
adjacent to pcc pavement granular material placed adjacent to portland cement concrete pavement shall be processed by the central plant mix method and placed with a spreader approved by the engineer .
the material placed shall be limited to the quantity necessary to construct a maximum of a num inch compacted layer .
b .
adjacent to ac pavement granular material placed adjacent to asphalt concrete pavement shall be processed and placed by one of the following methods num granular material shall be processed by the central plant mix method and placed with a spreader approved by the engineer .
the material placed shall be limited to the quantity necessary to construct a maximum of a num inch compacted layer .
num granular material shall be placed on the shoulder and processed by the road mixed method .
the material placed shall be limited to the quantity necessary to construct a maximum of a num inch compacted layer .
when granular material is placed on the shoulder and the final finished surface is to remain granular surface next to either pcc pavement or ac pavement the contractor may use either of the methods described in num a.num.b .
the granular material shall be spread evenly to the specified width .
watering shall be accomplished during the spreading operation .
the final rolling of the top surface of the granular material shall embed as many loose stones as possible .
the finished surface shall be smooth and free from waves and the contractor shall finish the surfacing materials to within num of the typical section cross slope .
the quarter crown within any num foot transverse length or actual lane width paved with a single paver pass shall not exceed num feet when measured with a straight edge stringline or other suitable equipment .
the centerline shall be finished to a transverse distance within num feet of the plans shown location of centerline .
granular material used for backfilling unclassified excavation digouts intersecting roads and entrances shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the engineer .
rca shall not be used in areas where drainage fabric edge drains or other similar drainage systems are present except rca will be allowed where approach drains and transverse drains are present .
granular bases and surfacing num page num b. subbase and base course each layer shall be compacted to the specified density before the next lift is placed and shall be rolled until a uniform and stable surface is obtained .
subbase shall be compacted to num of the maximum dry density .
base course shall be compacted to num of the maximum dry density .
the maximum dry density will be determined by sd num method num .
the percent of the maximum dry density will be determined by sd num sd num or sd num .
c. subbase salvaged and base course salvaged compaction and density requirements shall be a minimum of num of the target dry density established by sd num and compacted under the following conditions num .
material shall have a minimum of num moisture uniformly blended throughout the depth of the lift of material .
the percent moisture may be adjusted by the engineer .
num .
a minimum of num test strip for each lift placed shall be completed to determine the target dry density and optimum rolling sequence .
the test strips will remain in place as part of the completed work .
num .
the depth of the test strip lift shall be representative of the project .
num .
when there is a significant change in mix proportions weather conditions equipment or other controlling factors the engineer may require construction of another test strip to check target density .
num .
pneumatic tired rollers shall have an effective roller weight of at least num pounds per inch of roller width or satisfactory vibratory compaction equipment .
tires shall be uniformly inflated so their air pressures will not vary by more than num psi .
rollers shall be operated with tire pressures and wheel loads within the manufacturers recommended range for the size and ply of the tire being used .
steel face rollers shall furnish a minimum rolling weight of num pounds per inch of rolling width .
d. gravel cushion and gravel cushion salvaged compaction to a specified density is not required .
rolling shall proceed simultaneously with the spreading and watering and continue in overlapping strips until a uniform stable surface is obtained .
pneumatic tired rollers shall have an effective roller weight of at least num pounds per inch of roller width or satisfactory vibratory compaction equipment .
tires shall be uniformly inflated so their air pressures will not vary by more than num psi .
rollers shall be operated with tire pressures and wheel loads within the manufacturers recommended range for the size and ply of the tire being used .
num granular bases and surfacing page num steel face rollers shall furnish a minimum rolling weight of num pounds per inch of rolling width .
e. gravel surfacing and gravel surfacing salvaged compaction to a specified density is not required .
rolling shall proceed simultaneously with the spreading and watering and continue in overlapping strips until a uniform stable surface is obtained .
pneumatic tired rollers shall have an effective roller weight of at least num pounds per inch of roller width or satisfactory vibratory compaction equipment .
tires shall be uniformly inflated so their air pressures will not vary by more than num psi .
rollers shall be operated with tire pressures and wheel loads within the manufacturers recommended range for the size and ply of the tire being used .
steel face rollers shall furnish a minimum rolling weight of num pounds per inch of rolling width .
num method of measurement subbase subbase salvaged base course base course salvaged gravel cushion gravel cushion salvaged gravel surfacing including clay binder and gravel surfacing salvaged will be measured to the nearest num ton .
the contractor shall replace material lost or wasted during the processing operation at no additional expense to the department .
material placed in excess of the quantity needed to construct the typical section will be deducted from the final measured quantity .
water added during crushing and water mixed with granular material by a central plant will not be measured and the weight will not be subtracted from the granular material .
water for granular material added during laydown operations and materials which are paid for under separate items will not be measured under these items .
num basis of payment subbase subbase salvaged base course base course salvaged gravel cushion gravel cushion salvaged gravel surfacing including clay binder and gravel surfacing salvaged will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and placing materials water added in a central plant labor equipment test strips if required and all incidentals required .
if roadway shaping is required and a bid item is not provided payment for the granular material items will be full compensation for necessary shaping work .
salvaging processing and stockpiling granular num base and asphalt concrete mix materials page num num description this work consists of salvaging processing blending crushing and stockpiling salvaged material from the existing roadway .
salvaged material shall consist of granular material asphalt concrete mix material or asphalt mix and granular base material .
num materials salvaged material shall meet the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements a .
general the contractor shall not dispose of salvaged material or use the salvaged material for any purpose other than purposes designated in the plans without approval by the engineer .
b. salvage and stockpile granular material or salvage and stockpile asphalt mix and granular base material num .
salvaging the salvaged material shall be removed and loaded in a manner that minimizes waste and avoids contamination of the salvage material with underlying subgrade soil .
scrapers shall not be used for the removing or loading operations but may be used to haul the material .
salvaging of material shall not exceed num miles in advance of the grading operation .
salvaging of material may extend to num miles in advance of the grading operation if approved by the engineer .
the engineer will only approve the request if the contractor can demonstrate that the additional distance is necessary for the grading operation and that sufficient access is provided at intersecting roads and driveways .
the material shall be moved toward the center of the road to the extent necessary to ensure that salvage material is not lost down inslopes .
num .
processing processing and blending may be accomplished in place provided the contractors method meets the blending and gradation requirements and has positive depth control .
num .
stockpiling asphalt concrete mix and granular material shall be processed or crushed and stockpiled together so that a uniform blend is obtained .
the salvaged material may be stockpiled at contractor provided sites .
prior to stockpiling the stockpile site shall be prepared by removal of the top num inches of topsoil and the area bladed smooth .
c. salvage and stockpile asphalt mix material num .
salvaging the salvaged material shall be removed and loaded in a manner that minimizes waste and avoids contamination of the salvage material .
scrapers shall not be used for the removing or loading operations but may be used to haul the material .
salvaging of material shall not exceed num miles in advance of the grading operation unless otherwise directed .
the material shall be moved toward the center num salvaging processing and stockpiling granular base and asphalt concrete mix materials page num of the road to the extent necessary to ensure that salvage material is not lost down inslopes .
num .
stockpiling salvaged asphalt mix material shall be processed or crushed and stockpiled so a uniform blend is obtained .
prior to stockpiling the stockpile site shall be prepared by removal of the top num inches of topsoil and the area bladed smooth .
stockpiles shall be constructed in accordance with section num c. the stockpiles shall not contain dirt grease oil brick paving fabric clay balls organic debris and other foreign material .
num method of measurement salvage and stockpile granular material salvage and stockpile asphalt mix and granular base material and salvage and stockpile asphalt mix material will be measured to the nearest num ton at the time it is hauled to the road .
when less than num tons of salvaged material is required on a project the material may be measured in a stockpile and converted to tons using a factor of num tons per cubic yard in lieu of weighing the material .
alternate measurement techniques may be allowed if agreed upon by the contractor and engineer prior to salvaging operations commencing .
material stockpiled for future use will be measured in the stockpile and converted to tons using a factor of num tons per cubic yard .
the unclassified excavation quantities will not be increased or decreased to reflect whether salvaged material was taken from cut or fill sections .
num basis of payment salvage and stockpile granular material salvage and stockpile asphalt mix and granular base material and salvage and stockpile asphalt mix material will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
payment will be full compensation for work required to salvage haul process or crush and stockpile the material .
removal of this material is also included in and paid for once under the item of unclassified excavation .
full depth reclamation fdr num page num num description full depth reclamation fdr shall consist of processing and blending the asphalt mix and granular base material and placing watering shaping and compacting the material to the typical section .
num materials the asphalt mix and granular base material shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements a .
equipment num .
recycling equipment the equipment shall be self propelled and capable of processing and blending the material to the depth specified in the plans .
num .
rollers pneumatic tired rollers shall have an effective roller weight of at least num pounds per inch of roller width or satisfactory vibratory compaction equipment .
tires shall be uniformly inflated so their air pressures will not vary by more than num psi .
rollers shall be operated with tire pressures and wheel loads within the manufacturers recommended range for the size and ply of the tire being used .
steel rollers shall furnish a minimum rolling weight of num pounds per inch of rolling width .
b .
processing and laydown asphalt concrete mix and granular base material shall be processed in place so that a uniform blend is obtained .
the material shall be handled to ensure that salvaged material is not lost down the inslope .
the processed material shall be placed in a minimum of two lifts .
the maximum lift thickness shall not exceed num inches .
the depths of the in place asphalt concrete and granular base material may vary from what is shown in the plans .
the contractor will be responsible for interpreting the depths and including all costs to process the required depth of existing pavement and granular material .
each layer shall be compacted to the required density before the next lift is placed and shall be rolled until a uniform stable surface is obtained .
the final rolling of the top surface of the granular materials shall embed as many loose stones as possible .
the finished surface shall be smooth and free from waves and the contractor shall finish the surfacing materials to within num of the typical section cross slope .
the quarter crown within any num foot transverse length or actual lane width paved with a single paver pass shall not exceed num feet when measured with a straight edge num full depth reclamation fdr page num stringline or other suitable equipment .
the centerline shall be finished to a transverse distance within num feet of the plans shown location of centerline .
the contractor shall conduct his operations in such a way that both lanes will be brought up even at the end of each day .
c. compaction and density requirements compaction and density requirements shall be a minimum of num of the target dry density established by sd num and compacted under the following conditions num .
material shall have a minimum of num moisture uniformly blended throughout the depth of the lift of material .
the percent moisture may be adjusted by the engineer .
num .
a minimum of num test strip for each lift placed shall be completed to determine the target dry density and optimum rolling sequence .
the test strips will remain in place as part of the completed work .
num .
the depth of the test strip lift shall be representative of the project .
num .
when there is a significant change in mix proportions weather conditions equipment or other controlling factors the engineer may require construction of another test strip to check target density .
num method of measurement fdr will be measured to the nearest square yard .
plans quantity will be the basis of payment unless changes are ordered by the engineer .
water and materials which are paid under separate items will not be measured under this item .
num basis of payment fdr will be paid for at the contract price per square yard inclusive of all costs for processing blending placing shaping compacting equipment test strips labor and incidentals necessary to satisfactorily complete the work .
plans quantity will be the basis of payment unless changes are ordered by the engineer .
part c asphalt construction num asphalt concrete general page num num description these requirements are applicable to all types of hot mixed asphalt pavements irrespective of class type asphalt material or pavement use .
exceptions to the general requirements are in the specified requirements for each class .
the work consists of one or more courses of asphalt concrete mixture constructed on a prepared foundation .
num materials a .
composition of mixtures the asphalt concrete shall be composed of a mixture of aggregate asphalt binder additives and approved modifiers .
unless otherwise specified in the plans no rap is allowed in the asphalt concrete .
aggregate fractions shall be combined in proportions resulting in a mixture meeting the specified requirements .
the operation of the plant shall not commence until the departments bituminous engineer has established or verified a job mix formula in writing meeting the aggregate and mix design specification requirements for the class and type of asphalt concrete specified .
the job mix formula established or verified by the departments bituminous engineer shall fix a single percentage of aggregate passing each required sieve size a single percentage of asphalt binder to be added to the aggregate a single asphalt binder application temperature at the mixer a single temperature at which the mixture is to be discharged from the mixer and a single temperature at which the mixture is to be delivered to the road .
the following table sets forth the tolerances for the job mix formula gradation percent passing sieve sizes num inch larger num num thru num num num num percent asphalt binder content num percent hydrated lime content num temperature of mixture when emptied from mixer numf temperature of mixture on delivery to the road numf numf asphalt binder application temperature numf percent rap content if used num job mix formula tolerances for class q asphalt concrete shall conform to section num .
the mixture shall conform within the range of tolerances established by the job mix formula for that class of asphalt concrete .
should a change in sources of materials be proposed or when unsatisfactory results are obtained a new job mix formula shall be established .
num asphalt concrete general page num blade laid asphalt concrete mixture shall consist of the fine aggregate components of the asphalt concrete class specified on the project .
the job mix formula established or verified by the departments bituminous engineer shall set the fines components at approximately the same proportions as the asphalt concrete class specified on the project and shall fix a single percentage of asphalt binder to be added to the aggregate a single asphalt binder application temperature at the mixer a single temperature at which the mixture is to be discharged from the mixer and a single temperature at which the mixture is to be delivered to the road .
the blade laid asphalt concrete mixture may contain a small amount of coarse aggregate num sieve .
the department will not perform quality testing on any of the coarse aggregate num sieve in the blade laid asphalt concrete mix .
b .
aggregates aggregates shall conform to section num .
c. asphalt binder asphalt binder shall conform to section num .
d. shoulder joint sealant joint sealant shall conform to section num .
e. additives an additive is any material added to a bituminous mixture or material such as mineral filler asphalt additives and similar products without a specific pay item .
additives shall not be incorporated into the mixture without approval of the departments bituminous engineer .
f. hydrated lime hydrated lime shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements a .
weather and seasonal limitations asphalt concrete shall not be placed when the underlying surface is wet or frozen .
asphalt concrete shall not be placed when weather conditions prevent proper handling compaction or finishing .
the temperature and seasonal limitations are as follows minimum air temperatures seasonal limitations compacted thickness surface course subsurface course shoulder course minimum temperaturenum seasonal limits minimum temperaturenum seasonal limits num inch or less numf may num to oct. num inclusive numf none over num inch numf may num to oct. num inclusive numf none num minimum air and surface temperature in the shade .
b .
equipment num .
requirements for all plants the central plant for mixing the aggregate and asphalt binder may be a batch or drum mix type mixing plant .
asphalt concrete general num page num stockpiles of aggregate shall be kept separate and adequate measures to prevent contamination must be used at stockpile sites .
contaminated piles will be rejected .
segregated piles will be rejected until corrected .
when mineral filler hydrated lime or other additives are required a separate feed system shall be provided to store and accurately and uniformly proportion the required quantity into the mixture .
all cold feed bins shall be equipped with dividers to prevent overflow of aggregate to adjacent bins .
the plant shall be equipped with emission control equipment including a dust collector capable of eliminating or conserving the dust necessary to meet gradation limits and environmental standards .
burner fuel used for production of asphalt concrete shall be propane butane natural gas grade num fuel oil grade num fuel oil grade num fuel oil grade num light fuel oil grade num light or heavy fuel oil or grade num fuel oil .
fuel heavier than grade num shall meet the requirements of astm dnum .
recycled fuel oils rfonum rfonuml and rfonumh may also be used provided they meet the requirements of astm dnum .
the burner fuel supplier shall certify each load of burner fuel meets the applicable astm specification .
recycled fuel oils and fuel oils heavier then grade num shall be properly preheated and efficiently burned .
production of mix shall be stopped if flameouts or signs of incomplete combustion occur .
a pyrometer or other thermometric instrument shall be installed in the supply line between the asphalt binder storage tank and the asphalt binder discharge point in the plant to accurately measure the temperature of the asphalt binder .
an inline sampling valve shall be installed in the supply line between the asphalt binder storage tank and the asphalt binder discharge point in the plant .
the plant shall be equipped with accurate weighing or volumetric measurement devices .
asphalt binder storage tanks shall be kept level .
accurate calibration charts which show the quantity of material contained in a tank at each num inch increments of depth and a suitable device to measure the depth of the material shall be provided .
storage tanks shall uniformly heat the material under effective and positive control to the required temperature .
heating shall be accomplished by steam coils electricity or burners provided the flame does not come in direct contact with the heating tank .
the asphalt circulating system shall be of adequate size to ensure proper and continuous circulation during the entire operating period .
an accurate thermometer must be installed in the tank so the temperature can be monitored .
when hydrated lime is used the contractors hydrated lime system shall be equipped with scales to accurately determine the amount of hydrated lime used at num asphalt concrete general page num any time .
the contractors hydrated lime system shall control fugitive lime dust from being released into the air .
hydrated lime when added shall be added at the pugmill to moistened aggregate containing a minimum moisture content of num above the saturated surface dry condition of the aggregate as noted on the approved job mix formula .
the mixing of the aggregate hydrated lime and water shall be accomplished by using an enclosed twinshaft pugmill with a minimum effective length of num feet .
a water spray system must be installed at the discharge end of the pug mill .
this water system must be used when directed by the engineer to prevent fugitive lime dust from being released into the air .
num .
batch type mixing plants batch type plants shall have at least two storage bins with sufficient capacity to furnish the quantity of mineral aggregate materials necessary to operate at the calibrated capacity of the plant .
each compartment shall have partitions to prevent diversion of material into other compartments .
vibrators shall be provided to prevent bridging or arching of the bin contents .
batch plants shall be fully automatic to the extent the only manual operation required would be for the proportioning of one batch utilizing a single actuation switch or starter .
the automatic unit shall include a timer to automatically control the measuring mixing and dumping processes through a central control .
the automatic unit shall include a time lock device capable of controlling the operations of a complete mixing cycle .
when rap is used batch plants shall be modified to permit the rap to feed directly into the weigh hopper of the plant .
when rap is used the heated virgin aggregate shall be deposited in the weigh hopper first followed by the rap .
these two materials shall be dry mixed for a minimum of num seconds before introduction of asphalt binder into the pugmill .
wet mixing time shall be a minimum of num seconds .
mixing times may be adjusted by the engineer as necessary to achieve uniform mixing and coating .
discharge of the heated virgin aggregate shall be from one bin only and shall be discharged into the center of the weigh hopper .
the amount of aggregate stored in the bin shall not exceed one batch in weight and shall be fed into the bin in a manner that will prevent segregation .
a recording pyrometer shall be mounted in the discharge chute of the dryer .
daily charts of continuous aggregate temperature readings shall be submitted to the engineer .
in lieu of a recording pyrometer a computer printout showing the aggregate temperature readings at the discharge chute of the dryer may be substituted as approved by the engineer .
num .
drum mix plants the dryer drum shall uniformly heat coat and mix the materials without overheating the materials and adversely affecting the mixture .
asphalt concrete general num page num a .
materials and additives except rap shall be fed simultaneously into the dryer .
b .
the aggregate and rap feed system shall be easily and accurately calibrated and shall provide positive control of the aggregate feed .
the rate of feed shall be continuously monitored by belt scale or other device interlocked with the asphalt metering mechanism .
c. rap when used shall be introduced into the drum and combined with the aggregate so the rap does not come into direct contact with the burner flame .
asphalt binder shall be added to the mixture in the drum after the aggregates and rap have been combined .
d. the asphalt metering device shall positively control the rate asphalt is introduced into the mixture and shall respond instantaneously to variation in the aggregate feed rate .
e. production shall be limited to the rate required to obtain uniform aggregate coating and a uniform mixture meeting job mix temperature requirements .
the rate must be within manufacturers rated plant capacity .
f. a recording pyrometer shall be mounted in the discharge end of the mixer for determining the temperature of the mix .
daily charts of continuous mix temperature readings shall be submitted to the engineer .
in lieu of a recording pyrometer a computer printout showing the mix temperature readings at the discharge end of the mixer may be substituted as approved by the engineer .
num .
blade laid asphalt concrete equipment the contractor shall use either a motor grader blade or a paver to perform the blade laid asphalt concrete work .
the equipment shall force the mixture into the joints and cracks to adequately level and fill the joints and cracks while not exceeding the required application rate .
if the contractor uses a motor grader blade the blade shall be equipped with gates wings or other devices approved by the engineer to prevent the material from windrowing at the edges of the blade .
if the contractor uses a paver the paver shall be equipped with a solid screed bar plate measuring a minimum of num inches wide by num inch thick .
selfpropelled pneumatic tired rollers shall cover an overall surface width of at least num inches and shall furnish a minimum rolling weight mass of num pounds per inch of roller width .
num .
pavers selfpropelled pavers shall be equipped with a hopper having a bottom conveyor a full width vibrating screed with heaters and augers and shall be capable of spreading and finishing the mix to the specified widths typical section and thickness .
hydraulic extendable screeds may be used for variable width pavements .
auger extensions shall be used as recommended by the paver manufacturer and num asphalt concrete general page num shall extend to within num to num inches of the edge of the paver screed .
the paver shall provide an accurate smooth and uniform textured spread and shall provide preliminary compaction .
an attachment shall be provided on the paver that will place a beveled edge on the mat as specified .
pavers shall be equipped so that the height and transverse slope of the screed is automatically controlled using a fixed or traveling stringline on either or both sides of the paver .
the traveling stringline shall utilize either mechanical skis or non contacting grade averaging sensors .
the traveling stringline shall have a minimum effective length of num feet .
the system shall be capable of manually controlling the transverse slope and screed height .
num .
rollers rollers for compacting the asphalt concrete shall be of the selfpropelled type capable of producing a smooth surface finish .
the number and weight of rollers furnished shall be sufficient to compact the mix to the required density .
the rollers shall be capable of being reversed smoothly without shoving or tearing the asphalt concrete .
rollers shall be equipped to prevent pickup on the tires or drums .
moistening the drums or tires with water a water detergent solution or enclosing the roller to prevent heat loss from the tires may be required .
the use of fuel oil or other petroleum solvents to prevent pickup will not be permitted .
measures shall be taken to prevent oil grease or fuels from being dropped on the mat by rollers or any other type of equipment .
c. preparation of the mineral aggregate num .
stockpiling aggregate stockpiles of mineral aggregate for asphalt concrete shall be built in layers completing each layer over the full area of the pile before the next layer is started .
the height of each layer shall be controlled to minimize segregation .
the maximum drop of the materials from the conveyor shall not exceed num feet .
coning shall not exceed num feet .
the stockpile shall be leveled with rubber tired equipment between layers to maintain a level platform for the next layer .
dumping casting or pushing over the sides of the previous layers will not be permitted .
segregated piles will be rejected until corrected .
the equipment operating on the pile shall be free of dirt grease oil and other contaminants .
the size of the equipment shall be limited to that which can be operated on the stockpile without degradation of the material .
the leveling requirement will be waived for the fines stockpile when split on a num inch or smaller screen unless there is indication of segregation .
aggregate stockpiles shall be kept separate and adequate measures to prevent contamination must be used at stockpile sites .
num .
stockpile tests the contractor shall run process control tests on the mineral aggregate when producing material .
a gradation pi fractured faces and lightweight particles test shall be run for every num tons produced per pile .
the contractor shall also test the quality abrasion and soundness of the mineral aggregate .
the quality asphalt concrete general num page num shall be tested once per source .
all sampling and testing shall be accomplished in accordance with the departments materials manual .
the engineer may reduce the frequency of the stockpile tests on ledge rock sources depending on the quality and uniformity of the materials .
test results shall be recorded on forms furnished by the department and shall be immediately submitted to the engineer .
num .
mix design submittal the asphalt concrete mix designs shall be performed by the departments bituminous mix design lab .
prior to submitting samples to the departments bituminous mix design lab num of the plan quantity or num tons whichever is less of the mineral aggregate shall be produced .
when rap is required the contractor shall sample the rap from the roadway by an approved method .
the sampling method shall ensure a representative sample of material is obtained from approximately the same depth as the plans shown milling depth .
the rap sample shall be obtained from a minimum of three locations throughout the project length .
the contractor shall daylight all edges of the sampling area leaving no vertical faces or shall fill the sample area with an approved product leaving no vertical faces .
the equipment used shall generate a representative sample of rap similar to what will be produced from the cold milling operation .
the contractor shall notify the area office a minimum of num calendar days prior to sampling the rap from the roadway .
a representative from the area office shall witness all sampling of rap to be submitted for mix design .
this material shall be used to perform the mix design .
a portion of this sample shall be submitted to the departments bituminous mix design lab .
the contractor shall notify the area office a minimum of num calendar days prior to sampling and submitting the mix design aggregates .
a representative from the area office shall witness all sampling of aggregates to be submitted for mix design .
a representative from the area office shall complete the form dotnum for the composite aggregate sample and rap sample required for submittal to the departments bituminous mix design lab in pierre sd .
the area office representative shall take possession of the aggregate and rap samples for mix design and aggregate quality testing .
samples shall be obtained a minimum of num calendar days prior to hot mix production .
the department will deliver the samples to the departments bituminous mix design lab .
the department may allow the contractor to transport and deliver the rap and aggregate samples for mix design and aggregate quality testing only when the area office representative has sealed the samples with a tamper evident tag with the dotnum attached .
mix designs will only be performed on samples when accompanied by the following information a .
a completed data sheet dot num including the legal description of all mineral aggregate sources .
num asphalt concrete general page num b .
the mineral aggregate and rap samples submitted shall be representative of the materials produced for the project .
c. the average stockpile test results of each mineral aggregate stockpile produced along with the recommended bin splits of each material produced .
d. a num gallon sample of asphalt binder intended for use shall be obtained from the designated supplier for the project .
e. a temperature viscosity curve chart or required mixing temperature for the asphalt binder intended for use and the specific gravity of the asphalt binder .
the asphalt binder supplier shall provide the recommended lab mixing and compacting temperatures and the recommended field mixing and compaction temperatures for modified asphalt binders .
two mix designs per type will be made by the department without charge .
should the contractor desire an additional mix design or if additional mix designs are required due to the materials not meeting specifications the costs involved shall be at the contractors expense .
num .
proportioning of aggregates if blending of aggregates is required separate bins and stockpiles shall be provided .
materials shall be kept separated until they are delivered in their proper proportions onto the feeder leading to the dryer .
spreading or dumping filler sand or crushed rock over the top of gravel pits stockpiles or in hoppers at the crushing plants will not be permitted .
charging bins directly from pits crusher or screening plants will not be permitted .
the mineral aggregate exclusive of other additives shall be separated into at least two fractions dividing on the num sieve or other size agreed upon and placed into separate compartments ready for proportioning and mixing .
d. preparation of the mixture the mineral aggregate shall be satisfactorily mixed with the proper quantity of asphalt binder at the central mixing plant .
the mixing plant shall be operated using automatic controls .
manual operation will be permitted for the remainder of the day when automatic controls fail provided specified results are obtained .
the contractor shall restore automatic operation prior to the next days production .
the asphalt binder shall be added to the mix in the proportionate quantity and at the temperature established by the job mix formula .
in batch plants the mineral aggregate shall be mixed dry for a minimum of num seconds .
after introducing the required aggregate and asphalt binder into the mixer the materials shall be continuously mixed until the aggregate is completely and uniformly coated and a thorough distribution of the asphalt throughout the aggregate is obtained .
mixtures containing incompletely coated particles at the time of discharge from the plant or asphalt concrete general num page num thereafter will be rejected .
the contractor shall make appropriate adjustments in the production of mixtures to ensure the mixture is completely coated at the time of discharge from the plant .
when hot mix storage bins are used storage of the mix shall be limited to a maximum of num hours .
the point of temperature measurement will be the discharge end of the mixer .
e. transportation and delivery of the mixture the mixture shall be transported from the plant to the point of use in pneumatic tired vehicles .
the vehicle boxes shall be tight clean and smooth .
boxes shall be cleaned only with lime water soap a detergent solution or an approved commercial product specifically intended for this use .
oil diesel fuel or other petroleum solvents shall not be used .
no material shall be used which could adversely affect the asphalt concrete .
excess solution in the box shall be disposed of before the vehicle is loaded .
loads shall be tarped in inclement weather conditions and when ordered by the engineer .
f. blade laid asphalt concrete prior to placing the blade laid asphalt concrete mix the contractor shall thoroughly sweep the surface to remove all loose existing joint material and loose asphalt concrete from cracks joints and spall areas .
in curb and gutter sections or in rural sections where a finished and maintained lawn extends to the edge of the shoulder the contractor shall use a pickup broom with an integral selfcontained storage .
the pickup broom must be a minimum of num feet wide .
while sweeping in curb and gutter sections the pickup broom must have working gutter brooms .
a rotary power broom may be used in all other locations .
the blade laid asphalt concrete mix shall be compacted by at least two complete coverages with selfpropelled pneumatic tired rollers .
g. tacking spreading and compacting the surface including all vertical contact faces on which the asphalt concrete is to be placed shall be tacked in accordance with section num .
the tack coat shall be allowed a cure period as determined by the engineer prior to asphalt concrete placement .
surfaces which have been primed with cutback asphalt shall be allowed to cure for a minimum of num hours prior to being overlaid with asphalt concrete .
asphalt concrete shall be placed by selfpropelled pavers .
handwork is permissible in inaccessible or odd shaped areas .
in lieu of a selfpropelled paver asphalt concrete may be placed by a shouldering machine on shoulders less than num feet in width .
spot leveling and repair of the existing surface with asphalt concrete shall be required prior to the paver laid courses at locations designated .
potholes and areas of localized disintegration shall be cleaned of loose material squared tacked leveled with asphalt concrete and satisfactorily compacted .
spot leveling may be blade laid in lifts not exceeding num inches of uncompacted depth .
compaction shall be by the specified roller num asphalt concrete general page num coverage method .
the contractor may use a steel face roller provided the roller does not damage the mineral aggregate during compaction .
paver laid mix shall be spread using automatic transverse and longitudinal grade controls .
if the automatic controls fail or malfunction the engineer may permit manual operation for the remainder of the day provided the finished product meets the specifications .
frequent breakdowns shall constitute cause for suspension of the work until repair or replacement is made .
following placement of the first pass using the traveling stringline for control adjacent passes and succeeding lifts shall be placed using the traveling stringline riding on the previously laid material .
a shoe attachment may be used to match the longitudinal joints on the final paver passes of the top lift unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
a shoe attachment on the paver shall be used to automatically match the elevation of asphalt concrete shoulders with concrete pavements .
automatic slope controls will be required on paving equipment for placing asphalt concrete on shoulders num feet or more in finished width .
asphalt concrete shall be placed directly on the roadbed in a uniform windrow and then fed into the paver by a paver feeder .
the use of a paver feeder is not required on shoulders turning lanes less than num feet roadway paving less than num feet and transitions into bridge decks less than num feet .
the paver feeder shall pick up substantially all of the mix and feed it into the paver without segregation .
the size of the windrow shall be regulated so the paver is fed a continuous and adequate supply of mix .
the screed shall not be raised solely to accommodate excess material in the windrow or paver hopper .
a material transfer vehicle mtv which takes material directly from the trucks stores and mixes it and then dumps into the paver hopper may be used if approved by the engineer .
the temperature of mixture on delivery to the road shall be defined as the temperature of the mix just prior to placement or just prior to spreading by blade .
on the final surfacing lift laydown operations shall commence at the farthest point and progress continuously toward the plant .
on rural projects a partial width pass may be extended beyond the adjacent pass by as much as one days run .
the paver shall be moved back the following working day to place the adjoining pass .
where a difference in elevation exists between two lanes carrying traffic in the same direction on rural multilane asphalt concrete construction one of the affected lanes shall remain closed to traffic .
the plant production and availability of hauling vehicles shall be sufficient to provide a uniform and consistent quantity of asphalt concrete to the paver so laydown operations are continuous .
stops and starts shall be restricted to a minimum and excessive stopping of the paver will result in suspension of paving activities until corrective asphalt concrete general num page num measures are taken .
stopping normal laydown operations to surface an approach thereby creating an unnecessary joint will not be permitted .
laydown operations shall proceed from the center to the shoulders of the roadbed surface .
when turning lanes are present the contractor may alter the laydown operation .
in curb and gutter sections laydown may proceed from the gutter line to the centerline .
the contractor shall submit the proposed laydown operation to the engineer for approval prior to beginning laydown operations .
the longitudinal joints of succeeding lifts shall be offset approximately num inches .
the center longitudinal joint of the top lift shall be located on centerline except where a center turning lane is present .
longitudinal joints shall be located within num inches of the lane line .
at the end of the days paving the contractor shall place a temporary ramp from the top of the lift of asphalt concrete to the existing surface .
the temporary ramp shall extend a minimum of num feet per num inch of asphalt concrete placed .
transverse joints of the final lift shall be formed by sawing back the previous run to expose the full depth of the course .
the finished transverse joint of all lifts shall have a uniform texture and comply with the straightedge requirement .
waste material resulting from forming joints and temporary ramps shall be removed and disposed of .
segregation or excessive pulling of the mix shall warrant suspension of operations .
immediately after the mix has been placed and surface irregularities adjusted the mix shall be thoroughly and uniformly compacted by rolling .
multiple lift laydown operations will not be allowed on the same location on the same day unless approved by the engineer .
the use of ice or other materials to accelerate the cooling of the lift will not be allowed .
vibratory rollers shall have an automatic shutoff to deactivate the vibrators when the roller speed is less than num mph rollers shall be operated according to the manufacturers recommendations for speed impacts per foot and amplitude of vibration for the thickness of mix being compacted .
rolling shall be longitudinal commencing at the outer edges of the mat and progressing toward the center in straight parallel strips overlapping at least num inches .
on superelevated curves rolling shall progress from the lower to the upper edge of the mat .
the contractor shall vary the points of reversal to prevent a transverse crease .
the rollers shall not stand idle on any part of the mat that has not been completed and cooled sufficiently to resist deformation .
class q asphalt concrete placed on the shoulder shall be compacted using the same roller pattern used on the adjacent mainline asphalt concrete or as directed by the engineer .
the beveled edge shall be satisfactorily compacted and shall retain the specified dimensions after compaction .
num asphalt concrete general page num longitudinal joints shall be compacted in accordance with the following for confined edges on the first pass adjacent to the confined edge the compaction equipment shall be entirely on the hot mat num to num inches from the longitudinal joint .
for unconfined edges on the first pass adjacent to the unconfined edge the compaction equipment shall extend num to num inches beyond the edge of the mat .
the surface of each lift shall be free of waves and other irregularities .
the final lift surface shall be checked with a numfoot straightedge .
the variation of the surface from the straightedge between any two contact points shall not exceed num feet .
the crown on all lifts as indicated by checking with a numfoot straightedge shall be within numfeet of specified crown in any num foot length .
irregularities shall be corrected before the temperature of the asphalt mix drops below numf .
the longitudinal profile can only be improved by using a grinder with diamond blades mounted on a horizontal shaft and when approved by the engineer .
areas that have been ground shall not be left smooth or polished but shall have a uniform texture similar in roughness to the surrounding unground asphalt concrete .
grinding shall be day lighted to the outside edge of the pavement .
ground surfaces shall be flushed sealed .
under no circumstances shall operations continue when it becomes evident final rolling is not producing a smooth uniform compacted surface free from roller marks and other irregularities .
the mix shall be compacted on the road by one of the following methods .
unless otherwise specified the specified density method shall be used .
num .
specified density method the mix shall be compacted to the density specified for the class of asphalt concrete designated .
the percent of density shall be based on the maximum specific gravity of the test specimens prepared in the field in accordance with sd num .
the compacted density of asphalt concrete shall be determined according to sd num .
compaction rolling shall be completed before the temperature of the mix drops below numf .
vibratory rollers may be used in the static mode for finish rolling .
compaction of mix placed on entrances to farms residences or businesses and intersecting road approaches shall be compacted by the specified roller coverage method .
num .
specified roller coverage method the mix shall be compacted by at least four complete coverages with pneumatic tired rollers and at least one complete coverage with steel faced rollers or as approved by the engineer .
selfpropelled pneumatic tired rollers shall cover an overall surface width of at least num inches and furnish a minimum rolling weight mass of num pounds per inch of roller width .
selfpropelled tandem smooth steel rollers two steel drums operating in the same track shall furnish a minimum rolling weight mass of num pounds per inch of roller width .
asphalt concrete general num page num breakdown rolling may be accomplished by steelfaced rollers only when approved by the engineer .
rolling shall proceed on the mat as soon as lay down is completed .
completion of rolling on any segment shall not lag behind the laydown more than num feet .
during periods of cool weather this maximum distance between laydown and final rolling shall be reduced as ordered by the engineer .
compaction to a specified density will not be required .
however additional roller coverage may be required in order to obtain a smooth surface finish .
h. maintenance the contractor shall maintain the work during construction and until the acceptance of field work is issued by the area office .
maintenance shall include protection and repair of the prepared base course tack coat wearing surface mat shoulders and seal course .
rich or bleeding areas breaks raveled spots or other nonconforming areas in the wearing surface or base shall be corrected .
i .
traffic control hauling or allowing traffic on the roadway will not be permitted until the surface has been compacted and cooled sufficiently to resist marking or distortion .
where traffic is to be maintained by means of part width construction the contractor shall control all traffic by identified pilot cars and flaggers .
the contractor shall schedule work so traffic will not be greatly inconvenienced with long oneway lanes .
j. compaction sample when ordered by the engineer and at locations designated by the engineer the contractor shall saw and remove a compaction sample in accordance with sd num .
after removal the contractor shall repair the sample location to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the engineer shall take immediate possession of all samples for further testing .
k. shoulder joints when specified a continuous groove shall be constructed by forming sawing or routing the joint between the portland cement concrete pavement and the asphalt concrete shoulder .
sawing may be done with either diamond or watercooled abrasive blades .
if a router is used the router must be mechanical power driven and capable of cutting a groove to the required dimensions .
equipment designed to plow the groove to dimension will not be permitted .
the walls of the finished groove shall be vertical and the groove bottom shall be flat .
the groove shall be thoroughly cleaned immediately after forming sawing or routing .
dry sawed joints shall be cleaned with highpressure air .
wet sawed joints shall be cleaned with highpressure water followed by highpressure air .
the air compressor shall produce a minimum of num cfm output and shall be equipped with a maximum num inch nozzle .
the groove including the sides shall be free of dirt dust water oil grease and loose material immediately prior to sealing .
the portland cement concrete surface shall be free of asphalt and any curing compound that would prevent bonding .
num asphalt concrete general page num the groove shall be completely dry and filled level with joint sealer by a sealing device which will not entrap air in the sealed joint .
joint sealer application will not be permitted when the air temperature near the joint is less than numf or is numf and falling .
num method of measurement a. asphalt binder asphalt binder will be measured to the nearest num ton .
quantities of asphalt binder in excess of the asphalt content listed on the job mix formula plus the num tolerance will not be accepted for payment .
b. asphalt concrete asphalt concrete will be measured to the nearest num ton for the class specified .
the mixture of mineral aggregate asphalt binder and hydrated lime when required will be weighed after mixing .
no deduction will be made for the weight of the asphalt binder or hydrated lime when required included in the mixture .
deduction will not be made for material removed from temporary approaches authorized by the engineer .
c. compaction sample compaction samples will be measured by actual count of compaction samples ordered and accepted by the engineer .
d. sawing and sealing shoulder joints field measurement for this work will not be required .
plan quantity will be the basis of payment .
if changes are ordered by the engineer the length will be measured to the nearest foot and the quantity adjusted .
e. hydrated lime hydrated lime when provided as an additive to the asphalt concrete mixture to meet the moisture sensitivity requirements will be measured to the nearest num ton .
quantities of hydrated lime in excess of the lime content listed on the job mix formula plus the num tolerance will not be accepted for payment .
f. stockpile tests stockpile tests will not be measured for payment .
num basis of payment a. asphalt binder the accepted quantities of asphalt binder will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
the amount bid for this item shall be at least the cost of the asphalt binder furnished and delivered to the project site .
b. asphalt concrete the accepted quantities of asphalt concrete will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton complete in place .
c. compaction sample compaction samples will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment materials and all other items incidental to sampling and repair of the sample locations to the satisfaction of the engineer .
asphalt concrete general num page num d. sawing and sealing shoulder joints sawing and sealing shoulder joints will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
e. hydrated lime hydrated lime will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton complete in place .
payment for hydrated lime will only be made when hydrated lime is actually used .
the amount bid for this item shall be at least the cost of the hydrated lime furnished and delivered to the project site .
f. stockpile tests there will be no direct payment for the stockpile testing and related requirements .
all costs related to the testing for labor test equipment laboratory tools and all incidentals required to satisfactorily perform the required work shall be incidental to the asphalt concrete pavement items .
num asphalt concrete general page num this page intentionally left blank asphalt concrete class d e g num page num num description this work consists of constructing one or more courses of asphalt concrete on a prepared surface .
num materials the materials and their use shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements the construction requirements shall be as prescribed in section num with the following modifications a .
mix design specifications unless otherwise specified in the plans the mix design criteria shall conform to the following requirements for the class and type of asphalt concrete specified .
mix design specifications mix design parameters class d class e class g air voids num min .
num min .
num min .
vmanum num inch nominal maximum size num min .
num min .
num min .
num inch nominal maximum size num min .
num min .
num min .
gyratory gyrations num num num dustbinder ratio based on effective binder num num num moisture sensitivitynum na na num min .
num evaluated for compliance during the mix design .
if the percent passing the num inch sieve is greater than or equal to num the mix shall be considered num inch nominal maximum size .
if the percent passing the num inch sieve is less than num the mix shall be considered num inch nominal maximum size .
mixes containing num or more limestone ledge rock shall meet the vma requirements of num min .
for a num inch nominal maximum size and num min .
for num inch nominal maximum size .
num moisture sensitivity will be tested according to sd num .
hydrated lime shall be used to meet the moisture sensitivity requirement of the mix .
hydrated lime will not be required if the moisture sensitivity requirements are met without the addition of hydrated lime .
hydrated lime will be included in the dust numbinder ratio .
b. thickness the compacted thickness of each lift shall not exceed num inches .
c. density the minimum density requirement shall be num of the maximum specific gravity of the test specimens prepared in the field in accordance with sd num .
the compacted density of asphalt concrete shall be determined according to sd num .
num method of measurement measurement as prescribed in section num .
num basis of payment payment as prescribed in section num .
num asphalt concrete class d e g page num this page intentionally left blank asphalt concrete class q new section num page num num description the work consists of constructing one or more courses of gyratory controlled qcqa hot mixed asphalt concrete pavement on a prepared foundation .
num materials mineral aggregate shall conform to the requirements of section num .
all other materials and their use shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements the construction requirements shall be as prescribed in section num with the following additional requirements a .
laboratories num .
quality control laboratory the contractor shall furnish and maintain a quality control qc laboratory at the plant site .
the laboratory shall be furnished with the necessary space equipment and supplies to properly perform all specified testing .
the laboratory shall be equipped with a gyratory compactor meeting the requirements of aashto t num .
the laboratory equipment shall meet the requirements of the test methods contained in the departments materials manual and materials testing inspection certification program manual .
a copy of the equipment calibration records shall be kept in the qc laboratory .
the contractors qc laboratory shall be equipped with a mechanical convection oven meeting the requirements of section num .
the contractor shall furnish a cut off saw equipped with a diamond tipped blade .
the saw is to separate the core samples to the actual lift thickness .
the cores shall be sawed by the contractor to the correct lift line prior to testing the cores for density .
num .
quality assurance laboratory the contractor shall also provide a separate quality assurance qa laboratory for qa testing performed by the engineer .
the qa laboratory shall meet the requirements of section num .
b .
quality control num .
contractor furnished quality control program qc for the asphalt concrete pavement is the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall provide and maintain a qc program .
the program shall assure that all asphalt concrete materials and constructed pavement submitted for acceptance conforms to the contract requirements .
the contractor shall be responsible for all asphalt concrete materials and constructed pavement including aggregate process control and handling .
num asphalt concrete class q new section page num the contractor shall provide at least one technician certified in asphalt concrete aggregate testing and asphalt concrete hot mix testing for conducting the qc testing and at least one technician certified in asphalt concrete roadway inspection for roadway inspection .
all of the contractors qc testing and inspection technicians shall meet the departments certification requirements or be under the direct supervision of a certified technician for the type of work they are actually performing .
the certified testing and inspection technicians must be present at the plant and roadway whenever the plant is supplying asphalt concrete to the roadway .
at or prior to the preconstruction meeting the contractor shall submit a qc plan to the engineer for approval .
the plan shall contain the following minimum requirements a .
the names and phone numbers of the individuals responsible for the contractors qc program .
b .
a listing of the certified technicians responsible for the qc inspection material sampling and testing .
c. a copy of the completed performance checklist and training and evaluation records for all temporary or seasonal personnel who will be performing qc inspection or sampling and testing .
d. an organizational chart indicating lines of authority .
e. the contractor shall notify the engineer if a control test strip will be used .
the contractor may produce approximately num tons of material to establish a roller pattern and verify the field produced mix properties match those of the lab mix design .
after test strip placement further mixing and laydown operations will be suspended until the laboratory test results of the asphalt mixture and core densities are available .
the material used in the test strip will not be included in the mix pay factor analysis .
the material used in the test strip shall be tested for all the properties listed in the departments materials manual .
the engineer shall approve the location of the test strip .
if a control test strip is not constructed the qc plan shall specify how the contractor will establish a roller pattern to achieve the specified density and volumetric requirements .
the engineer will provide the following to the contractor at the preconstruction meeting names of the certified individuals in charge of quality assurance qa testing and roadway inspection .
an organizational chart including the names and phone numbers of those in the direct line of authority .
asphalt concrete class q new section num page num num .
mineral aggregate testing prior to production the aggregate producer shall provide test results to the contractor and engineer for each stockpile of virgin mineral aggregate that will be incorporated into the asphalt concrete mixture a minimum of num weeks prior to asphalt concrete production .
the aggregate producer shall use an individual certified in asphalt concrete aggregate testing .
the required tests shall include gradation crushed particles fine aggregate angularity flat and elongated particles sand equivalent and lightweight particles at the following minimum frequencies one test per num tons for each virgin mineral aggregate ingredient produced .
a minimum of three tests for each virgin mineral aggregate stockpile .
the contractor may vary the frequency of the crushed particles fine aggregate angularity flat and elongated particles sand equivalent and lightweight particles tests on ledge rock sources depending on the quality and uniformity of the materials .
num .
contractor furnished mix designs asphalt concrete mix designs shall be performed by the contractor and verified by the departments bituminous mix design lab .
a certified asphalt concrete mix design and production control technician shall perform the asphalt concrete mix design .
all contractors submitting mix designs to the department are required to participate in the proficiency sample program .
prior to submitting samples to the departments bituminous mix design lab num of the plans quantity or num tons whichever is less of the virgin mineral aggregate shall be produced .
when rap is required the contractor shall sample the rap from the roadway by an approved method .
the sampling method shall ensure a representative sample of material is obtained from approximately the same depth as the plans shown milling depth .
the rap sample shall be obtained from a minimum of three locations throughout the project length .
the contractor shall daylight all edges of the sampling area leaving no vertical faces or shall fill the sample area with an approved product leaving no vertical faces .
the equipment used shall generate a representative sample of rap similar to what will be produced from the cold milling operation .
the contractor shall notify the area office a minimum of num calendar days prior to sampling the rap from the roadway .
a representative from the area office shall witness all sampling of rap to be submitted for mix design .
this material shall be used to perform the mix design .
a portion of this sample shall be submitted to the departments bituminous mix design lab .
the contractor shall notify the area office a minimum of num calendar days prior to sampling and submitting the mix design aggregates .
a representative from the area office shall witness all sampling of aggregates to be submitted for mix design .
a representative from the area office shall complete the form dotnum for the composite aggregate sample and rap sample required for submittal to the num asphalt concrete class q new section page num departments bituminous mix design lab .
the area office representative shall take possession of the aggregate and rap samples for mix design and aggregate quality testing .
samples shall be obtained a minimum of num calendar days prior to hot mix production .
the area office will deliver the samples to the departments bituminous mix design lab in pierre sd .
the area office may allow the contractor to transport and deliver the rap and aggregate samples for mix design and aggregate quality testing only when the area office representative has sealed the samples with a tamper evident tag with the dotnum attached .
mix designs will only be performed on samples when accompanied by the following information a .
a completed data sheet form dotnum including the legal description of virgin mineral aggregate sources .
b .
representative virgin mineral aggregate samples and rap samples shall be proportionate to the bin splits proposed for use during construction .
c. a summary sheet showing all test results from the gradations completed and the average gradation of each mineral aggregate stockpile produced along with the proposed bin splits to be used in the production of asphalt concrete pavement .
d. a num gallon sample of asphalt binder intended for use shall be obtained from the designated supplier for the project .
e. a mix design report and moisture sensitivity test results if required that includes the lab data and test results required in sd num sd num and section num b.num .
the contractors mix design shall meet all of the mix design specifications .
when the mix design verification is completed by the departments bituminous mix design lab an approved mix design report dot num will be provided to the area engineer and the contractor prior to production .
the mix design report will include the single percentage of aggregate passing each required sieve size a single percentage of asphalt binder to be added to the mixture a single percentage of hydrated lime to be added to the mixture a single asphalt binder application temperature a single temperature at which the mix is to be discharged from the mixer and a single temperature at which the mix is to be delivered on the road .
num .
gyratory controlled qcqa mix design requirements and specifications unless otherwise specified in the plans the mix design criteria shall conform to the following requirements .
asphalt concrete class q new section num page num a .
consensus virgin mineral aggregate requirements num .
crushed particles sd num the crushed particles shall be tested on the composite virgin mineral aggregate sample .
table a crushed particles minimum two or more crushed faces class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num num .
fine aggregate angularity sd num table b fine aggregate angularity minimum uncompacted void content class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num num .
flat and elongated particles sd num the maximum amount of flat and elongated particles for the coarse aggregate shall not exceed the limits shown in table c. flat and elongated particles are defined where the ratio of maximum to minimum dimension is greater than num .
the aggregate tested shall be the composite virgin aggregate material that is retained on a num sieve table c flat and elongated particles maximum flat and elongated particles num class qnum no limit class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num num evaluated for specification at mix design only num asphalt concrete class q new section page num num .
sand equivalent sd num table d sand equivalent sand equivalent minimum class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num b .
source virgin mineral aggregate requirements num .
source virgin mineral aggregate requirements table e source mineral aggregate requirements light weight particles sd num sd num sodium sulfate soundness sd num num cycles los angeles abrasion loss sd num num num num num class qnum num maximum num maximum num maximum num maximum num maximum class qnum num maximum num maximum num maximum num maximum num maximum class qnum num maximum num maximum num maximum num maximum num maximum class qnum num maximum num maximum num maximum num maximum num maximum class qnum num maximum num maximum num maximum num maximum num maximum num .
gyratory controlled qcqa gradation sieve analysis sd num virgin mineral aggregate gradations at mix design must be within the control points for the designated aggregate size of the table below .
table f gyratory controlled qcqa gradationnum control points percent passing sieve size min .
max .
num inch num num inch num num num inch num num num num num num num num the gradation sample shall not include hydrated lime .
asphalt concrete class q new section num page num c. mixture requirements num .
gyratory compactive effort the mixture shall be compacted in accordance with sd num .
the number of gyrations and densification criteria are in listed in tables g and h. table g gyratory compactive effort ninitial ndesign nmaximum class qnum num num num class qnum num num num class qnum num num num class qnum num num num class qnum num num num num .
mixture densification criteria table h target mixture densification criteria percent of mixture maximum specific gravity gmm ndesign nmaximumnum class qnum num num class qnum num num class qnum num num class qnum num num class qnum num num num nmaximum evaluated for specification at mix design only num .
voids in mineral aggregate criteria vma vma is calculated from the mixture bulk specific gravity at ndesign gyrations .
table i voids in mineral aggregate criteria nominal maximum aggregate size minimum vma num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num num the minimum vma required for hot mix during production shall be num num .
voids filled with asphalt vfa vfa is calculated from the mixture bulk specific gravity at ndesign gyrations .
table j voids filled with asphalt criteria vfanum class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num num evaluated for specification at mix design only num asphalt concrete class q new section page num num .
dust to binder ratio the dust to binder ratio shall be num to num the dust to binder ratio is calculated as the percent by mass of the total material passing the num sieve including hydrated lime divided by the effective asphalt binder content expressed as percent by mass of mix .
if the aggregate gradation percent passing the num sieve is less than num at mix design the dust to binder ratio shall be increased to num to num .
num .
moisture sensitivity sd num the minimum retained tensile strength ratio for the mixture is num .
the moisture sensitivity requirement will be waived if num hydrated lime is added to the mix .
hydrated lime will not be required or can be added at a rate lower than num if the moisture sensitivity requirement is met .
if lime is used a minimum of num hydrated lime shall be added to the mix .
liquid antistripping additives will not be allowed in lieu of hydrated lime .
an item will be included in the contract for hydrated lime .
payment for hydrated lime will only be made when hydrated lime is actually used .
moisture sensitivity will only be evaluated during the mix design process .
num .
asphalt pavement analyzer aashto t num samples shall be compacted at the ndesign gyratory level at the contractor selected binder content and tested at the pg binder high temperature .
field samples will be tested at the binder and air void content of the selected field gyratory samples or as made at the ndesign gyratory level from a sample of field produced mix .
table k asphalt pavement analyzer criteria apa maximum rutting mm class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num class qnum num num .
moisture content of mix the maximum moisture in the field produced mix shall be num .
the mix shall be sampled from the windrow in front of the laydown machine and placed in an airtight tared container .
the mix shall be dried to a constant mass as described in sd num .
num .
quality control testing a. calibration testing num .
cold feed prior to production of asphalt concrete the qc and qa certified technicians shall conduct comparison tests at the plant with a split companion cold feed calibration sample of virgin aggregate to assure that all associated asphalt concrete class q new section num page num equipment and procedures provide comparable results .
comparison test results shall meet the requirements of the mix design report and shall conform to the tolerances shown in the departments materials manual .
the split companion calibration testing shall continue until the results meet the requirements of the mix design report and are within the listed tolerances .
the split companion calibration testing shall be performed on each mix type produced prior to production of that mix type .
num .
mixture testing the qc and the qa technicians shall perform correlation testing on a reheated prebuilt split companion sample from the mix design process supplied by the contractor .
the correlation testing will be for the theoretical maximum specific gravity rice method and gyratory bulk specific gravities .
two gyratory compaction samples shall be made using a compactive effort of ndesign .
the bulk specific gravity shall than be measured on specimens compacted to ndesign gyrations .
air voids shall be calculated using the theoretical maximum specific gravity and bulk specific gravity at ndesign gyrations .
the percent of theoretical maximum specific gravity densification shall be determined at ndesign .
the results shall be within the tolerances shown in the departments materials manual .
num .
bulk specific gravity reheat correlation the qc and the qa technicians shall perform a reheat correlation test for the bulk specific gravity .
the reheat correlation test shall be performed on a split sample of a sublot from within the first lot of production for the mix design .
an additional reheat correlation test shall be performed on a split sample of a sublot from within the first lot of production for any new mix designs .
cool a split portion of the sample down to room temperature .
after the split sample has cooled reheat and compact according to sd num .
calculate the difference in the bulk specific gravities of the nonreheated and reheated tests .
the average difference using the qc and qa technicians test results will be the correction factor for a reheated bulk specific gravity .
this test may be repeated at the discretion of the contractor or the engineer .
b. asphalt concrete quality control production testing after the calibration cold feed and mixture testing is completed and the results are within the specified tolerances the contractor will be allowed to begin production of asphalt concrete .
the engineer shall randomly determine all sample locations .
sampling and splitting not performed by the engineer shall be witnessed by the engineer .
to ensure that a representative random sample is obtained the qc sample locations shall only be given to the contractor immediately prior to sampling .
the hot mix sample shall be obtained before the cold feed gradation sample .
if hydrated lime is used in the mix the hydrated lime shall be momentarily shut off while obtaining the cold feed gradation sample .
if hydrated lime is to be included num asphalt concrete class q new section page num in the mix care shall be taken to ensure that the hot mix sample is obtained with hydrated lime included in the sample .
there will be a num ton buffer between the random sample locations .
the intent of the buffer is to prevent backtoback sampling and to more evenly distribute the sampling and testing workload .
a lot shall consist of five sublots .
sublots shall not represent more than num tons of asphalt concrete unless the current sublot is terminated .
the contractor shall obtain qc samples at the specified locations for four of the five sublots .
the engineer will sample and split a minimum of one of the five sublots and witness all qc sampling .
the contractor shall test all five sublot samples a split of the one sublot sampled by the engineer and four sublot samples taken by the contractor .
the material shall be sampled split and tested by the methods and procedures described in the departments materials manual .
the aggregate and hot mix samples shall be large enough to obtain num splits of the minimum sample size needed for testing .
if the sample is to be used for ia testing the samples shall be large enough to obtain num splits of the minimum size needed for testing .
immediately after splitting the qa technician shall take possession of half of the sample for all of the qc samples .
the qa technician shall ensure the departments portion of the backup samples for all qc and qa tests are properly labeled stored and retained until the departments bituminous engineer has completed the ftest and ttest statistical evaluation .
the qc technician shall retain their backup split until the qc qa and ia technicians have obtained their test results for the individual lot and have found the results to be within the allowable tolerances in the departments materials manual sd num and the engineer has approved the disposal of the backup samples .
the engineer will determine and mark the core locations after the mix is placed and compacted .
the cores will be taken the next working day after the asphalt pavement is placed .
the contractor shall perform the coring under observation by the engineer .
the engineer will take immediate possession of the core samples for density testing .
the contractor shall fill all core holes before the end of the next working day with hot asphalt concrete and compact the mix to a density close to that of the surrounding pavement .
core samples for density will be tested by the engineer .
the qc technician shall complete all of the required tests on the samples selected for qa or ia testing .
c. specification control limits the control limits of materials being produced will be evaluated under two different categories pay factor attributes and nonpay factor attributes .
asphalt concrete class q new section num page num num .
pay factor attributes air voids and in place density compaction are the two pay factor attributes .
these attributes will be statistically analyzed for contract unit price adjustment .
the percent air voids shall meet the requirement in table l and the in place density of the asphalt concrete when expressed as a percent of the lot average maximum specific gravity rice method shall meet the requirements in table l. table l pay factor attributes a .
air voids num num b .
in place density compaction class qnum num to num class qnum num to num class qnum num to num class qnum num to num class qnum num to num when field test results for air voids or in place density deviate from the job mix formula values the contractor may adjust the gradation asphalt binder content or both within the allowable tolerances shown for items a b c and d shown in table n. bin splits may be adjusted up to num from the job mix formula bin splits .
adjustments shall be made as a result of an interactive process between the contractor and the engineer .
the contractors recommendations shall prevail provided all specifications and established mix design criteria are being met .
if new materials are to be incorporated into the asphalt concrete or bin split percentages are adjusted by more than num from the job mix formula a new mix design will be required by the contractor unless otherwise approved by the bituminous engineer with verification by the departments bituminous mix design lab .
the contractor shall be responsible to verify that all mix design criteria are being met prior to written job mix formula approval .
when a new mix design and job mix formula is required the current sublot shall be terminated and incorporated into the previous sublot for pay factor analysis .
a new lot will be started when production is changed to the new job mix formula .
at the end of production the current sublot shall be terminated and incorporated into the previous sublot unless the hot mix sample and both core sample locations have been obtained and tested for the current sublot .
num .
nonpay factor attributes there are several requirements not used in the determination of the pay factor that are very important to the performance of the asphalt concrete .
the below listed attributes are tested at the frequency listed in the departments materials manual .
the attributes shall be maintained within the requirements in section num b.num or as otherwise specified .
num asphalt concrete class q new section page num table m nonpay factor attributes virgin mineral aggregate gradation asphalt binder content hydrated lime content moisture content of mix sand equivalent lightweight particles crushed particles fine aggregate angularity voids in mineral aggregate vma dust to binder ratio rap content if used the asphalt binder and hydrated lime content are not statistically evaluated as pay factor attributes but may be price adjusted dotnum for failure to conform to specification requirements .
the vma and dust to binder ratio are calculated using the asphalt binder percentage determined from the daily cutoff from that days production .
the bulk specific gravity of the mineral aggregate will be determined by the departments materials surfacing central laboratory during the mix design verification .
when rap is required the vma will be calculated using the bulk specific gravity of the mixture the percent stone of the mixture and the bulk specific gravity of the aggregate as determined by the departments materials surfacing central laboratory during the mix design verification all including rap .
when rap is required the dust to binder ratio will be calculated using the percent num material from the virgin aggregate the percent hydrated lime and the effective binder content of the total mixture including rap .
the bulk specific gravity of the mineral aggregate may be tested during production at the discretion of the contractor or the engineer .
a split portion of material shall be given to the other entity for verification .
if the vma or dust to binder ratio value does not meet the requirements in section num b.num the contractor shall make corrective actions before production continues and document the corrective actions taken .
if three out of any five consecutive tests for vma or dust to binder ratio exceed the criteria in section num b.num the contractor shall immediately cease operations .
a new mix design will be required by the contractor unless otherwise approved by the departments bituminous engineer with verification by the departments bituminous mix design lab prior to resuming production .
the contractor shall be responsible to verify that all mix design criteria are being met .
asphalt concrete class q new section num page num table n job mix formula tolerances attribute tolerance from target value a. sieve num thru num num b. sieve num thru num num c. sieve num thru num num d. percent asphalt binder num e. sand equivalentnum minimum or more f. percent lightweight particlesnum maximum or less g. fine aggregate angularitynum minimum or more h. crushed particlesnum minimum or more j .
percent hydrated lime num k. asphalt application temperature numf l. temp .
of mixture when emptied from the mixer numf m. temp .
of mixture on delivery to the road numf num f n. percent rap content if used num num these properties are not listed on the job mix formula but will be tested for compliance with the mix design specifications listed in tables ae .
if two out of any five consecutive tests for the gradation requirements items a b or c fail to meet the tolerances contained in table n the contractor shall immediately cease operations .
the contractor shall investigate the cause of the variation in production .
production will not be allowed to resume until a passing cold feed sample is obtained and the engineer has approved the corrective action .
if the asphalt binder content hydrated lime content or rap content falls outside the tolerance in table n the contractor shall make corrective actions before production continues and document the corrective actions taken .
if two out of any five consecutive tests for the asphalt binder content hydrated lime content or rap content fail to meet the tolerances contained in table n the corrective action shall include recalibration of the binder meter the lime weigh and feed system or the rap feed system respectively .
the maximum moisture content in the fieldproduced mix shall be num .
if the moisture content in the mix exceeds the maximum allowed the contractor shall make corrective actions before production continues and document the corrective actions taken .
burner adjustments increase mix temperature slower plant production rates use of drier aggregates and adjustment to the amount of time material is in drum for mixing and heating are possible corrective actions .
additional moisture content in the fieldproduced mix tests shall be conducted to verify that the corrective action has worked to produce specification mix .
if the sand equivalent percent lightweight particles fine aggregate angularity or crushed particles items e f g or h for a single test fall outside the tolerances shown in table n the contractor shall immediately cease operations .
the contractor shall investigate the cause of the variation in production .
the contractor will not be allowed to continue operations until a num asphalt concrete class q new section page num passing cold feed sample is obtained and the engineer has approved the corrective action .
num .
test identification number the production control sublot tests consecutively in accordance with the departments materials manual starting with number qcnum or qcnum based on the total number of samples needed .
the two density cores in a sublot shall have the same number along with an a or b designation and shall match the sublot number .
the two gyratory specimens shall be numbered with the sublot number and an a and a b for the two specimens .
use n before the sublot number for nonpay factor material .
use info before the number for information samples .
use ts before the sublot number for test strip samples .
use r after the number for remedial samples .
use cal before the number for calibration samples .
num .
control charts the contractor shall provide qc charts that include the control limits and each individual test result for the following parameters a gradation of the control sieves in the job mix formula b asphalt binder content c hydrated lime content d maximum specific gravity rice e bulk specific gravity gyratory f air voids g in place density h vma i dust to binder ratio qc test results shall be recorded on the control charts immediately after completion of the test .
the control charts shall also include the qa and independent assurance test results .
the control charts shall be prominently displayed and accessible to the engineer .
the control charts shall be given to the engineer upon completion of the project .
num .
documentation the contractor is responsible for documenting all observations inspection records mixture adjustments test results and corrective actions on a daily basis .
the contractor shall also record and maintain a plant record of plant starts and stops mix temperatures leaving the plant bin split of aggregates and the temperature of the asphalt binder going into the mix .
field observations and inspections shall be noted as they occur in a permanent duplicating field book or diary provided by the engineer .
the roadway diaries shall include hours paved equipment in use stations paved course depth width crown spread checks tonnage weather and temperature of mixture delivered to the road .
plant diaries shall include plant start and shutdown times mix temperature of material produced binder spot checks aggregate bin splits being used actual calculated asphalt binder asphalt concrete class q new section num page num percentage for the day tons of mix produced mixture or aggregate adjustments weather conditions and any other pertinent information .
the engineer will collect copies of documentation records and recorded mix temperature charts daily .
all records shall be made available at all times upon request by the engineer .
the test results and original work sheets including all gyratory specimen compaction sheets for the production control testing listed in table m shall be given to the engineer upon completion of the test .
c. quality assurance the engineer will randomly sample and test a minimum of one sublot for each lot .
the engineer may test any or all of the splits of the qc sublot samples as part of the qa program .
the engineer will provide at least one individual certified in asphalt concrete aggregate testing and asphalt concrete hot mix testing for conducting the qa testing and at least one individual certified in asphalt concrete roadway inspection for roadway inspection .
the qa technician will complete all of the required tests on the samples that are selected for qa testing .
the services of contractors personnel to assist in obtaining the qa samples should be limited only to instances when hazardous conditions or liability issues exists that dictate their involvement and the following requirements are met num .
the qa sample location or time is only given to the contractor immediately prior to sampling .
num .
the contractors personnel are used only to provide labor to assist in physically obtaining the qa sample .
num .
the engineer is present to witness the taking of the qa sample .
num .
the engineer witnessing the sampling and the contractor labor performing the sampling are certified in accordance with the departments certification program .
num .
the engineer immediately takes possession of the qa sample .
qa test results will be made available to the contractor within num hours or the next working day .
the split sample test results qa of the sample taken by the engineer will be compared to the contractor test results qc for conformance with the departments materials manual .
populations of the qc sample test results will be compared to the qa sample test results utilizing the procedures shown in sd num .
if the test results are within the allowable tolerances found to be similar and found to represent the same population as determined by ftest and ttest statistical evaluation procedures conducted by the bituminous engineer the contract unit price adjustments will be based on the contractor qc test results .
sampling and splitting not required to be performed by the engineer will be witnessed by the engineer .
the engineer will test the core samples for density .
num asphalt concrete class q new section page num the engineer will perform or witness the measurement of the depth of the asphalt binder in the storage tanks as described in sd num .
the engineer will determine the temperature of the asphalt binder in the tank and will perform the daily calculation of the asphalt binder content .
the engineer will perform the daily calculation of the hydrated lime content .
the engineer will test the moisture content of the hot mix .
the mix for the moisture test shall be sampled from the windrow in front of the laydown machine and placed in an airtight tared container .
the mix shall be dried to a constant mass as described in sd num .
d. independent assurance procedures the department will perform independent assurance ia testing on project produced materials .
random samples of mineral aggregate and hot mix asphalt concrete used for qc testing will be selected by the region materials engineer for ia testing .
the region materials engineer will perform ia testing for the attributes listed in the departments materials manual .
the tolerances from the departments materials manual will be used to independently evaluate the qc and qa testing procedures and equipment .
the region materials engineer shall witness the sampling and splitting of the designated ia sample an actual sublot sample .
the region materials engineer may select either engineer or contractor sampled sublot for the ia testing .
the region materials engineer will also perform ia testing for the bulk specific gravity on in place density cores .
a separate ia core shall be obtained by the contractor while obtaining the in place density core used to determine the pay factor .
the ia core shall be taken at the same offset and within one foot of the core used in determining the pay factor .
e. dispute resolution system process verification procedures using ftest and ttest statistical evaluation procedures to determine if both qc and qa test results represent the same sample population may result in the need for testing backup sublot samples and substituting the new test result for pay factor calculations .
if the qc and qa test results do represent the same population as determined by ftest and ttest statistical evaluation procedures the contractors test results may be used for quality acceptance .
num method of measurement and acceptance the method of measurement shall be as prescribed in section num except the method of measurement for qa and qc field laboratories and the method of measurement and acceptance for asphalt concrete will be made according to the following a. asphalt concrete the asphalt concrete shall be statistically accepted by lots .
a lot shall consist of five sublots .
sublots shall not represent more than num tons unless the current sublot is terminated .
the first lot shall start at the beginning of production or following the control test strip .
asphalt concrete class q new section num page num a lot will be terminated when a new mix design is completed and a new job mix formula is issued .
if less than five sublots have been completed when a lot is terminated the sublots will be included in the previous lot and the pay factor computed for the revised lot .
if there is no previous lot the lot will not be terminated until five sublots are obtained .
num .
determination of contract unit price adjustment asphalt concrete that is not compacted according to the specified density method will not be included in the pay factor calculations but may be price adjusted dotnum for failure to conform to specification requirements .
the material specified to be sampled and tested on a qcqa basis will be evaluated for payment under this subsection .
all qc test results for a lot will be analyzed collectively and statistically by the quality level analysis standard deviation method using the procedures herein defined .
the lots will be analyzed to determine the total estimated percent of the lot that is within the specification limits .
quality level analysis specification conformance analysis is a statistical procedure for estimating the percent of material that is within the specification limits pwl .
the pwl is determined by using the lot mean x and the lot standard deviations .
two measures of quality are required to establish the contract unit price adjustment .
the first measure is the acceptable quality level aql which is the pwl at which the lot will receive num pay or a composite pay factor of num .
the second measure of quality is the rejectable quality level rql at which the engineer has determined the material may not perform as desired and may be rejected .
the aql has been selected at num pwl and the rql at num pwl .
the rql using the pay factor equation will result in num pay or a pay factor of num .
an individual pay factor for any attribute resulting in less than num pay may result in the lot being rejected .
when the acceptable quality level of any individual pay factor attribute has a ql of num or less the composite pay factor shall not exceed num .
a lot may be accepted provided the composite pay factor is at least num and there are no isolated defects identified by the engineer .
a lot containing material with less than a num composite pay factor may be rejected .
all of the rejected material shall be removed from the work .
the engineer will determine if the material may remain in place at a reduced price .
a lot containing material with less than a num composite pay factor may not be overlaid prior to the engineer determining the acceptability of the lot .
the engineer may reject any quantity of material that appears to be defective based on visual inspection or test results .
the visual rejection may include segregation low temperature material very high or low asphalt content etc .
such rejected material num asphalt concrete class q new section page num shall not be used in the work or included with the lot acceptance tests .
rejected material will not be measured for payment .
the contractor may elect to remove any defective material and replace it with new material to avoid a pay factor less than num .
any such new material will be sampled tested and evaluated for acceptance according to this specification .
num .
quality level analysis the standard deviation method procedures are as follows a .
only test results on material incorporated in the work will be included in the quality level analysis .
b .
calculate the arithmetic mean x of the test values where  summation of x individual test value to xn n total number of test values c. calculate the sample standard deviations where  x num summation of the squares of individual test values .
x num  summation of the individual test values squared .
d. calculate the upper quality index qu where usl upper specification limit or target value tv plus allowable deviation .
target value the single specification value which would result in an ideal product .
e. calculate the lower quality index ql x x n  s n x x nn num num num u q usl x s l q x lsl s asphalt concrete class q new section num page num where lsl lower specification limit or target value minus allowable deviation .
f. determine pu percent within the upper specification limit which corresponds to a given qu from table p. note if a usl is not specified pu will be num. g. determine pl percent within the lower specification limit which corresponds to a given ql from table p. note if an lsl is not specified pl will be num. h. determine the quality level the total percent within specification limits .
quality level ql pu pl num i .
to determine the pay factor for each individual attribute pf num numql .
j .
determine the composite pay factor cpf for each lot .
the third decimal place of the cpf shall be rounded to the nearest hundredth by the computer program .
fnumpfnum fnumpfnum cpf __________________ num f f num to num where fnum or num price adjustment factor listed in table o for each measured attribute .
pfnum or num pay factor for each measured attribute .
f sum of the f price adjustment factors .
the asphalt concrete pavement contract unit price will be adjusted according to section num .
payment for the asphalt concrete will be made at a price determined by multiplying the contract unit price by the composite pay factor .
the following table will be used to calculate the composite pay factor num asphalt concrete class q new section page num table o pay attributes price adjustment factors measured attribute factor f design air voids num in place density compaction num all mineral aggregate testing prior to production and qcqa testing shall be incidental to the contract unit price per ton for asphalt concrete .
asphalt concrete will be measured to the nearest num ton .
the mixture of mineral aggregate and asphalt will be weighed after mixing .
no deduction will be made for the weight of the asphalt included in the mixture .
deduction will not be made for material removed from temporary approaches .
deductions will be made for all rejected and wasted asphalt concrete pavement .
b. qa and qc field laboratories there will be no measurement or payment for the qc laboratory furnished and used by the contractor to perform the qc testing .
the contractor furnished qa laboratory will be measured in accordance with section num .
num basis of payment the basis of payment shall be as prescribed in section num except the basis of payment for asphalt binder asphalt concrete and qa and qc field laboratories will be made according to the following a. asphalt binder the accepted quantities of asphalt binder will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
the amount bid for this item shall be at least the cost of the asphalt binder furnished and delivered to the project site .
payment for the asphalt binder is not subject to the statistical pay factor adjustment .
b. asphalt concrete the accepted quantities of asphalt concrete will be paid for at the contract unit price as adjusted by the pay factor calculations in section num of this specification per ton complete and accepted in place .
asphalt concrete that is not compacted according to the specified density method will not be included in the pay factor calculations .
asphalt concrete that is not included in the pay factor calculations shall be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
the contract unit price of asphalt concrete shall include all cost for labor equipment materials testing and all incidentals required to furnish and place the asphalt concrete mix according to these specifications .
c. laboratories num .
qc laboratory the laboratory used by the contractor for qc testing shall be incidental to the asphalt concrete pavement items .
asphalt concrete class q new section num page num num .
qa laboratory payment for the qa laboratory will be according to section num of the standard specifications .
num asphalt concrete class q new section page num table p quality levels quality level analysis by standard deviation method pu or pl percent within limits for upper quality index qu or lower quality index ql positive values of qu or ql nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum num nnum num to n num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note for negative values of qu or ql pu or pl is equal to num minus the table pu or pl .
if the value of qu or ql does not correspond exactly to a figure in the table use the next higher value .
asphalt concrete composite num page num num description this work consists of constructing one or more courses of asphalt concrete and treating a prepared surface with asphalt material and sand as required .
num materials the materials for treating a prepared surface shall conform to section num .
the materials for asphalt concrete composite and their use shall conform to section num except as modified by the following the mineral aggregate for asphalt concrete composite shall conform to section num class e type num with the following modifications the asphalt binder used in the mixture shall be pg num pg num pg num or pg num unless otherwise specified in the plans .
the contractor shall provide a job mix formula to the departments bituminous engineer with supporting mix design data prior to production .
the asphalt binder content may be adjusted by the engineer .
the engineer may accept the mixture on the basis of the certificates of compliance and visual inspection or may test the mixture for specification compliance .
num construction requirements the construction requirements shall be as prescribed in section num and num with the following modifications a. density compaction of the asphalt concrete composite shall be by methods and to a density satisfactory to the engineer .
b. thickness the compacted thickness of each lift shall not exceed num inches .
c. asphalt asphalt for tack ssnumh or cssnumh shall be applied prior to each lift of asphalt concrete .
asphalt for tack shall be applied at a rate of num gallons per square yard on existing pavement or milled asphalt concrete surface and at a rate of num gallons per square yard on new asphalt concrete pavement .
asphalt for flush seal ssnumh or cssnumh and sand for flush seal shall be applied to the final lift of asphalt concrete in accordance with section num .
asphalt for flush seal shall be applied at a rate of num gallons per square yard and sand for flush seal shall be applied at a rate of num pounds per square yard .
d. the requirement for a paver feeder from section num g is waived .
num asphalt concrete composite page num num method of measurement measurement will be to the nearest num ton .
num basis of payment asphalt concrete composite shall be paid for at the contract unit price per ton for asphalt concrete composite furnished complete in place .
asphalt concrete composite shall include mineral aggregate asphalt binder asphalt for tack ssnumh or cssnumh asphalt for flush seal ssnumh or cssnumh sand for flush seal equipment labor and incidentals necessary .
when required the following shall also be included in the contract unit price per ton for asphalt concrete composite asphalt for prime mcnum blotting sand for prime hydrated lime equipment labor and incidentals necessary .
asphalt concrete class s num page num num description this work consists of constructing a course of asphalt concrete on a prepared surface .
num materials the materials for asphalt concrete class s and their use shall conform to section num with the following additional requirements stabilizing additive for asphalt concrete the contractor shall use cellulose fibers only as the stabilizing additive for asphalt concrete .
the cellulose fibers shall conform to the following requirements and be accompanied with certified test results for each batch delivered to the project .
fiber length num inch max sieve analysis alpine sieve analysis passing num sieve num ash content num nonvolatiles ph num num oil absorption times fiber weight num num moisture content num max by weight num construction requirements the construction requirements shall be as prescribed in section num with the following modifications a .
weather and seasonal limitations asphalt concrete shall not be placed when the underlying surface is wet or frozen .
asphalt concrete shall not be placed when weather conditions prevent proper handling compaction or finishing .
the placement of asphalt concrete will only be permitted between june num and september num inclusive and when the air and surface temperatures are numf or greater in the shade .
b. rollers substitute the following for the first paragraph of section num b.num there shall be at least two steel faced tandem rollers for each paver in use .
the self propelled steel faced tandem rollers two steel drums operating in the same track shall furnish a minimum rolling weight mass of num pounds per inch of roller width .
vibratory rollers shall be operated in the static mode unless otherwise ordered by the engineer .
pneumatic tired rollers are not allowed .
the rollers shall be capable of being reversed smoothly without shoving or tearing the asphalt concrete .
c. breakdown rolling substitute the following for section num g.num selfpropelled tandem smooth steel rollers two steel drums operating in the same track shall furnish a minimum rolling weight mass of num pounds per inch of roller width .
breakdown rolling consisting of a minimum of two complete coverages with self num asphalt concrete class s page num propelled tandem smooth steel rollers shall proceed on the mat as soon as laydown is completed .
operations shall be scheduled so breakdown rolling is completed on a segment within num feet of the laydown .
final or finish rolling shall consist of a minimum of one complete coverage with a selfpropelled tandem smooth steel roller .
completion of rolling shall not lag behind the laydown by a distance of more than num feet .
during periods of cool weather this maximum distance between laydown and final rolling shall be reduced as ordered by the engineer .
compaction to a specified density will not be required .
however additional roller coverage may be required in order to obtain a smooth surface finish .
d. stabilizing additive for asphalt concrete add the following to section num c num .
the asphalt concrete mixture shall meet the num maximum drain down percent in uncompacted bituminous paving mixtures requirement when tested in accordance with sd num .
if the asphalt concrete mixture drain down percent exceeds the maximum allowed the contractor will be required to add a stabilizing additive to the mixture to prevent drain down of the asphalt binder and mineral aggregate according to the following stabilizing additives shall be introduced into the mixture using a stabilizer supply system recommended by the manufacturer of the additive .
the supply system shall be a separate system that proportions the required amount of stabilizer in a uniform distribution .
the system shall include low level and noflow indicators and a printout of status of feed rate in lbsmin .
the stabilizer supply line shall include a section of transparent pipe for observing consistency of flow or feed .
stabilizing additive shall be added at a dosage rate between num and num by weight of the total mix as determined by the mix designer .
if the stabilizing additive content falls outside a tolerance of num by total weight of desired stabilizing additive from the job mix formula target the contractor shall stop production until corrective measures are taken .
num method of measurement measurement as prescribed in section num with the following addition g. stabilizing additive for asphalt concrete stabilizing additive for asphalt concrete when provided will be measured to the nearest num ton .
num basis of payment payment as prescribed in section num with the following addition g. stabilizing additive for asphalt concrete stabilizing additive for asphalt concrete will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton including all cost for labor equipment and materials associated with the addition of the stabilizing additive for asphalt concrete complete in place .
asphalt concrete class hr num page num num description this work consists of constructing one or more courses of asphalt concrete with rap on a prepared surface .
num materials the materials for asphalt concrete class hr and their use shall conform to section num except as modified by the following asphalt concrete aggregates shall consist of rap and virgin aggregate .
the proportions of materials in the mixture will be determined by the job mix formula .
the virgin mineral aggregate for asphalt concrete class hr shall conform to section num class e type num .
the virgin aggregates shall meet the specifications of the class and type specified .
the combined virgin aggregate and rap will not be further tested for gradation or quality control purposes .
num construction requirements the construction requirements shall be as prescribed in section num with the following modifications a .
the compacted thickness of each lift shall not exceed num inches .
b .
the minimum density requirement shall be num of the maximum specific gravity of the test specimens prepared in the field in accordance with sd num .
the compacted density of asphalt concrete shall be determined according to sd num .
c. the rap virgin aggregate materials and asphalt cement shall be mixed by a conventional hot mix batch plant or a drum mix type hot plant .
num method of measurement measurement as provided in section num .
num basis of payment payment as provided in section num .
num asphalt concrete class hr page num this page intentionally left blank prime tack fog seal and flush seal num page num num description this work consists of preparing and treating a prepared surface with asphalt material and sand as required .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections a. asphalt section num .
b. blotting sand for prime section num .
c. sand for flush seal section num .
d. sand for fog seal section num .
num construction requirements a .
weather and seasonal requirements application shall be made only during daylight hours when the wind does not adversely affect the spraying operation and when the following conditions are met num .
asphalt for prime the application of asphalt for prime will be permitted only a .
when the ambient air and surface temperatures on the project are both at least numf in the shade .
b .
when conditions are dry .
when plans call for prime on interim surfacing the prime application shall closely follow the base finishing operation and at no time shall the prime operation be more than num miles from the base finishing operation .
the cure time for the processed base prime and blotting sand application will be determined by the engineer .
surfaces primed with cutback asphalt shall be allowed to cure for a minimum of num hours prior to being overlaid with asphalt concrete .
num .
asphalt for tack the application of asphalt for tack will be permitted only a .
when the ambient air and surface temperature on the project are both at least numf in the shade .
b .
when conditions are dry except emulsified asphalt may be applied when the surface is slightly damp .
num prime tack fog seal and flush seal page num num .
asphalt for fog seal the application of asphalt for fog seal will be permitted only a .
when the ambient air and surface temperature on the project are both at least numf in the shade .
b .
when conditions are dry .
num .
asphalt for flush seal the application of asphalt for flush seal will be permitted only a .
between may num and november num inclusive .
b .
when ambient air and surface temperatures on the project are both at least numf in the shade .
c. when the surface is dry or slightly damp .
b. dilution of tack fog seal and flush seal emulsified asphalt for tack fog seal and flush seal with a specified application rate of num gallons per square yard or less may be diluted .
the rate of dilution shall be at a ratio of at least num part emulsion to no more than num part added water num ratio minimum by volume unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
the emulsion shall be uniformly mixed by adding potable water and if necessary agitating the mixture .
the amount of emulsion and any added water shall be included on the ticket delivered to the project .
if the emulsion is diluted the emulsified asphalt supplier shall perform the dilution .
dilution of asphalt emulsion in the field will not be allowed unless approved by the engineer .
field dilution of the emulsified asphalt will only be allowed when the rate of dilution is accurately controlled .
the final rate of dilution shall not be less than the minimum ratio of at least num part emulsion to no more than num part added water num ratio minimum .
diluted emulsified asphalt for tack fog seal and flush seal shall be applied at an adjusted rate proportional to the dilution ratio resulting in application of the specified rate of emulsion .
emulsified asphalt for tack fog seal or flush seal with a specified rate exceeding num gallons per square yard may not be diluted .
c. equipment the following minimum equipment shall be furnished by the contractor .
num .
brooms a .
pickup broom in curb and gutter sections or in rural sections where a finished and maintained lawn extends to the edge of the shoulder the contractor must use a pickup broom with an integral selfcontained storage .
the pickup broom must be a minimum of num feet wide and must have working gutter brooms .
b. rotary power broom a rotary power broom may be used in all other areas .
prime tack fog seal and flush seal num page num num .
heating equipment equipment for heating the asphalt material in or at the tank car transport truck or distributor shall be designed and constructed to heat the material without burning scorching or overheating and with positive control of the heat .
the introduction of steam directly into the material will not be permitted .
num .
distributors distributors used to apply the asphalt material shall be selfpropelled equipped with pressure type mechanical circulating pumps and valves a heating system and insulated tank which will provide the uniform required temperature throughout the entire contents of the distributor tank .
the distributor shall have a capacity of at least num gallons .
detachable distributor units separate from the tank will not be allowed .
the distributor shall uniformly apply the heated asphalt material to the road surface in accurately measured quantities and maintain the specified rate of application during the distribution of the entire tankload regardless of change in gradient superelevation direction or content level in the tank .
calibration runs for verification shall be made at the start of the work .
the spray nozzles shall be designed sized and arranged to ensure uniform distribution of heated asphalt material at the designated rate in an overlapping fan shaped spray without surge streaks ridges or bare spots .
a strainer shall be provided in the discharge line to prevent nozzles from clogging .
the output of each and every nozzle on the bar shall be the same and a test shall be made in advance of use to determine compliance with this requirement .
different sizes heights pressures and settings of nozzles for different designated rates shall be provided .
the distributor shall be equipped with a tachometer clearly visible to the operator which accurately shows the speed in feet per minute .
pressure metering distributors shall be furnished with an accurate pressure gauge showing the distribution pressure .
volume metering distributors shall be furnished with a pump tachometer or meter showing the volume furnished .
the distributor shall include an accurate mercury actuated thermometer showing the temperature of the material in the tank and a contents gauge showing the number of gallons in the tank at any content level .
the distributor shall be equipped with adjustable spray bars arranged so the application width will be available in num foot intervals .
the distributor spray bars shall be capable of operating at a constant controlled height and shall be of the full circulating type .
each nozzle of the distributor bar shall be equipped with a cutoff valve which immediately stops the flow without dripping .
compliance with these requirements must be proven before the distributor can be used .
d. surface preparation the surface shall be thoroughly swept and cleaned of all foreign material .
appurtenances immediately adjacent to the surface to be treated shall be protected from the splatter of asphalt .
manhole covers water shut valves and other num prime tack fog seal and flush seal page num utility access points shall be covered to ensure liquid asphalt is not applied to them as directed by the engineer .
surfaces to receive a prime coat shall be satisfactorily compacted and cured .
e. application of asphalt during application the temperature of the asphalt shall be maintained within the temperature range furnished by the asphalt supplier .
asphalt shall be applied by a pressure distributor in a uniform and continuous manner .
coverage shall be made to the satisfaction of the engineer .
unauthorized increases in rate of application will not be eligible for payment .
the angle of the spray nozzles and the height of the spray bar shall be set to obtain uniform distribution .
the distributor shall travel at the established speed when the spray bar is opened .
areas inaccessible to the distributor shall be covered by hand spray methods .
when the distributor is not in operation it shall be parked off the roadbed or drip pans shall be placed under the spray bar .
tack application ahead of mat laydown shall be limited by job conditions and shall not exceed the amount estimated for the current days operation unless ordered or allowed by the engineer .
tacked areas which become unsatisfactory as a result of traffic weather or other conditions shall be retacked .
required retacking which is not the fault of the contractor will be paid for at the contract unit price for tack asphalt .
f. application of sand blotting of prime shall be accomplished by broom sweeping or spreading sand on the primed surface with a mechanical spreader .
hand spreading will be permitted on odd shaped or inaccessible areas .
application of sand will not be permitted until the prime has set for at least num hours unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
the fresh application of asphalt for flush seal shall be covered with a uniform spread of sand immediately behind the distributor .
the sand shall be placed by a selfpowered aggregate spreader with positive controls or other equipment acceptable to the engineer .
the sand shall be placed uniformly on the asphalt application .
rolling will not be required .
the finished surface shall be smooth riding without transverse or longitudinal ridges and shall present a uniform satisfactory appearance .
bleeding areas shall be resanded .
rough and nonuniform areas shall be corrected .
when applying fog seal coats a light application of sand may be ordered by the engineer to prevent material pick up .
if ordered the sand shall be placed by a selfpowered aggregate spreader with positive controls or other equipment acceptable to the engineer .
the sand shall be placed uniformly on the asphalt application .
rolling will not be required .
the finished surface shall be smooth riding without transverse or longitudinal ridges and shall present a uniform satisfactory appearance .
bleeding areas shall be resanded .
rough and nonuniform areas shall be corrected .
the loose sand material remaining on the surface shall be lightly broomed off after a waiting period of twentyfour hours from the time of application or as otherwise directed prime tack fog seal and flush seal num page num by the engineer .
excess material in curb and gutter sections shall be broomed towards the gutter and shall be picked up and disposed of by the contractor .
unauthorized increases in rate of application will not be eligible for payment .
g. temporary traffic control the contractor shall provide flaggers signs and barriers to warn direct and prevent traffic from traveling on the freshly applied asphalt until it has penetrated and does not track or pickup on the tires of traveling vehicles or the surface has been blotted with sand .
temporary traffic control shall conform to section num .
num method of measurement a. asphalt asphalt will be measured to the nearest num ton .
b. blotting sand for prime blotting sand for prime will be measured to the nearest num ton .
c. sand for flush seal sand for flush seal will be measured to the nearest num ton .
d. sand for fog seal sand for fog seal will be measured to the nearest num ton .
num basis of payment a. asphalt asphalt will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton complete in place .
separate payment will not be made for water for dilution of emulsified asphalt .
b. blotting sand for prime blotting sand for prime will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton complete in place .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing and all incidentals required to complete the work .
c. sand for flush seal sand for flush seal will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton complete in place .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing and all incidentals required to complete the work .
d. sand for fog seal sand for fog seal will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton complete in place .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing and all incidentals required to complete the work .
num prime tack fog seal and flush seal page num this page intentionally left blank cold milling asphalt concrete num page num num description this work consists of cold milling a portion of the existing asphalt concrete surface course and hauling and stockpiling the removed material .
num materials cold milled asphalt concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements a .
general the material shall be removed by cold milling with the specified equipment without the use of heat .
the contractor shall not dispose of cold milled asphalt concrete material or use the cold milled material for any purpose other than purposes designated in the plans without approval by the engineer .
b .
equipment the equipment for cold milling shall consist of a rotating drum equipped with teeth capable of removing material to a depth of up to num inches in one pass producing a uniform surface finish .
the cold milling machine shall establish a longitudinal profile grade within num inch referenced from a traveling stringline or erected fixed string line and shall be controlled by an automatic system for controlling grade .
the cold milling machine shall be equipped so that the depth and transverse slope of the drum is manually or automatically controlled using the traveling or fixed stringline on either or both sides of the milling machine .
the fixed stringline shall remain taut after being tightened .
the traveling stringline shall have a minimum effective length of num feet .
the traveling stringline shall be attached and positioned on the milling machine to reference the longitudinal profile .
the traveling stringline shall utilize either mechanical skis or non contacting grade averaging sensors .
if mechanical skis are provided the sensor of the control system shall rest midway between the traveling stringline .
following milling of the first pass adjacent passes shall be milled referencing the traveling stringline riding on the previously milled pass or a fixed stringline .
a shoe attachment may be used to match an adjacent reference point when directed by the engineer .
the drum shall be capable of tilting to allow feathering of edges to zero cut .
c. construction methods the existing surface of the pavement shall be removed by milling to the depth width cross section and grade specified .
the resulting milled surface shall be free of detrimental ridges or grooves .
the final pavement surface shall have a transverse pattern of num inch center to center of each strike area .
the difference between the ridge and valley of the mat surface shall not exceed num inch .
num cold milling asphalt concrete page num the milled section shall be finished to the cross slope shown on the typical section num .
the quarter crown within any num foot transverse length or the actual lane width paved with a single paver pass shall not exceed num foot when measured with a straightedge stringline or other suitable equipment .
the engineer may order changes to the typical section if field conditions warrant .
all vertical cuts from cold milling operations left and right of the centerline shall be daylighted to the outside edge of the road to allow surface water to be drained off of the roadway .
daylighting shall be accomplished by methods satisfactory to the engineer .
when traffic will be exposed to the milled surface all cold milling asphalt concrete shall be accomplished on onehalf of the roadway at a time .
the contractor shall schedule the cold milling asphalt concrete operations so that there are no drop offs uneven lanes or windrows of milled material remaining on the roadway overnight .
at the end of the day the contractor shall place cold milled asphalt concrete material to provide temporary ramps as a transition onto or off of the milled surface and the project limits bridge approaches and intersecting roads .
the resultant transition shall be of sufficient length to provide a slope no steeper than num .
num .
cold milling asphalt concrete and placing cold milled material the contractor shall place the cold milled asphalt concrete material directly on the shoulder of the roadway to the dimensions of the typical sections or as directed by the engineer .
the contractor may need to adjust the depth of milling due to rutting or other roadway irregularities to create the proper grade line cross section and cross slope and to obtain the material required for the shoulders .
some areas of the shoulder may require the movement of cold milled asphalt concrete material either ahead or back to achieve the required cross section .
no separate payment will be made for the movement of this material .
material placed on the shoulders shall be compacted according to section num d except that a pneumatic tired roller with an effective roller weight of at least num pounds per inch of roller width will be required .
at the time of compaction the cold milled asphalt concrete material placed on the shoulder shall contain approximately num moisture uniformly blended throughout the depth of the material .
the percent moisture may be adjusted by the engineer .
prior to allowing traffic on the milled surface the surface shall be thoroughly broomed free of remaining loose material .
in rural sections where a finished and maintained lawn extends to the edge of the shoulder the contractor shall use a pickup broom with an integral selfcontained storage .
the pickup broom must be a minimum of num feet wide .
a rotary power broom may be used in all other areas .
num .
cold milling asphalt concrete loose material resulting from the milling shall be immediately picked up hauled to the stockpile sites and stockpiled .
prior to allowing traffic on the milled surface the surface shall be thoroughly broomed free of remaining loose material .
in curb and gutter sections or in rural sections where a cold milling asphalt concrete num page num finished and maintained lawn extends to the edge of the shoulder the contractor shall use a pickup broom with an integral selfcontained storage .
the pickup broom must be a minimum of num feet wide .
while sweeping in curb and gutter sections the pickup broom must have working gutter brooms .
a rotary power broom may be used in all other areas .
cold milled asphalt concrete material shall be processed or crushed and stockpiled so that a uniform blend is obtained .
prior to stockpiling the stockpile site shall be prepared by removal of the top num inches of topsoil and the area bladed smooth .
stockpiles shall be constructed in accordance with section num .
the stockpiles shall not contain dirt grease oil brick paving fabric clay balls organic debris and other foreign material .
num method of measurement a .
cold milling asphalt concrete and placing cold milled material cold milling asphalt concrete and placing cold milled material will not be measured .
plans quantity will be used .
if changes from the plans quantity are ordered these areas will be measured and the plans quantity will be appropriately adjusted .
water for granular material added during laydown operations and materials which are paid for under separate items will not be measured under this item .
b .
cold milling asphalt concrete cold milling asphalt concrete will not be measured .
plans quantity will be used .
if changes from the plans quantity are ordered these areas will be measured and the plans quantity we be appropriately adjusted .
num basis of payment a .
cold milling ashpalt concrete and placing cold milled material cold milling asphalt concrete and placing cold milled material will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard or as indicated in the plans .
payment will be full compensation for the removal of grass weeds topsoil etc .
from the placement location milling removing placing and compaction of the cold milled material and brooming equipment labor and all incidentals required .
b .
cold milling asphalt concrete cold milling asphalt concrete will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard or as indicated in the plans .
payment will be full compensation for milling removing hauling stockpiling processing or crushing the cold milled material brooming equipment labor and all incidentals required .
num cold milling asphalt concrete page num this page intentionally left blank asphalt concrete crack sealing num page num num description this work shall consist of routing and sealing transverse and longitudinal cracks in an asphalt concrete roadway surface with the specified sealant .
num materials asphalt concrete crack sealant shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements a .
routing num .
routing equipment shall be mechanical power driven and capable of cutting a reservoir to the required dimensions .
equipment designed to plow the cracks to dimension will not be permitted .
num .
cracks which are less than num inch in width or depth will require routing to a width and depth of num to num inch .
num .
cracks which are num inch or greater in width and depth will not require routing but shall be thoroughly cleaned of foreign material to a depth equal to the width of the crack .
num .
the walls of the finished reservoir shall be vertical and the reservoir bottom shall be flat .
num .
routing will not be allowed when the roadway is wet .
b .
cleaning num .
cleaning shall be accomplished with an air compressor producing a minimum of num cubic feet per minute output and equipped with a maximum num inch nozzle .
the air compressors shall be equipped with traps capable of removing all free water and oil from the compressed air .
num .
reservoirs and cracks shall be thoroughly cleaned of dust dirt and loose materials so the reservoir is clean and dry at the time the blocking medium or sealant is applied .
num .
if a routed reservoir or crack is left overnight the reservoir shall be recleaned immediately before the blocking medium or sealant is applied .
num .
the routed asphalt concrete and foreign material resulting from the reservoir preparation shall be removed from the roadway surface before an area is opened to traffic .
num asphalt concrete crack sealing page num c. sealing num .
cracks num inches or greater in width which exist below the routed and cleaned reservoir shall be filled with a blocking medium to ensure a nominal sealant depth equal to the width of the reservoir .
num .
sealant material shall be placed within num hours of routing .
num .
there shall be no visible signs of moisture on the roadway surface or in the reservoir at the time the sealant is applied .
num .
the sealant handling mixing and application temperature restrictions shall conform to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
sealant shall be applied with a pressure type applicator .
num .
when applying the sealant on all transverse cracks and any longitudinal cracks that are located more than num inches from a lane line the reservoir shall be overfilled and squeegeed to provide a film of sealant on the roadway surface num to num inches on both sides of the reservoir .
when applying the sealant on longitudinal cracks that are located within num inches of a lane line the reservoir shall be overfilled and squeegeed to provide a film of sealant on the roadway surface up to num inch on both sides of the reservoir .
num .
the squeegee shall be a u shaped device which will produce a full uniform and neat appearing reservoir and adjoining surface area .
other type devices will require prior approval by the engineer .
num .
a blotting material such as toilet tissue or an approved detacking agent shall be placed over the sealant material immediately after placement at intersections superelevated curves urban areas grades steeper than num and other locations specified on the plans .
blotting material or an approved detacking agent will be required when traffic is allowed to cross a sealed area before track free status has been achieved .
num .
the contractor shall repair or refill at the contractors expense any part of a sealed reservoir damaged by traffic .
d. seasonal and temperature limitations num .
routing and sealing of asphalt concrete surfaces will be permitted only during daylight hours between april num and june num inclusive and between august num and november num inclusive .
num .
application of the sealant material will only be allowed when the pavement surface temperature is at least numf and rising .
asphalt concrete crack sealing num page num num .
application of the sealant material will only be allowed when the ambient air temperature is between numf and numf .
num .
application of the sealant material will only be allowed when the relative humidity is less than num .
e. general num .
only onehalf of the roadway shall be worked on at a time unless a traffic control plan to work full width is submitted by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
num .
routing and crack sealing shall be considered as one work zone .
a work zone shall not exceed num miles in length at any one time .
num method of measurement asphalt concrete crack sealing will be measured by the pound of sealant used .
the manufacturers weight of the sealant will be accepted as the basis for measurement .
quantities of asphalt concrete crack sealing with a manufacturers unit weight in excess of the specified unit weight will be reduced to the specified maximum unit weight prior to measurement for payment .
num basis of payment asphalt concrete crack sealing will be paid at the contract unit price per pound and shall be full compensation for routing and for furnishing heating placing and blotting the sealant .
blocking medium shall be incidental to the asphalt concrete crack sealing .
traffic control will be paid at the contract unit price .
num asphalt concrete crack sealing page num this page intentionally left blank asphalt surface treatment num page num num description this work consists of an application of asphalt covered with a spread of cover aggregate .
num materials a. asphalt asphalt shall conform to section num .
b .
cover aggregate cover aggregate shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements a .
weather and seasonal requirements surface treatment operations will be permitted only during daylight hours when conditions are dry and when wind does not adversely affect the spraying operation .
minimum temperatures and seasonal limitations are as follows minimum temperature and seasonal limitations cover aggregates air and surface temperature in the shade and rising seasonal limitations dates are inclusive type num numf may num aug. num type num numf may num aug. num type num numf may num sept. num b .
equipment the following equipment shall be furnished num .
broom a .
pickup broom in curb and gutter sections or in rural sections where a finished and maintained lawn extends to the edge of the shoulder the contractor shall use a pickup broom with an integral selfcontained storage .
the pickup broom must be a minimum of num feet wide .
while sweeping in curb and gutter sections the pickup broom must have working gutter brooms .
b. rotary power broom a rotary power broom may be used in all other areas .
num .
equipment for heating and applying the asphalt conforming to the requirements of section num c. num .
a selfpropelled aggregate spreader with positive controls capable of depositing the required quantity of aggregate uniformly over the full width of the asphalt application .
num .
a minimum of four selfpropelled pneumatic smooth tired rollers for each spreader in use .
each roller shall completely cover an overall surface width of at least num inches and furnish a minimum uniform rolling weight mass of num pounds per of rolling width .
num asphalt surface treatment page num c. cover aggregate preparation following production of the cover aggregate stockpile and at least num calendar days prior to starting the asphalt surface treatment the contractor shall submit a sample of the cover aggregate to the asphalt supplier for evaluation of compatibility and design of the surface treatment .
prior to starting the surface treatment the contractor shall submit a copy of the compatibility test results and the asphalt surface treatment design from the asphalt supplier to the engineer and the departments bituminous engineer .
the contractor shall notify the area office a minimum of num calendar days prior to sampling and submitting the cover aggregates .
satisfactory quality test results for the cover aggregate shall be obtained prior to use on the project .
d. surface preparation the surface shall be thoroughly swept and cleaned of all foreign material .
appurtenances immediately adjacent to the surface to be treated shall be protected from the splatter of asphalt .
the contractor shall repair any damage to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
manhole covers water shut valves and other utility access points shall be covered to ensure liquid asphalt is not applied to them as directed by the engineer .
the methods used for covering shall be removed after completion of the final asphalt surface treatment application .
freshly primed bases shall be cured prior to the application of surface treatments .
e. application of asphalt the asphalt shall be maintained within a temperature range of numf to numf during application .
asphalt shall be applied by a pressure distributor in a uniform and continuous manner .
unauthorized increases in the asphalt application rate will not be eligible for payment .
the angle of the spray nozzles and the height of the spray bar shall be set to obtain uniform distribution .
when starting and stopping emulsion application a strip of building paper or other suitable material at least num feet in width and at least num foot longer than the width of the spray bar shall be used to prevent a double application of emulsion .
the distributor shall travel at the established speed when the spray bar is opened .
skipped areas and deficiencies shall be immediately corrected .
areas inaccessible to the distributor shall be satisfactorily covered by hand spray methods .
spraying operations shall not proceed when it is evident the asphalt spread will not be covered with aggregate and rolled all in accordance with the prescribed schedule .
f. application of cover aggregate cover aggregate shall be spread immediately following application of all rapidsetting emulsions .
for wind conditions of num miles per hour or less the cover aggregate shall be spread within num minutes of the application of the mediumsetting emulsion .
for wind conditions greater than num miles per hour the time may be reduced in the field to ensure the aggregate is applied before the medium setting emulsion breaks .
time limits for spreading of cover aggregate when using mediumsetting emulsions shall be adjusted as directed to satisfy project conditions .
the aggregate shall be applied before the emulsion begins to break emulsion still brown in color .
asphalt surface treatment num page num a complete aggregate coverage shall be continually maintained .
a strip of asphalt application approximately num inches wide for a double overlap spray bar or num inches wide for a triple overlap spray bar along that side of the spread forming a longitudinal joint with the adjacent spread shall be left uncovered .
the adjacent asphalt and cover aggregate application shall overlap this strip .
in lieu of this procedure a butt joint may be constructed using special end nozzles .
longitudinal joints other than at centerline will not be permitted within the center num feet unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
when loading trucks the cover aggregate shall be screened to minimize segregation eliminate oversize and effectively break up or discard material bonded into chunks .
when required aggregate shall be uniformly moistened before or during loading .
unauthorized increases in application rates will not be eligible for payment .
prior to rolling the contractor may be directed to adjust inequalities in the spread of type num cover aggregate with a drag broom .
g. rolling rolling shall begin immediately behind the spreader and shall consist of four complete coverages using pneumatic tired rollers .
a complete coverage is defined as rolling full width in one direction .
the rolling shall be completed within num minutes after the cover aggregate is applied .
rollers shall be operated in unison at a close interval and if the width of spread allows in a staggered formation .
rollers shall not be operated at a speed in excess of num miles per hour .
asphalt and cover aggregate applications shall not extend more than num mile beyond the rolling operation .
with the use of minimum specified equipment the project shall be completed in num mile increments except for the sweeping of excess cover aggregate .
the weight and tire pressures of the rollers shall be varied as directed to obtain optimum embedment of the cover material without undue crushing of the aggregate .
special attention shall be given to the transverse and longitudinal joints during rolling .
unsatisfactory joints shall be corrected without additional compensation .
turning of rollers on the freshly treated surface is prohibited .
rolling at night or when light conditions would create a traffic hazard will not be allowed .
h. traffic control construction operations shall be coordinated to minimize traffic delays .
oneway traffic shall be maintained during application of the surface treatment on driving lanes .
upon completion of rolling traffic will be permitted to travel on the treated surface .
traffic shall be controlled by pilot cars and flaggers during application of the surface treatment on driving lanes with the speed of pilot cars not to exceed num miles per hour on the freshly applied surface treatment for a period of at least four hours after application .
the width arrangement and sequence of the parallel application strips shall not unduly inconvenience traffic .
i .
maintenance and repair areas of the surface treatment which peel or are otherwise unsatisfactory shall be repaired with additional asphalt cover aggregate and rolling .
num asphalt surface treatment page num compensation for repairs due to causes beyond the control of the contractor will be paid at the contract unit price for asphalt surface treatment .
the finished surface treatment shall be uniform and smooth riding .
transverse or horizontal ridges raveled spots wheel marks depressions abrupt color changes and other inequalities shall be corrected .
payment will not be made for this correction work .
asphalt splattered on roadway appurtenances shall be satisfactorily cleaned off by the contractor .
loose material remaining on the surface shall be broomed off during a cool period within num hours of application .
the brooming shall include the entire surface of the asphalt surface treatment application additional lane widths intersections and shoulders .
in curb and gutter sections and in areas where a finished and maintained lawn extends to the edge of the shoulder the loose material shall be swept up with a pickup broom .
brooming the material into a pile with a rotary broom for pickup will not be allowed .
in sections without curb and gutter and in areas where a finished and maintained lawn does not extend to the edge of the shoulder the loose material may be swept onto the roadway inslopes as approved by the engineer .
broomed off material picked up by the contractor shall be disposed of at sites provided by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
num method of measurement a. asphalt for surface treatment asphalt for surface treatment will be measured to the nearest num ton .
b .
cover aggregate cover aggregate will be measured to the nearest num ton .
num basis of payment a. asphalt for surface treatment asphalt for surface treatment will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
b .
cover aggregate cover aggregate specified will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing and all incidentals required to complete the work .
cold in place recycling cir of asphalt concrete num page num num description this work shall consist of milling asphalt pavement mixing the reclaimed asphalt pavement rap material with emulsified asphalt placing the recycled mixture and compacting the recycled mixture according to these specifications and the typical sections in the plans .
num materials a. reclaimed asphalt pavement rap section num .
b. asphalt section num .
num construction requirements a. rollers pneumatic tired rollers shall have an effective roller weight mass of at least num pounds per inch of roller width or satisfactory vibratory compaction equipment .
tires shall be uniformly inflated so their air pressures will not vary by more than num psi .
rollers shall be operated with tire pressures and wheel loads within the manufacturers recommended range for the size and ply of the tire being used .
steel rollers shall furnish a minimum rolling weight of num pounds per inch of rolling width .
b .
equipment configuration the cold recycling equipment shall consist of a unit or a combination of units which will satisfactorily perform the following requirements num .
mill the bituminous pavement and pick up the rap .
num .
process the rap material to meet the specified gradation .
the rap material shall be processed by a closed circuit system capable of continuously returning oversized material to the crusher .
num .
mix the rap material uniformly with the specified amount of emulsified asphalt .
num .
deposit the mixture in a windrow or paver .
num .
place and compact the recycled mixture to the specified density with automatic line and grade controls .
c. equipment performance the milling unit shall be capable of milling the asphalt concrete pavement at least num inches deep and a minimum of num feet wide in a single pass .
the unit shall have automatic controls capable of maintaining uniform grade and cross slope .
the milling unit shall have a continuous weighing system with a meter to accurately measure the amount of water being added at the milling unit .
the water pump shall shut off automatically if the milling unit is stopped .
num cold in place recycling cir of asphalt concrete page num the processing unit shall separate and remove strips of crack sealant from the rap material prior to mixing and weighing .
the mixing unit shall have a continuous weighing system for the processed rap material coupled with a meter to accurately maintain the proportion of rap material and emulsified asphalt at the rate approved by the engineer .
the emulsified asphalt pump shall shut off automatically if delivery of rap material is stopped .
the mixing unit shall be capable of producing a homogeneous mixture of processed rap material and emulsified asphalt without segregation .
the emulsified asphalt metering system shall deliver the specified amount of asphalt to within num of the required application rate .
positive means shall be provided for calibration of the weighing and metering devices .
d. milling and mixing operation the rap material shall be processed to the required gradation and thoroughly mixed with the specified amount of emulsified asphalt .
water may be added to the milling unit or to the rap material to facilitate mixing provided the water does not adversely affect the emulsified asphalt .
the amount of moisture allowed in the recycled mixture shall be num or less prior to compaction .
results of the acceptance moisture test performed by the department shall be recorded on a dotnum and shall be provided to the contractor as soon as they are completed .
the frequency of testing shall be performed at a minimum of one per num mile per lane processed .
moisture contents shall be determined by sd num oven drying method or other method approved by the engineer .
the minimum sample size needed to determine the moisture content of the cip material shall be num grams .
the recycled mixture shall be deposited in a windrow or paver without segregation .
the contractor shall have equipment available to equalize the windrow as directed .
e. paving operations the recycled mixture shall be spread and compacted in a continuous operation confined to the minimum practical length .
the laydown machine for the recycled mixture shall be controlled by an automatic system for controlling grade and slope and shall establish a longitudinal profile grade and transverse slope that is referenced from a traveling stringline .
the traveling stringline shall utilize either mechanical skis or noncontacting grade averaging sensors .
the traveling stringline shall have a minimum effective length of num feet .
the system shall be capable of manually controlling the transverse slope .
the recycled mixture shall be spread and finished in one lift by an asphalt concrete laydown machine .
no heat shall be applied to the mixture by the laydown machine .
the recycled mixture shall be placed and finished to within num of the cross slope shown on the typical section sheet in the plans .
cold in place recycling cir of asphalt concrete num page num the quarter crown within any num foot transverse length or actual lane width paved with a single paver pass shall not exceed num feet when measured with a straight edge stringline or other suitable equipment .
f. compaction and density requirements compaction and density requirement shall be a minimum of num of the target density .
the target density shall be established in accordance with sd num and compacted under the following conditions num .
the ambient air temperature is a minimum of numf and rising .
num .
a minimum of one test strip shall be completed to determine the target density and optimum sequence of rollers .
the test strips will remain in place as part of the completed work .
num .
the depth of the lift shall be representative of the project .
num .
the contractor shall have as a minimum two selfpropelled rollers for use on the test strips double drum vibratory steel roller and a pneumatic tired roller .
when there is a significant change in mix proportions weather conditions equipment or other controlling factors the engineer may require construction of another test strips to check target density .
g. prime coat seal and overlay the compacted recycled mixture shall be primed prior to the overlay .
the asphalt prime seal coat shall not be placed until the moisture content of the compacted recycled mixture is num or less .
the prime coat and blotter material shall be applied as specified in the plans .
the contractor shall determine the amount of moisture in the compacted recycled mixture prior to proceeding with the prime coat seal .
the moisture tests are for monitoring only and are not for acceptance .
the frequency of testing shall be performed at a minimum of one per mile per lane processed .
the department will randomly determine sample locations at the determined frequency and ensure that the contractor obtains samples by approved methods .
the contractor shall perform additional moisture tests on a weekly basis from the same area as the initial sample locations until the compacted recycled mixture has reached specification .
results of the moisture tests shall be recorded on a dotnum and provided to the engineer .
moisture content shall be determined by sd num oven drying method or other method approved by the engineer .
the minimum sample size needed to determine the moisture content of the recycled material shall be num grams .
the contractor at no cost to the department shall patch all potholes and raveling of the prime and or compacted recycled mixture prior to paving .
num cold in place recycling cir of asphalt concrete page num h. weather and seasonal limitations milling mixing and laydown of recycled mixture shall be completed only when num .
the ambient air temperature is numf and rising .
num .
rain or foggy conditions do not exist .
num .
the cold recycling shall only be performed as noted above from may num to september num inclusive .
i .
traffic control cold recycling activities will be permitted from sunrise to sunset .
at the end of cold recycling activities each day the contractor shall open the roadway to normal twoway twolane traffic .
if recycling segments are incomplete at the end of the day the contractor shall at no additional cost place granular material on the incomplete segment to provide a temporary driving surface which is stable and will drain free of standing water .
all longitudinal vertical edges shall be beveled to a num slope with the temporary granular material .
num method of measurement a .
cold in place recycling asphalt concrete cold in place recycling will not be measured .
plan quantity will be used unless the engineer orders additional quantity in writing .
any additional quantity will be measured to the nearest square yard .
b. asphalt for cold recycling asphalt for cold recycling shall be measured to the nearest num ton .
num basis of payment a .
cold in place recycling asphalt concrete cold recycling asphalt concrete will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for milling water water application asphalt application blending laydown compaction and test strips including all equipment labor and incidentals required to satisfactorily complete the work .
b. asphalt for cold recycling asphalt for cold recycling will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
payment will be full compensation for the asphalt including all transportation handling storage labor and incidentals required .
part d rigid pavement num portland cement concrete pavement page num num description this work consists of constructing portland cement concrete pavement of sufficient quality to serve the purpose for which the concrete pavement was designed on a prepared surface .
num materials materials shall conform to the requirements specified in the following sections a .
cement section num .
type ii cement shall be used for all concrete pavement .
b. admixtures sections num and num .
c. water section num .
d. fine aggregate section num .
e. coarse aggregate section num .
f. reinforcing steel section num .
g. preformed expansion joint filler section num .
h. joint sealer section num .
i. curing materials section num .
j. dowel bar assemblies section num .
k. fly ash sections num and num .
l. epoxy resin adhesive epoxy resin adhesive shall be of the type intended for horizontal applications and shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum type iv grade num equivalent to aashto m num type iv grade num class a b or c. the minimum gel time shall be num minutes .
num construction requirements a .
quality of concrete and proportioning when the contractor proposes to use aggregate from sources not previously tested by the department the contractor shall submit preliminary samples to the departments central materials laboratory to determine its acceptability .
num portland cement concrete pavement page num if a concrete mix design is not designated in the plans the contractor shall develop and use a concrete mix design conforming to the following for approval by the department minimum cementitious material content of num pounds with a fly ash content of num to num .
minimum coarse aggregate content of num by weight of total aggregates .
minimum num day compressive strength of num psi .
the departments concrete engineer will determine if a concrete mix design verification is required .
if the department in the departments sole discretion determines a concrete mix design verification is required the contractor shall submit samples of materials proposed for use excluding water to the departments central materials laboratory at least num calendar days prior to the anticipated paving start date .
aggregate samples shall be obtained from stockpiles of material to be used in the work .
a maximum of two concrete mix design verifications per contract will be made by the department without charge .
should the contractor desire additional concrete mix designs verified the costs involved shall be at the contractors expense .
the concrete paving mix shall have a uniform consistency and shall be proportioned as set forth in the approved design mix .
for the stationary side form method the slump of the concrete shall be between num inch and num inches .
for the slipform method the slump of the concrete shall not be more than num inches .
the concrete shall contain num entrained air with an allowable tolerance of num to num .
air shall be entrained by an approved airentraining admixture .
b .
equipment vehicles tracking foreign substances including but not limited to soil rock vegetation hardened concrete partially hydrated concrete fuel and oil will not be allowed to drive through or back into fresh mixed concrete .
equipment dropping foreign substances including but not limited to soil rock vegetation hardened concrete partially hydrated concrete fuel and oil from the unit shall not be allowed over or in contact with the fresh mixed concrete .
num .
batching equipment batching equipment shall be computerized and automatic .
manual operation will be permitted when automatic controls fail provided concrete meeting specified results is produced however the automatic operation shall be restored before work may commence the day following the failure .
the contractor shall provide satisfactory means for obtaining material samples from the batching plant .
batching plant structures shall be leveled so the accuracy of the weighing mechanism is maintained .
portland cement concrete pavement num page num hoppers shall fully discharge without jarring the scales .
clearances between scale parts hoppers and bin structure shall be maintained to avoid displacement of or friction between parts due to material accumulations vibration or other cause .
pivot mountings shall be designed so the parts will not jar loose and constructed to assure unchanging spacing of knife edges under all circumstances .
exposed fulcrums clevises and similar working parts shall be kept clean .
to maintain accuracy weighing hoppers and other parts which are affected by wind action shall be protected by shelters or wind breaks .
the equipment for weighing aggregates cement water and admixtures shall be an integral part of the batching equipment .
the scalesload cells shall be accurate within num at any point throughout the range of the scaleload cell .
graduations shall be not greater than num of the capacity of the scaleload cell .
the scalesload cells shall be sensitive to the weight indicated by one graduation .
the following controls shall apply to the aggregate batching equipment the batching equipment shall operate within a delivery tolerance of num of the net weight for each aggregate weighed .
the hopper inlet mechanism shall be interlocked against opening when the discharge gate is open .
the hopper discharge mechanism shall be interlocked against opening while the hopper is being charged .
the hopper discharge mechanism shall be interlocked against opening if any material in the hopper is either overweight or underweight by more than num of the specified weight .
the cement batching equipment shall operate within a delivery tolerance of num of the net weight of the cement per batch .
the cementitious material cement and fly ash batching equipment shall also operate within a delivery tolerance of num of the net weight of the total cementitious material per batch .
water may be measured by volume or weight .
the measuring equipment shall operate within a delivery tolerance of num of the net weight or volume of water .
when water is measured by volume means for determining the accuracy of the measuring device shall be provided .
airentraining or other admixtures may be measured by volume or by weight .
the measuring equipment shall operate within a delivery tolerance of num of the net weight or volume per batch .
num portland cement concrete pavement page num num .
ticket requirements a printed computer generated ticket shall be automatically produced for each load of concrete batched .
the printed computer ticket shall accompany each load of concrete to the project and shall be presented to the engineer prior to discharging the load at the project site unless the engineer approves an alternate procedure .
the printed ticked must contain the following minimum information truck number date and time batched total volume of the load in cubic yards dot mix design number actual weight mass or volume of each component of the mix coarse aggregate fine aggregate cement fly ash water batch water admixtures air entraining admixtures water reducers retarders accelerators others moisture in aggregate either free moisture or total moisture maximum water allowed maximum water allowed weight of mix design water weight of free water wc ratio asbatched when automatic moisture sensing equipment is used for an aggregate component the batch ticket shall show the percent of moisture for the aggregate component with moisture sensing equipment .
the results of the most recent two hour moisture test shall be shown for aggregate components without moisture sensing equipment .
the final wc ratio for acceptance shall be calculated using the following formula and rounded to the nearest num of cement weight of supplementary cementitious material weight weight of free water weight of batch water weight of added water wc ratio free moisture total moisture in aggregate absorption of aggregate weight of free water free moisture x weight of aggregate weight of batch water total weight of water added to the batch either at the plant or in the truck weight of added water total weight of water added after batching process typically added at point of delivery portland cement concrete pavement num page num the weight of free water shall be calculated for both the fine aggregate and the coarse aggregate .
the above information must be automatically printed in such a manner that the engineer may verify the mix adheres to the proportions specified by the mix design .
num .
mixing and hauling equipment mixers and agitators shall have attached in a prominent place the manufacturers plate showing the various uses for which the equipment is designed and the capacity of the drum in terms of volume of mixed concrete .
the pickup and throwover blades in the drum shall be restored or replaced when any part or section is worn num inch or more below the original height of the manufacturers design .
the contractor shall maintain a copy of the manufacturers design showing dimensions and arrangement of blades in reference to the original height and depth .
mixers that have an accumulation of hard concrete or mortar shall not be used .
mixers except truck mixers shall be equipped with a timing device to track the total mixing time of the concrete batch .
truck mixers shall be equipped with counters to record the number of revolutions of the drum or blades .
mixers shall be capable of combining the concrete ingredients into a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and shall uniformly discharge the concrete .
the hauling bodies of nonagitating equipment shall be smooth mortartight metal containers equipped with gates and vibrators that will permit uniform control of the discharge of the concrete .
num .
spreading and finishing equipment the spreading equipment shall consist of a mechanized device to place and provide a rough strike off of the concrete .
the concrete shall be unloaded into an approved mechanical concrete spreader and deposited uniformly across the subgrade or subbase as close as possible to its final position .
the use of a mechanical spreader may be waived provided the concrete hauling equipment is equipped with a discharge system capable of distributing the concrete uniformly without segregation across the width of paving and meets the approval of the engineer .
the spreader shall run on forms when forms are used or on wheels or tracks when slip forming .
the mechanical concrete spreader shall be selfpropelled and shall be capable of spreading the concrete mix to the desired cross sections .
the spreader shall be easily adjustable to spread different elevations of concrete .
slipform paving equipment shall have the direction of forward motion and grade vertical elevation controlled by an electronic sensing device .
the electronic sensing device shall either follow a taut string line or shall be controlled by a gpstotal num portland cement concrete pavement page num station system capable of meeting the alignment grade surface test and cross slope requirements .
the paving equipment shall spread consolidate screed and finish the freshly placed concrete to provide a dense and homogenous pavement with a minimum amount of hand finishing .
the paving equipment shall not cause flotation of aggregate particles or show evidence of an accumulation of laitance on the surface of the concrete either during or after placement .
num .
vibrators vibrators shall be either the surface pan type or the internal type .
they may be attached to the spreader the finishing machine or mounted on a separate carriage .
vibrators shall be interlocked with the machines travel mechanism so vibration is stopped when the forward motion stops .
vibrators shall not come in contact with the joints load transfer devices reinforcement subgrade subbase or side forms .
the frequency of the surface vibrators shall not be less than num impulses per minute .
the frequency of the internal vibrators shall not be less than num impulses per minute .
when spud type internal vibrators are used adjacent to forms they shall have a frequency of not less than num impulses per minute .
vibrators shall not be operated in excess of this frequency to such a degree that flotation of aggregate particles is caused and is evident or visible either during or after placement or that it causes an accumulation of laitance on the surface of the concrete .
a vibrating reed tachometer hand type shall be provided with each paver .
the vibrating reed tachometer shall have a range from at least num to num vibrations per minute vpm .
for a contract which has a minimum of num square yards of pavement that is num feet or more wide an electronic internal vibrator monitoring device shall be provided .
the device shall be capable of displaying the operating frequency of each internal vibrator and shall be visible to the paving operator .
the vibrator monitoring device shall have a range from at least num to num vpm .
vibrators shall not be used to level or spread the concrete but shall be used only for purposes of consolidation .
num .
concrete saw the contractor shall provide sawing equipment adequate to complete the sawing to the required dimensions and at the required rate .
the contractor shall also provide at least one standby saw in good working order .
if an early entry saw is used the early entry saw shall use a dry cutting operation with up cutting blade rotation and a skid plate straddling the blades to minimize raveling and tearing of the concrete at the joint .
portland cement concrete pavement num page num num .
forms forms shall have a depth not less than the prescribed edge thickness of the pavement .
built up forms with horizontal joints shall not be used .
when staked in place forms shall withstand the pressure of the concrete and the impact vibration and loading of any equipment they are required to support without significant springing settlement or lateral displacement meeting the following requirements the top face of any form shall not vary from a true plane by more than num of an inch in num feet nor shall the contact face of a straight form vary from a true plane by more than num inch in num feet .
bent twisted or broken forms and those with battered top surfaces shall be removed from the work .
repaired forms shall not be used until inspected and approved .
flexible or curved forms of proper radius shall be used for curves of num foot radius or less .
flexible or curved forms shall be of an acceptable design .
num .
profilograph when specified in the contract the contractor shall furnish and operate an approved num foot california style profilograph .
the profilograph shall consist of a num foot frame supported upon a multiple system of wheels at both ends .
the profile shall be recorded from the vertical movement of a wheel attached to the frame at midpoint in reference to the mean elevation of the points of contact established by the support wheels .
the profilogram trace shall be recorded on a scale of num inch is equal to num feet longitudinally and num inch equal to num inch vertically .
the contractor shall supply and use a computerized california type profilograph .
the computer shall smooth the profile with a thirdorder butterworth filter with a cutoff wavelength of num feet .
the computer shall generate a profile index using a zero width blanking band .
the computer shall also use a num inch bump threshold to identify must grind locations .
prior to use on the project and periodically thereafter the calibration of the profilograph shall be checked .
the vertical and horizontal scales shall be checked .
the horizontal scale shall be checked by running the profilograph over a known distance and scaling the results on the profilogram .
the cause of incorrect scales shall be determined and corrected prior to using the profilograph .
c. preparation num .
insert steel bar in pcc pavement when specified in the plans and at the locations specified in the plans the contractor shall insert steel bars into drilled holes in the existing concrete pavement .
an epoxy resin adhesive must be used to anchor the steel bar in the drilled hole .
epoxy resin adhesive shall conform to section num l. num portland cement concrete pavement page num the diameter of the drilled holes in the existing concrete pavement for the steel bars shall not be less than num inch nor more than num inch greater than the overall diameter of the steel bar .
holes drilled into the existing concrete pavement shall be located at middepth of the slab and true and normal .
the drilled holes shall be blown out with compressed air using a device that will reach to the back of the hole to ensure that all debris or loose material has been removed prior to epoxy injection .
the contractor shall mix the epoxy resin as recommended by the manufacturer and apply by an injection method approved by the engineer .
if an epoxy pump is utilized the pump shall be capable of metering the components at the manufacturers designated rate and be equipped with an automatic shutoff .
the pump shall shut off when any of the components are not being metered at the designated rate .
the contractor shall fill the drilled holes num to num full of epoxy or as recommended by the manufacturer prior to insertion of the steel bar .
care shall be taken to prevent epoxy from running out of the horizontal holes prior to steel bar insertion .
rotate the steel bar during insertion to eliminate voids and ensure complete bonding of the bar .
insertion of the bars by the dipping method will not be allowed .
num .
stationary side form method forms shall be set to line and grade .
the granular surface shall be final graded and dowel assemblies if required accurately placed in advance of concrete placement .
the foundation under the forms shall be compacted and true to grade .
the form shall be firmly in contact with the granular surface for the entire length of the form .
forms shall be staked into place with not less than three pins for each num foot section .
a pin shall be placed at each side of every joint .
form sections shall be tightly locked and free from play or movement .
forms shall be cleaned and oiled prior to placing concrete .
alignment and grade elevations of the forms shall be checked and corrections shall be made before placing concrete .
when forms have been disturbed or the grade has become unstable the forms shall be reset and rechecked .
after side forms have been set to line and grade and securely fastened the surface on which the concrete paving is to be placed shall be brought to final grade by a subgrader or subgrade plainer .
high areas shall be trimmed to proper elevation .
low areas shall be filled and compacted to a condition similar to that of surrounding grade or filled with concrete integral with the pavement .
an automatic subgrader operating from a preset grade line or automatic grade control may be used prior to setting of the side forms .
after grading has been completed by the automatic subgrader the forms shall be set the surface checked and high and low areas corrected .
portland cement concrete pavement num page num the finished subgrade surface shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until the pavement is placed .
num .
slip form method the surface on which the concrete is to be placed shall be brought to final grade by an automatic subgrader operating from a preset grade line or automatic grade control .
the finished subgrade surface shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until the pavement is placed .
d. handling measuring and batching materials the separate aggregate components shall not become intermixed prior to being weighed .
aggregates shall be transported from stockpiles or other sources to the batching plant in a manner that maintains a uniform grading of the material .
the use of tracktype dozing equipment will not be permitted in handling coarse aggregates from stockpiles .
aggregates that have become segregated or mixed with earth or foreign material shall not be used .
if the aggregates contain nonuniform moisture storage or stockpile periods will be required to equalize the moisture content .
the separate aggregate components for each batch may be weighed cumulatively in a single hopper or weighed separately in individual hoppers .
a separate scale and hopper shall be used for weighing cementitious materials .
the quantity of cement and fly ash used versus the quantity specified will be checked periodically by running a cutoff .
the contractor shall completely empty the cement silo and necessary conveyances at the direction of the engineer .
individual cutoffs shall not show an underrun exceeding num nor shall the final cutoff show an overall underrun exceeding num .
the cutoff will not be performed if concrete is supplied by a commercial redimix plant also supplying concrete to non sddot projects at the same time .
the amount of batch water and aggregates added to the mix shall be adjusted accordingly using the results of the most recent two hour moisture tests .
if automatic moisture sensing equipment is used the engineer may allow the use of the automatic moisture sensing results to make adjustments .
e. mixing concrete concrete shall be mixed at a central stationary plant .
truck mixing will be permitted only when approved by the engineer .
mixing and agitating speeds shall be as designated by the manufacturer of the equipment .
mixers may not be charged in excess of their rated capacity .
manual operation of the central plant will be permitted only in case of failure of the automatic control .
automatic operation must be restored before work may commence the day following the failure .
num portland cement concrete pavement page num mixing water shall not be heated above numf .
aggregates shall not be heated above numf and shall be free of frozen lumps ice and snow .
a portion of the mixing water shall be charged into the drum in advance of the cement and aggregates .
the flow of water shall be uniform and all water shall be in the drum by the end of the first num seconds of the mixing period .
concrete mixed less than the specified time shall be disposed of at the contractors expense .
when a concrete batch is transported in a truck mixer or agitator and the batch is smaller than num of the rated capacity of the truck mixer or agitator the following percentage of additional cementitious material at the same proportions as listed on the mix design shall be added to the batch percent of rated capacity additional cementitious material required num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num the above provisions regarding additional cementitious material shall also apply to the mixing of small batches in central plants .
additional cementitious material will not be required when the small batch is mixed in a drum that is sufficiently coated with mortar to withstand the loss of cementitious material .
sufficient mortar coating as determined by the engineer may include mortar coating the drum from a previously mixed batch during continuous mixing operations .
additional cementitious material will be required if more than num minutes has passed from the mixing of the previous batch if the drum has been cleaned following the previous batch or if the mortar coating the drum has been disturbed following the previous batch .
num .
central plant mixing concrete shall be mixed not less than one minute after all materials excluding water are in the mixer .
num .
truck mixing original mixing time for truck mixed concrete shall not be less than num or more than num revolutions of the drum at mixing speed after all ingredients including water are in the drum .
additional revolutions beyond num shall be done at agitating speed .
the mixing water shall be added at the time of batching .
when approved by the engineer additional water admixtures and cement may be added to the batch after completion of the original mixing in which case the batch shall be mixed an additional num revolutions at mixing speed .
the contractor shall provide means to accurately measure the amount of additional materials added .
f. delivery requirements the rate of delivery of concrete shall be uniform .
when concrete is continuously agitated in the hauling unit the concrete shall be discharged within num minutes after the cement has been placed in contact with the portland cement concrete pavement num page num aggregates and discharged and screeded within num minutes .
when the concrete temperature is numf or above the time limitation shall be reduced to discharged within num minutes and discharged and screeded within num minutes .
when concrete is not continuously agitated in the hauling unit the concrete shall be discharged within num minutes after the cement has been placed in contact with the aggregates and discharged and screeded within num minutes .
when the concrete temperature is numf or above the time limitation shall be reduced to discharged within num minutes and discharged and screeded within num minutes .
the hauling unit shall be thoroughly cleaned and flushed with water as necessary to insure hardened concrete will not accumulate in the concrete hauling compartment .
all wash water shall be completely discharged before recharging the hauling unit with fresh concrete .
g. placing concrete placement of concrete on a frozen surface will not be permitted .
the surface temperature of forms steel and adjacent concrete which will come in contact with the concrete shall be raised to a temperature above freezing prior to placement .
concrete temperature at time of placement shall not be less than numf or more than numf .
the subgrade surface shall be uniformly moist when the concrete is placed .
moisture shall be applied without forming pools of water .
the concrete shall be deposited on the grade so as to require as little rehandling as possible .
free fall of concrete shall not exceed num feet .
necessary hand spreading shall be done with shovels .
rakes or vibrators shall not be used for spreading concrete .
workmen shall not be allowed in the freshly mixed concrete with boots or shoes coated with foreign substances .
the concrete shall be consolidated against and along the faces of all forms by vibrators .
vibrators shall not come in contact with a joint assembly the grade or a side form .
the vibrator shall not be operated longer than num seconds in any one location .
all concrete material which falls on or is worked into the surface of a completed slab shall be removed immediately .
h. test specimens the contractor shall furnish concrete from the mixture for making test specimens .
i .
placement of reinforcement and dowel bar assemblies the reinforcement shall be free from dried concrete dirt oil paint grease mill scale and rust which could impair bond with the concrete .
epoxy coated dowel bars and tie bars shall meet the requirements of section num a .
num portland cement concrete pavement page num the reinforcement shall be positioned on approved supports in advance of the concrete placement .
no hand placement will be allowed .
automatic dowel bar inserters will not be allowed .
the use of an automatic tie bar inserter mounted at the back of the paving pan will only be allowed on the vertical edge of longitudinal construction joints .
the concrete shall be consolidated around the tie bar .
the use of an automatic tie bar inserter will not be allowed on sawed longitudinal joints .
tie bars shall be held in the specified position parallel to the slab surface and perpendicular to the centerline by a supporting device .
tie bars or tie bar baskets shall be securely staked to the roadbed and shall hold the bar at the correct spacing alignment and elevation .
tie bars will not require supports if inserted into the side of the pavement during slip form paving of the longitudinal construction joint operation .
failure to acquire the correct tie bar locations or position in the construction joint shall require the bars to be corrected and a change made to the operation which may include drilling and epoxying bars or other methods as approved by the engineer .
the final position of each tie bar shall be within the following tolerances vertical placement tnum for any part of the tie bar t slab thickness transverse placement side shift num inches when measured perpendicular to the longitudinal joint line if the tie bar does not meet the requirements and tolerances specified corrective action shall be performed at the contractors expense to the satisfaction of the engineer .
dowel bar assemblies shall be installed where specified .
anchor pins for the dowel bar assemblies shall be installed as detailed in the plans .
dowel bar assemblies shall be fabricated in single units for the appropriate lane prior to being placed on the subgrade .
after the dowel bar assemble is staked and prior to concrete installation it is the contractors option to cut and bend spacer wires that pass through the contraction joint .
the free ends of the epoxy coated dowel bars minimum of num of the dowel length plus num inches shall be given a thin uniform coating of form oil or multipurpose grease .
this coating shall be applied within two hours of being covered by concrete .
in lieu of this manual coating dowel bar assemblies may be precoated by dipping the complete assembly in a bond breaker meeting the requirements of section num .
dowel bar assemblies shall be precoated on projects which have quantities of portland cement concrete pavement of num square yards or greater .
precoated dowel bar assemblies must be free of foreign materials at the time of placement .
dowel bars shall be placed parallel to the subgrade and parallel to the centerline of the pavement as specified in the plans .
the final position of each dowel bar shall be within the following tolerances portland cement concrete pavement num page num vertical placement num inch for any part of the dowel bar transverse placement side shift num inch when measured perpendicular to the longitudinal joint line if the dowel bar does not meet the requirements and tolerances specified corrective action shall be performed at the contractors expense to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the contractor shall accurately mark the location of doweled contraction joints to assure accurate placement of the weakened plane of the joint during subsequent operations .
the marks must be within num inch of the center of the dowel bars as placed .
reinforcement for continuously reinforced concrete slabs shall be supported on chairs and the entire slab poured in one operation .
the chairs meeting the requirements of section num shall hold the reinforcement in position without displacement during concrete placement .
in addition to other inspection methods for reinforcement and dowel bar assemblies the department may use a ground penetrating radar gpr to verify reinforcement and dowel bar locations in the hardened concrete .
the gpr may be used any time prior to the acceptance of field work being issued .
all costs related to corrective measures including but not limited to concrete removal or cutting of reinforcement price deducts and delays to the project schedule shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
j .
final strikeoff consolidation and finishing num .
sequence the sequence of operations shall be the strikeoff and consolidation floating and removal of laitance straight edging and final surface finish .
the addition of water to the surface of the concrete to assist in finishing operations will not be permitted .
in isolated areas where extreme conditions exist the engineer may determine the addition of water would be beneficial if applied with an approved fog sprayer .
concrete shall be finished before initial set has occurred .
concrete not finished before initial set has begun shall be wasted .
retempering of concrete will not be allowed .
concrete shall not be mixed and placed unless natural light is sufficient for finishing operations .
the contractor shall remove and replace concrete placed that is not workable or able to be finished properly .
the concrete shall be struckoff consolidated and finished so the surface of the pavement conforms to the cross section and elevation specified .
the contractor shall consolidate the concrete in a manner that results in a dense homogenous mass without segregation holes voids or layers .
concrete shoulders shall not be constructed above or more than num inch lower than adjacent concrete pavement .
num portland cement concrete pavement page num num .
finishing at joints the concrete adjacent to joints shall be placed without voids or segregation against the joint material under and around all load transfer devices joint assembly units and other features designed to extend into the pavement .
concrete adjacent to joints shall be mechanically vibrated as per section num g. num .
machine finishing vibrators meeting the requirements of section num b.num shall be used for full width vibration of concrete paving slabs .
immediately after placement the concrete shall be struck off and screeded by an approved finishing machine .
the machine shall go over each area of pavement as many times and at the intervals necessary to produce a surface of uniform texture to provide proper consolidation and to provide a dense homogenous mixture free of segregation holes voids and layers .
the contractor will be responsible to remove and replace pavement that is not properly consolidated or contains segregation holes voids and layers .
excessive finishing over a given area shall be avoided .
the top of the forms shall be kept clean by an effective cleaning device attached to the machine .
the travel of the machine on the forms shall be maintained true without lift wobbling or other variation affecting the precision finish .
during the first pass of the finishing machine a ridge of concrete shall be maintained ahead of the front screed for its entire length .
the finishing machine shall be operated with a continuous forward movement .
all operations of mixing delivering spreading and vibrating concrete shall be coordinated to provide uniform progress and minimize the stopping and starting of the paver .
except in an emergency no tractive force shall be applied to the machine except that which is controlled from the machine .
num .
hand finishing hand finishing methods will not be permitted except when narrow widths or irregular areas that can not be finished with mechanical equipment are encountered .
in the event of mechanical equipment breakdown the concrete already deposited on the grade shall be hand finished and additional concrete placement shall be terminated .
hand finishing shall be done in a manner that produces an acceptable finished surface .
num .
floating long handled floats shall be used to smooth and fill opentextured areas in the pavement .
the use of longhandled floats shall be kept to a minimum and shall not be used to float the entire surface of the pavement .
care shall be taken so the crown is not worked out of the pavement during the operation .
portland cement concrete pavement num page num excess water and laitance shall be removed from the surface of the pavement by a straightedge num feet or more in length .
successive drags shall be lapped num the length of the straightedge .
num .
final finish before the concrete has attained its initial set the surface shall be given a final finish with a carpet drag drawn over the surface in a longitudinal direction .
the drag shall be mounted on a bridge and shall be sized so that a strip of the carpet at approximately num feet wide is in contact with the pavement surface while the drag is operated .
the condition of the drag shall be maintained so the resultant surface is of uniform appearance with corrugations approximately num inch in depth .
drags shall be maintained clean and free of encrusted mortar .
drags that can not be cleaned shall be discarded and replaced .
the carpet shall meet the following requirements facing material molded polyethylene pile face blade length num inch num inch total fabric weight num ounces per square yard minimum the backing shall be of a strong durable material not subject to rot which is adequately bonded to the facing .
plain jointed concrete pavement shall be either longitudinally or transversely tined as specified in the plans .
continuously reinforced concrete pavement shall be longitudinally tined .
tining depth and spacing shall be determined according to sd num .
brooming may be used on irregular areas in lieu of the carpet drag and tine finish .
the broom shall be drawn transversely across the pavement with adjacent strokes slightly overlapping .
brooming shall be uniform in appearance and shall produce grooves approximately num inch deep .
texturing shall be completed while the concrete surface can be broomed without being torn or unduly roughened by the operation .
the finished surface shall be free from rough and porous areas irregularities and depressions resulting from improper handling of the broom .
a. transverse tining immediately following the carpet drag the surface of the concrete pavement shall be given a transverse metaltine finish with a separate selfpropelled mechanical device .
the metaltine finish shall provide a groove width of num inch and a groove depth of num inch num inch .
the spacing between the individual tines shall meet the following num portland cement concrete pavement page num inches ten foot tining rake num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num successive passes of the tining shall not overlap .
each location where transverse joint saw cuts are to be made shall be protected from tining by covering with a metal strip from num inches to num inches or by other methods that produce acceptable results .
brooming may be used on irregular areas in lieu of the carpet drag and tine finish .
the broom shall be drawn transversely across the pavement with adjacent strokes slightly overlapping .
brooming shall be uniform in appearance and shall produce grooves num inch deep .
texturing shall be completed while the concrete surface can be broomed without being torn or unduly roughened by the operation .
the finished surface shall be free from rough and porous areas irregularities and depressions resulting from improper handling of the broom .
b. longitudinal tining immediately following the carpet drag the surface of the concrete pavement shall be given a longitudinal metaltine finish with a wire broom or comb attached to a separate selfpropelled mechanical device .
transverse joints shall not be protected from longitudinal tining the tining shall be continuous across the joints .
the slab shall not be tined within num inches of the edge of the slab centerline or rumblestrip .
the longitudinal tining equipment shall have the ability to be raised and lowered and shall have vertical and horizontal controls to ensure straight grooves that are parallel to the longitudinal joint .
the tine bar shall have a single row of tines and shall provide a groove width of num inch num inch and a groove depth of num inch num inch .
the spacing between the individual tines shall be uniformly spaced at num inch intervals .
num .
edging at forms and joints after the final finish and while the concrete is still plastic the edges of the pavement along each side of the slab and on each side of transverse construction joints shall be worked with an approved tool and rounded to portland cement concrete pavement num page num the specified radius .
edging will be permitted along longitudinal construction joints provided the radius does not exceed num inch .
a welldefined and continuous radius shall be produced and a smooth dense mortar finish obtained .
the surface of the slab shall not be unduly disturbed by tilting of the tool during use .
any tool marks appearing on the slab adjacent to the joints shall be eliminated by brooming belting or burlap dragging the surface without disturbing the rounding of the corner of the slab .
where preformed expansion joint filler is used the contractor shall remove all concrete on top of the preformed expansion joint filler .
all joints shall be tested with a num foot straightedge before the concrete has set and correction made if one side of the joint is higher than the other or if they are higher or lower than the adjacent slabs .
k. protection of concrete for the protection of the pavement surface the contractor shall have available covering materials including but not limited to insulating blankets curing blankets and plastic sheeting .
the contractor shall maintain the concrete surface temperature above numf until the concrete has attained a compressive strength of at least num psi .
in addition when the air temperature is forecasted to be below numf for more than num hours the contractor shall cover the concrete surface with the covering material .
this protection shall be in addition to one of the curing methods specified in section num m. the contractor shall remove and replace concrete damaged by cold weather at the expense of the contractor .
the pavement shall not be opened to traffic until meeting the requirements of section num q .
when rain appears imminent paving operations shall stop and the unhardened concrete shall be covered with the protective covering .
pavement not properly protected from weather shall be subject to corrective action as determined by the engineer .
the contractor shall protect the concrete pavement and its appurtenances against all traffic .
this shall include watchmen to direct traffic and the erection and maintenance of warning signs lights pavement bridges crossovers etc .
crossovers will not be permitted until the concrete is at least num hours old .
any damaged or defective pavement shall be repaired or removed and replaced as directed .
when pavement must be removed and replaced the engineer will determine the dimensions of the pavement to be removed .
l. joints curing membrane damaged or protective cover removed during the sawing operation shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor as directed by the engineer at no cost to the department .
num .
longitudinal sawed joints deformed steel tie bars shall be placed perpendicular to the longitudinal joints by approved methods .
tie bars shall not be painted or coated with asphalt or other material or enclosed in tubes or sleeves .
num portland cement concrete pavement page num longitudinal sawed joints shall be cut to the dimensions specified .
suitable guidelines or devices shall be used to assure cutting the joint to a true line .
the sawed joint will not require reapplication of curing compound .
the joint shall be sealed as required in section num p. sawing of the longitudinal joint shall commence as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to permit sawing without raveling .
all joints shall be sawed to the specified depth as shown on the plans before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking occurs .
repair or correction of uncontrolled cracks shall be as directed by the engineer and at the expense of the contractor .
num .
longitudinal construction joints when adjacent lanes of pavement are constructed separately a keyway shall be formed along the construction joint .
the keyway may be omitted at the contractors option if the longitudinal joint is tied with deformed steel tie bars .
when deformed steel tie bars are required they may be bent at right angles with a minimum inside bend radius of num inch for the first lane constructed and straightened into final position before the concrete of the adjacent lane is placed .
tie bars damaged during the straightening process shall be replaced by drilling and epoxy installation at the contractors expense .
the longitudinal construction joint shall be sawed shortly after the end of the curing period and shall be sealed as required in section num p. when adjacent lanes of pavement are constructed separately epoxycoated deformed steel tie bars of specified length size spacing and material shall be placed across the longitudinal construction joint to tie the lanes together .
the epoxy coated tie bars installed in drilled holes along the vertical edge of the first lane placed shall be installed with an approved epoxy resin adhesive to provide a minimum pull requirement of num pounds .
holes shall be blown clean and dry prior to placing the adhesive .
the installation shall be with methods and tools conforming to the adhesive manufacturers recommendations .
the drilled holes shall be filled from the back to the front num to num full of epoxy or as recommended by the manufacturer prior to insertion of the steel bar .
care shall be taken to prevent epoxy from running out of the horizontal hole prior to steel bar insertion .
rotate the steel bar during installation to eliminate voids and ensure complete bonding of the bar .
insertion of the bars by the dipping method will not be allowed .
if an epoxy pump is utilized it shall be capable of metering the components at the manufacturers designated rate and be equipped with an automatic shutoff .
the pump shall shut off when any of the components are not being metered at the designated rate .
the contractor shall load test num of the first num tie bars that are drilled and epoxied in place .
no further installation will be allowed until the initial num testing has been completed and approval to continue installation has been given by the engineer .
portland cement concrete pavement num page num testing will be required for num of the bars installed after the initial num .
for each bar that fails to pass the minimum requirements two more bars selected by the engineer shall be tested .
each bar that fails to meet the minimum load requirement shall be reinstalled and retested .
the equipment and method used for testing shall meet the requirements of astm enum .
all tests shall be performed within num hours of installation .
the tie bars shall be installed and approved before concrete is placed in the adjacent lane .
num .
transverse contraction joints transverse contraction joints shall be created by sawing .
the initial saw cut shall commence when the concrete has hardened sufficiently to permit sawing without raveling .
if required the widening cut shall not commence until completion of the concrete cure period .
joints shall be sawed before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking takes place .
if necessary the initial sawing operations shall be performed both day and night regardless of weather conditions .
the initial sawed joint will not require reapplication of curing compound .
if an early entry saw is used the cut may remain approximately num inch from the edges of the concrete slab to control spalling at the edge .
unless specified otherwise the early entry saw cut shall be to a minimum depth of num inch .
if an early entry saw is used the contractor shall complete the initial saw cut on all joints where a crack has not developed for the entire width and to the required depth before the end of the num hour curing period .
the engineer will not require the contractor to complete the saw cut to the final required depth at joint locations where the early entry saw cut resulted in the concrete pavement cracking as determined by the engineer .
the early entry saw shall not induce micro cracking along the saw cut .
the contractor shall repair damaged areas resulting from incorrect early entry sawing practices .
num .
random cracks the sawing of a joint shall be omitted if a crack occurs within num inches of either side of the joint location prior to the time of sawing .
sawing shall be discontinued when a crack develops ahead of the saw .
any procedure which results in premature and uncontrolled cracking shall be revised immediately by adjusting the sequence of cutting the joints or the time interval involved between the placing of the concrete or removal of curing media and the cutting of joints .
longitudinal random cracks penetrating the full depth of the pavement shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the method of repair shall be approved by the engineer .
the methods will include but are not limited to crossstitching epoxy injection routed and sealed or removal and replacement .
cross stitching and epoxy injection repair methods will not be allowed for pavement panels cracked into more than two pieces or pavement panels where the random crack is diagonal in orientation approximately num from the centerline or transverse joint .
repair or correction of uncontrolled or random cracks shall be as directed by the engineer and at the expense of the contractor .
if an uncontrolled crack develops within num feet of the contraction joint a minimum of num feet of pavement removal and replacement will be required .
removal and replacement of the pavement shall be done at the contractors expense .
if cracking num portland cement concrete pavement page num occurs on both sides of the joint the dowel bar assembly and a minimum of num feet of pavement each side of the joint shall be removed and replaced .
removal and replacement of the pavement shall be done at the contractors expense .
if an uncontrolled crack develops on one side of the contraction joint in the mid panel area between num feet from the joint and the midpoint of the panel the entire panel shall be replaced on that side of the joint within the lane containing the cracking .
removal and replacement of the pavement shall be done at the contractors expense .
no section of pavement less than num feet in length will be allowed to remain in place .
the department will provide drawings and specification of repair procedures to the contractor .
if extreme conditions exist which make it impractical to prevent erratic cracking by early sawing the contraction joint groove shall be formed in a manner approved by the engineer prior to initial set of the concrete .
num .
transverse construction joints transverse construction joints shall be made at the end of each days run and where an interruption is of duration long enough that the concrete is no longer plastic and can not be vibrated .
the transverse construction joint shall be located either at the contraction joint location or a minimum of num feet from the nearest contraction joint .
supplemental hand vibrators shall be immediately available to provide satisfactory consolidation at joints .
paving in the area of a transverse construction joint will not be permitted for num hours after installation .
m. curing immediately after the finishing operations have been completed and marring of the concrete will not occur the entire surface and exposed edges of the pavement shall be properly cured .
the concrete shall not be left exposed for more than num hour between stages of curing or during the curing period .
curing shall be maintained for at least num hours after concrete placement .
one of the following curing methods shall be used num .
curing blankets and white polyethylene sheeting method the surface of the concrete pavement and both pavement edges shall be covered with curing blankets .
the mats shall be thoroughly saturated with water and placed with the wettest side down .
immediately after placement the curing blankets shall be covered with white polyethylene sheeting placed in accordance with section num m.num .
combination burlappolyethylene sheeting may be substituted for the layer of curing blanket and the polyethylene sheeting with the engineers approval .
the curing blankets shall be kept moist by periodic applications of water .
portland cement concrete pavement num page num num .
impervious membrane method the entire surface of the pavement shall be sprayed uniformly with white pigmented curing compound immediately after the finishing of the surface .
if the pavement is cured initially with curing blankets the impervious membrane shall be applied immediately upon removal of the curing blankets .
the curing compound shall not be applied during or immediately after rainfall .
curing compound shall be applied under pressure by approved selfpropelled mechanical sprayers .
the curing compound may be applied in one or two applications .
if applied in two applications the second shall be applied within num minutes after the first .
the contractor shall apply curing compound at the minimum application rate of num gallon per num square feet for carpet drag or broom finished surfaces and num gallon per num square feet for metal tined finished surfaces .
the sprayer equipment shall be equipped with a tank agitator and shall be fully atomizing .
the spray fog shall be protected from the wind by a shield .
during application the compound shall be thoroughly mixed and continuously agitated by mechanical means .
hand spraying of odd width or shapes and concrete surfaces exposed by form removal will be permitted .
curing compound shall not be applied to the inside faces of joints to be sealed unless the compound is completely removed by subsequent sawing operations .
curing membrane damaged or protective cover removed on the surface of the pavement during the sawing operation shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor as directed by the engineer at no cost to the department .
should the film become damaged within the curing period the damaged portions shall be repaired immediately with additional compound .
the sides of the exposed slab shall be protected with a curing treatment equal to that provided for the surface .
num .
white opaque polyethylene sheeting method the top surface and sides of the pavement shall be entirely covered with polyethylene sheeting .
the units used shall be lapped at least num inches .
the sheeting shall be placed and weighted down to maintain intimate contact with the surface covered .
the sheeting shall be sized so each unit as laid will extend beyond the edges of the slab at least twice the thickness of the pavement .
in cold weather the substitution of dark sheeting for white sheeting will be permitted .
n. removing forms forms shall not be removed until concrete has set for at least num hours except for auxiliary forms used temporarily in widened areas .
forms shall be removed without damaging the pavement .
after the forms have been removed the exposed sides of the slab shall be cured by one of the methods indicated above unless the forms are left in place for more than num hours .
num portland cement concrete pavement page num o .
surface test the pavement surface shall be checked for deviations using either a num foot straightedge or a profilograph when specified .
when the use of a profilograph is specified the num foot straightedge check may also be required in locations determined by the engineer .
num .
num foot straightedge the pavement surface shall be tested with a num foot straightedge .
the permissible longitudinal and transverse surface deviation shall be num inch in num feet .
the permissible longitudinal and transverse surface deviation for pavement used in rest areas weigh stations ramp entrances shoulders and other similar areas shall be num inch in num feet .
the permissible transverse surface deviation on the outer num inches of the edge of pavement shall be num inch under a num foot straightedge except where the edge will become a longitudinal crown joint .
this test should not be performed within num feet of a rumble strip .
areas where the surface deviation exceeds the permissible deviation will be subject to the following at the discretion of the engineer .
grind down to an elevation where the area or spot will be within the permissible deviation .
accept affected area without corrective action with price reduction as determined by the engineer under the provisions of section num .
satisfactorily remove and replace deficient area .
the contractor shall accomplish corrective grinding with specially prepared circular diamond blades mounted on a horizontal shaft .
the contractor shall day light corrective grinding to the outside edge of the pavement .
the contractor shall repair and replace joint sealant damaged by corrective grinding as directed by the engineer and at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor shall not leave ground areas smooth or polished .
the contractor shall ensure ground areas have a uniform texture equal in roughness to the surrounding unground concrete .
when limestone is used as the coarse aggregate in the pavement and the current average daily traffic adt shown on the plans is greater than num the contractor shall reestablish the tining with a mechanical tining machine in all areas where the corrective grinding exceeds num feet measured longitudinally along the centerline of the road .
the contractor shall remove and replace all joint sealant within the area where tining is replaced .
the contractor will replace all permanent pavement markings damaged destroyed or removed during corrective grinding at no additional cost to the department .
num .
profilograph when the profilograph is specified the following provisions shall apply .
portland cement concrete pavement num page num a .
operations the profilograph shall be operated at a speed no greater than a normal walk .
two passes shall be made in each driving lane one in each wheel path .
the profilogram trace shall be marked and labeled at the beginning and end of each trace equation and num foot marker .
each profilogram shall be completely labeled to show the project stationing lane wheel pass date paved date tested and the operators name .
tests shall be run after each days paving .
tests shall be run the next working day following placement .
if less than num linear feet is paved the days production may be grouped with the subsequent days production .
results shall be furnished to the engineer within num working days after placement of the pavement and again within num working days after corrections are made .
curing membrane damaged or protective cover removed during the testing operation shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor as directed by the engineer at no cost to the department .
b .
evaluation the profilogram shall be furnished to the department and will be evaluated by and become the property of the department .
evaluation consists of determining the profile index to the nearest num inch per mile by measuring and summing scallops that appear outside a zero width blanking band .
the average profile index will be determined from the two wheel paths in each driving lane .
individual bumps will be evaluated using a num inch bump template .
the average of the two profile indexes per lane will be rounded to the nearest num inch .
the department will spot check or retest areas it desires with a department owned and operated profilograph .
if a discrepancy between the profilograms exist the cause of the discrepancy shall be determined and the area rerun when ordered by the engineer .
c. requirements the pavement shall conform to the following profile index requirements num pavement on tangent alignment and pavement on horizontal curves having a centerline radius of num feet or more and pavement within their respective superelevation transitions shall not exceed an average profile index of num inches per mile .
num areas excluded from profilograph testing shall be shoulders transitions area within num feet of existing pavement and bridges existing curb and gutter sections ramps pavements on horizontal curves having a centerline radius less than num feet and their respective superelevation transitions .
pavement sections not subject to profilograph testing shall meet the num foot straight edge test requirements in section num o.num .
the contractor shall accomplish corrective grinding with specially prepared circular diamond blades mounted on a horizontal shaft .
the contractor shall num portland cement concrete pavement page num day light corrective grinding to the outside edge of the pavement .
the contractor shall repair and replace joint sealant damaged by corrective grinding as directed by the engineer and at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor shall not leave ground areas smooth or polished .
the contractor shall ensure ground areas have a uniform texture equal in roughness to the surrounding unground concrete .
when limestone is used as the coarse aggregate in the pavement and the current adt shown on the plans is greater than num the contractor shall reestablish the tining with a mechanical tining machine in all areas where the corrective grinding exceeds num feet measured longitudinally along the centerline of the road .
the contractor shall remove and replace all joint sealant within the area where tining is replaced .
the contractor will replace all permanent pavement markings damaged destroyed or removed during corrective grinding at no additional cost to the department .
d. pavement with profile smoothness values from num to num inches per mile in any num mile section with bumps in excess of num inches may be ground and corrected to a profile value of num inches per mile or less and receive num pay .
this will require that the num mile section be reprofiled by the contractor .
e. pavement with an average profile index from greater than num inches per mile in any num mile section shall be subject to one of the following at the contractors option .
num correct by grinding to a value of num inches per mile or less .
num remove and replace deficient areas .
f. individual bumps in excess of num inches shall be subject to one of the following at the option of the engineer num satisfactorily correct the deficient area by grinding with equipment meeting the requirements of section num num.c.num .
num bumps less than num inch in num feet may be accepted without correction .
num remove and replace deficient areas .
g. coring for pavement thickness measurement will be performed after all corrective action has been completed by the contractor .
portland cement concrete pavement num page num h. incentive payment incentive payments will be made based on the chart below profile index inches per mile price adjustment of contract unit price num or less num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num and greater grindnum num pavement at num and greater shall be corrected ground or removed and replaced to a value of num or less in any num mile section .
incentive payments can not be improved due to grinding regardless of the average profile index .
the adjustments in the unit price will apply to the total area of the num milelong section .
the area will be computed using the total lane width num feet or less and the total length of the section num mile or less if it is the segment at the end of the project or at the end of a paving section adjacent to an exception .
p. sealing joints joints shall be sealed with hotpoured elastic joint sealer or low modulus silicone sealant as specified .
joints shall be sealed immediately after completion of the curing period before the pavement is opened to traffic .
joint grooves with spalls greater than num inch in depth shall be patched with an approved epoxy resin mortar in accordance with section num c. all loose concrete shall be removed from the spalled area and the spalled surface shall be thoroughly cleaned .
after cleaning the spalled surface shall be primed and an epoxy resin mortar of troweling consistency shall be placed in the spalled area and finished as the original pavement surface .
the epoxy binder components shall be proportioned and mixed as recommended by the manufacturer .
after the epoxy binder is thoroughly mixed dry silica sand shall be blended into the mixture to give an epoxy resin mortar of trowelable consistency .
after the epoxy resin mortar has cured the forming material shall be carefully removed .
the finished joint shall have vertical faces and the joint width shall be maintained .
patching of spalls shall be done only within the temperature range recommended in aashto m num for the class of epoxy used .
joints to be sealed shall be thoroughly clean and dry .
all materials such as old sealant oil asphalt curing compound paint rust and other foreign materials shall be completely removed .
cleaning shall be accomplished by sand blasting and other tools as necessary .
joints to be sealed with silicone sealant shall be sand blasted utilizing a mechanical device that holds the sand blaster at the appropriate angle and distance num portland cement concrete pavement page num from the joint to ensure proper cleaning .
the device shall have a mechanism attached that will correctly guide the device in the joint .
just prior to sealing each joint shall be blown out using a jet of compressed air at a working pressure of not less than num psi to remove all traces of dust .
air compressors used for cleaning joints shall be equipped with traps capable of removing all free water and oil from the compressed air .
joint sealer application will not be permitted when the air or pavement temperature near the joint is less than numf or is numf and falling .
the sealant shall be applied without spilling on the exposed surface .
sealant on the surface of the concrete pavement shall be removed immediately and the pavement surface cleaned .
failure of the joint material in either adhesion or cohesion will be cause for rejection .
repair shall be at the expense of the contractor .
shoulder joints between portland cement concrete pavement and asphalt concrete shoulders shall be sealed in accordance with section num k. num .
hotpoured elastic joint sealer hotpoured elastic joint sealer shall be stirred during heating so that localized overheating does not occur .
all joints shall be sealed with an approved pressure sealing device equipped with a nozzle inserted into the joint so sealing material will be forced from the bottom of the joint to the top .
num .
silicone sealant silicone sealant shall be applied with a mechanical device equipped with a nozzle or spout shaped to fit into the joint .
the joint sealant shall be applied under pressure from the inside of the joint to remove entrapped air and ensure good joint contact .
backer rod shall be installed to the proper depth to produce the width and depth of sealant specified .
the sealant surface shall be tooled to produce a slightly concave surface below the pavement surface .
tooling shall be accomplished before a skin forms on the sealant surface .
the use of water soap or oil as a tooling aid will not be permitted .
num .
seasonal limitations silicone sealing operations will only be permitted between may num and october num inclusive unless the contractor has received written permission from the region engineer to continue sealing later than october num .
silicone sealing operations will only be permitted when the air and pavement surface temperatures are numf or greater and rising .
without approval from the engineer to continue silicone sealing operations after the october num seasonal limitation the contractor shall only perform the initial cut at all joints .
beginning no sooner than may num of the following year the contractor shall widen the joints install the backer rod and seal joint with silicone according to section num p. portland cement concrete pavement num page num all costs related to the sealing seasonal limitations including additional labor materials equipment traffic control mobilization and incidentals shall be at the expense of the contractor .
q .
application of live load the pavement shall not be opened to traffic until the concrete has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
the pavement shall be cleaned prior to opening to traffic .
when concrete is placed adjoining a previously constructed pavement the paving machines mechanical spreaders and other heavy equipment shall not be operated on the existing pavement until the existing concrete has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
equipment operated on a previously constructed pavement that has attained a compressive strength of at least num psi but less than num psi shall be tracked type equipment .
hauling units shall not be allowed on the concrete until it has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
working platforms and tining curing and other lightweight finishing equipment may be operated on the edge of the existing concrete num hours after the concrete was placed .
with the approval of the engineer lightweight sealing equipment including but not limited to pickup and trailer hot kettle and air compressor may be operated on the slab more than num hours after the concrete was placed .
when operating on previously constructed lanes measures shall be taken to protect the previously constructed lane from becoming marred by the equipment .
r. tolerance in pavement thickness the pavement thickness will be determined by average caliper measurement of cores tested in accordance with aashto t num .
cores shall be sampled in accordance with aashto t num .
cores may be taken in areas believed to be deficient in thickness .
pavement deficiencies verified by these core measurements will be considered under the provisions of section num .
these core measurements will not be used to determine pavement thickness as set forth in the following for the purpose of establishing an adjusted unit price for pavement units are to be considered separately .
one random core location will be determined by the engineer for each of the units as described in table num .
additional cores if needed within the unit will be sampled at the interval for additional cores in table num .
the sizes of units taken from table num are determined as follows .
for concrete shoulders see paragraph num below .
num .
width the width of the pavement represented shall be the pavement surface between adjacent longitudinal construction joints between a longitudinal construction joint and the pavement edge or between two pavement edges where the entire width is poured in one operation .
num portland cement concrete pavement page num num .
length the length of the unit is that corresponding to the width shown in table num .
table num width of pavement to be represented by cores length of unit intervals for additional cores up to and including num feet num feet num feet over num feet thru num feet num feet num feet num feet thru num feet num feet num feet over num feet num feet num feet the remaining fractional unit length in feet shall be represented by cores in one of the following manners a .
if the fractional part of the unit length is num or less of the specified unit length from table num either the fractional part is considered as a separate unit or the fractional part shall be added to the previous unit when possible .
the intervals for the additional cores should equal approximately num of the total length .
b .
if the fractional part of the unit length is greater than num of the specified unit length from table num it will be considered as a separate unit and intervals for the cores should equal approximately num of the fractional unit length .
length measurements shall start at the end of the pavement bearing the smaller station number .
num .
ramps gore areas acceleration lanes and deceleration lanes each ramp consisting of the ramp gore area and acceleration lane or deceleration lane shall be considered separate from the mainline pavement following the limits in table num for the ramp areas .
num .
irregular areas irregular areas such as intersections entrances crossovers etc .
may be considered as a separate unit or may be included as part of an adjacent unit .
num .
lane tapers lane tapers shall be included as part of the length of a unit shown in table num .
to determine the width for table num use the maximum width at the start or end of the taper .
num .
sampling one core will be taken at random by the department in each unit .
num .
measurements when the measurement of the core from the unit is not more than num inch from the plan thickness the core measurement shall represent the unit .
when the measurement of the core from a unit is deficient by more than num inch and not more than num inch from the plan thickness two additional cores at intervals specified in table num for the width of pavement represented will be taken .
random offsets will be used for the additional cores .
the average thickness of the num cores will be used as the average thickness for that unit .
portland cement concrete pavement num page num when the measurement of any core is deficient by more than num inch the following will apply a .
additional cores will be taken at not less than num foot intervals parallel to the centerline in each direction from the affected location until in each direction a core is found which is not deficient by more than num inches .
the point at which the pavement is deficient by exactly num inches will be found by assuming a straight line relationship between the cores .
the deficient area will be defined by the point that is deficient by more than num inch to the points on each side within num inches of the specified depth .
the deficient area shall be removed and replaced at no cost to the department .
b .
after the deficient area has been isolated additional cores must be taken to represent the remaining portion of the unit .
c. a final core shall be taken to represent the repaired area .
num .
averaging measurements of cores will be averaged for a unit and the thickness will be reported to the nearest num inch .
measurements of cores that are in excess of the specified pavement thickness by more than num inch will be considered as the specified thickness plus num inch .
location of cores will not be a factor in determining average thickness of a unit .
num .
payment payment for units will be in accordance with table num .
table num portland cement concrete pavement deficiency in thickness determined by cores proportional part of contract price allowed from through num inch num inch num num inch num inch num num inch num inch num num inch num inch num num inch num inch num num inch num inch num num .
concrete shoulders the foregoing provisions for tolerance in pavement thickness will apply to portland cement concrete shoulders with the following exceptions a .
each shoulder shall be cored separately .
b .
the unit length will be num feet .
the last unit on each shoulder will be the appropriate length plus the fractional part of that length in feet remaining .
num portland cement concrete pavement page num c. wherever in the foregoing num inch is mentioned substitute num inch .
d. when the measurement of the core from a unit is deficient by more than num inch and not more than num inch from the plan thickness two additional cores will be sampled at intervals of num feet and used in the average thickness for that unit .
e. payment for units will be in accordance with table num .
table num portland cement concrete shoulders deficiency in thickness determined by cores proportional part of contract price allowed from through num inch num inch num num inch num inch num num inch num inch num num inch num inch num num inch num inch num num inch num inch num num method of measurement a. portland cement concrete pavement shoulders and miscellaneous pavement these items will be measured to the nearest num square yard .
pavement which is removed or for which no payment will be made will not be measured .
area computations will be as set forth in section num .
when an item for miscellaneous pcc pavement is provided in the contract the areas of concrete pavement to be measured under this item will be described on the plans .
b. dowel bar assemblies dowel bar assemblies will be measured by the actual number of bars furnished and installed .
c. insert steel bar in pcc pavement insert steel bar in pcc pavement will be measured by the actual number of steel bars furnished and installed .
num basis of payment a. portland cement concrete pavement shoulders and miscellaneous pavement these items will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard or the adjusted unit price as set forth in section num r. payment will be full compensation for furnishing all materials including reinforcing steel labor equipment and all incidentals necessary .
payment will also be full compensation for trimming and water used to moisten the subgrade ahead of the paver curing the concrete sawing and sealing joints and all costs involved in the furnishing operating and calibration of the profilograph .
portland cement concrete pavement num page num the amount bid on these items shall be based on the specified amount of cement per cubic yard .
if a cement factor is not shown on the plans the amount bid shall be based on num pounds per cubic yard for pavement shoulders and pavementmiscellaneous .
b. dowel bar assemblies dowel bar assemblies will be paid for at the contract unit price per each dowel bar .
payment will be full compensation for labor materials equipment and all incidentals necessary to furnish and install the assemblies .
c. insert steel bar in pcc pavement insert steel bar in pcc pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per each steel bar .
payment will be full compensation for labor materials equipment and all incidentals necessary to furnish and install the steel bar .
num portland cement concrete pavement page num this page intentionally left blank concrete spall repair num page num num description this work consists of removal of sealant from transverse contraction joints repair of spalled areas sawing cleaning and resealing joints .
num materials a .
bonding mortar for concrete patches num .
cement cement shall conform to section num .
num .
water water shall conform to section num .
num .
sand sand shall conform to section num .
num .
proportioning bonding mortar shall be mixed in the following proportions by volume num parts portland cement .
num part sand .
mix with only enough water to form a thick creamy consistency .
b .
concrete patch material concrete patching material shall be one of the following and approved by the departments concrete engineer num .
type i a packaged dry rapidhardening mortar conforming to the requirements of astm c num type rnum containing no chloride ions .
a magnesium or phosphate based product will not be allowed .
if extender aggregate is added the extender aggregate shall conform to section num .
num .
type ii a packaged dry rapidhardening concrete conforming to the requirements of astm c num type rnum containing no chloride ions .
a magnesium or phosphate base product will not be allowed .
if extender aggregate is added the extender aggregate shall conform to section num .
num .
type iii a dry bagged air entrained concrete patching material known as numunum meeting the following requirements a .
materials num cement cement shall conform to section num .
num coarse aggregate coarse aggregate shall conform to section num except the gradation shall conform to the gradation specified in section num b.num.b .
num fine aggregate fine aggregate shall conform to section num for class m concrete except the gradation shall conform to the gradation specified in section num b.num.b .
num concrete spall repair page num num air entraining admixture air entraining admixture shall be dry and blended in the bag .
num water water added at the time of batching shall conform to section num .
num other admixtures other admixtures if used shall conform to section num and may be dry blended in the bag or added at the time of batching .
b. gradation the coarse and fine aggregate shall be blended at a num ratio by volume to meet the following gradation numunum gradation requirements sieve size percent passing num inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num c. mix proportions proportion the mix in accordance with the following table per num pound bag of dry mix .
if other sizes of bags are used they shall contain the same proportioning mix proportions material weight pounds type i cement num coarse aggregate num fine aggregate num d. blending provide a blending device meeting the following characteristics and requirements num capable of producing the required mix proportions within num num contains a proportioning device equipped with a warning device to indicate when the system is out of tolerance num capable of stopping the flow of cement to allow sampling of the blended coarse and fine aggregate num designed to allow cement and aggregate to run out separately for checking material weights and ensuring that the blending proportions meet mix requirements .
concrete spall repair num page num before blending with the cement dry the coarse and fine aggregates as approved by the engineer .
blend the cement and aggregate before bagging the mix .
e. bags and batch identification provide moisture and tear resistant bags .
print the following on the bags num the phrase grade numunum concrete patch mix num weight of the bag in pounds num mix date num the instructions for mixing into concrete c. epoxy resin mortar num .
sand sand shall conform to section num .
num .
epoxy resin the epoxy resin adhesive shall conform to aashto m num type iii grade num .
num .
proportioning proportioning shall be as recommended by the manufacturer .
d. sealant silicone or hot pour sealant as detailed in the plans shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements a .
general spall repair locations shall be marked in the field by the engineer .
joints on which seal removal or spall repair has begun shall be completed and sealed during the same construction season .
spall repair and seal replacement will only be permitted between may num and october num inclusive unless the contractor has received written permission from the region engineer to continue later than october num .
sealing operations will only be permitted when the air and pavement surface temperatures are numf or greater and rising .
the pavement shall be dry before starting the concrete patch .
in place sealant shall be removed from transverse joints prior to placing the concrete patch .
spalled areas num inch deep or less at the joint will not need repair .
when both type a and type b spalls are shown on the plans type a spalls are over num foot wide and type b are spalls num foot wide or less but greater than num foot wide .
spalls less than num foot wide shall be filled with joint sealant .
b .
type a spalls edges of areas to be repaired shall be sawed to a depth necessary minimum of num inch to ensure the area can be chipped down to sound concrete .
jack hammers of num pounds .
maximum and chipping hammers of num pounds .
maximum shall be used .
after sawing the vertical edges shall be removed by chipping .
the bottom of chipped areas shall be left rough to obtain a good bond between the patch num concrete spall repair page num and the old concrete .
the area shall then be sandblasted and the sand blown from the joint and the patch area .
partially exposed dowel bars shall be coated or covered with an approved bond breaker .
improperly aligned or positioned bars shall be removed .
prior to placing the patch the joint shall be formed to a width equal to the current opening .
the area shall be chipped to a uniform depth to facilitate forming to the depth of removal .
forming material shall be foam core board or other stiff material capable of standing without deflection .
the forming material shall be one unit for the length of the spall repair area .
the concrete patch material shall be mixed and placed in accordance with the manufacturers technical data sheet .
the contractor shall provide a manufacturers technical data sheet to the engineer prior to performing the work .
at placement the patch material shall be between numf and numf and shall be maintained above numf until num psi has been obtained .
traffic will not be permitted over the area until the repair material has reached num psi .
upon removal of the forming material the joint shall be sawed cleaned and sealed .
specific installation details shall conform to the following based on the type of concrete patch material used num .
type i ii packaged dry rapid hardening mortar or concrete astm cnum type rnum if a bonding agent or bonding mortar is recommended by the manufacturers technical data sheet the bonding agent shall be in accordance with the manufacturers guidelines .
the patch shall be screeded from existing pavement to existing pavement .
the top surface shall be trowel finished from middle of patch to existing concrete .
any saw cuts that extend beyond the patch perimeter shall be filled with patching material .
the surfaces of the patch shall be given a broomed finish .
patched areas shall be wet cured with curing blankets and white polyethylene sheeting for a minimum of num hours then sprayed with curing compound at a minimum rate of num gallon per num square feet .
num .
type iii bagged air entrained concrete patching material numunum a layer of bonding mortar shall be scrubbed into and over the surfaces to be patched immediately prior to patch placement .
excess grout must not pool in the low areas .
concrete spall repair num page num the patch shall be placed before the bonding mortar dries and shall be consolidated by vibration .
the patch shall be screeded from existing pavement to existing pavement .
the top surface shall be trowel finished from middle of patch to existing concrete .
after screeding and finishing the same bonding grout shall be used to paint the edges of the repair .
any saw cuts that extend beyond the patch perimeter shall be filled with patching material and must also have the surface painted with bonding grout .
the surfaces of the patch shall be given a broomed finish .
the patched area shall be sprayed with curing compound at a minimum rate of num gallon per num square feet .
an additional coat of curing compound shall be applied after num minutes but less than num hour after the first application .
c. type b spalls the spalled concrete shall be removed and the areas chipped down to sound concrete .
the resulting areas shall be left rough to obtain a good bond between patch and concrete .
the area shall then be sandblasted and the joint formed as specified for type a spalls .
the entire area shall be given a coat of straight epoxy resin without aggregates .
epoxy resin mortar shall immediately be tamped in place and troweled off .
placement of epoxy will be permitted only within the temperature range recommended in aashto m num for the class of epoxy used .
form removal joint sawing and traffic over the patch area will not be permitted for num hours after placement .
d. saw and seal joints transverse joints shall be sawed to the uniform width and depth specified .
for silicone sealant the contractor shall have backer rod available for variable width joints up to num inches wide .
prior to sealing the joints shall be cleaned in conformance with section num .
once cleaning operations begin traffic will not be permitted over repair areas until joints are sealed and seal material has cured .
num method of measurement a .
saw and seal joints saw and seal joints will be measured to the nearest foot .
the areas that have spall repairs will not be measured .
b .
repair of type a spalls repair of type a spalls will be measured to the nearest num square foot .
surface measurements will be taken to the nearest num foot .
c. repair of type b spalls repair of type b spalls will be measured to the nearest num foot or to the nearest num square foot as shown on the plans .
num basis of payment a .
saw and seal joints saw and seal joints will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for removal of old sealant cleaning and resealing the joints .
num concrete spall repair page num b .
repair of type a spalls repair of type a spalls will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
payment will be full compensation for sawing sealing materials labor equipment and incidentals required .
c. repair of type b spalls repair of type b spalls will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot or to the nearest square foot as shown on the plans .
payment will be full compensation for sawing sealing materials labor equipment and all incidentals required .
undersealing num page num num description this work consists of filling existing voids under pcc pavement by drilling injection holes and pumping a cementfly ash grout under the pavement slab .
num materials a .
design mix the design mix for grout shall conform to the following proportions by absolute volume num part portland cement num parts fly ash water to achieve the specified fluidity fluidity of the grout when measured by a flow cone in accordance with astm cnum shall have a time of efflux between num and num seconds .
the contractor shall submit for approval materials proposed for use .
the submittal shall include mill certification for cement physical and chemical analysis for fly ash and tests of the grout slurry by a department approved testing laboratory .
tests shall show one three and seven day strengths flow cone times shrinkage and expansion observed and time of initial set .
the seven day strength shall be at least num psi as measured in accordance with astm cnum .
as an alternate standard num inch diameter by num inch high water tight concrete cylinder molds may be used to determine seven day strength .
when the cylinder molds are used the strength shall be num psi minimum .
alternate design mixes for the grout may be submitted to the engineer for approval .
b. portland cement type i or type ii cement is required .
the cement shall meet the requirements of section num .
c. fly ash fly ash shall conform to section num .
d. water water shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements a .
general the contractor or subcontractor performing the undersealing shall have prior experience with undersealing operations and shall have personnel on the project with expertise in undersealing .
prior to awarding the contract the department may require the contractor to substantiate previous experience with this type of work .
the contractor upon department request shall be required to submit a list of at least three projects on which the contractor or undersealing subcontractor has satisfactorily completed similar work .
deflection testing of the joints shall be performed as required by the engineer .
testing may be performed either before and or after the undersealing operation .
num undersealing page num the contractor shall take the necessary precautions to avoid slurry or foam from entering areas such as pipes culverts voids behind abutments and other such areas that may hinder the functionality of the roadway .
if foam or slurry enters these areas it shall be removed to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional expense to the department .
jacking foam shall not be used for undersealing except as allowed as per section num a .
b. deflection testing the contractor shall furnish either a deflection measuring device that can apply at least num pounds of force either vibrating or falling weight or a loaded vehicle having a single axle that can be loaded to num kips evenly distributed between the two sides to test joints and cracks .
num .
if a deflection measuring device is used the loading plate shall be placed as close as possible to the slab corner .
load transfer shall be measured with sensors that are placed adjacent to the joint or crack on the loaded and unloaded side .
num .
if a loaded vehicle is used as a measuring device a gauge mount shall be positioned with one gauge referenced to the corner of each slab on both sides of the joint near the shoulder edge perpendicular to the pavement joint .
the gauges should then be zeroed with no load on the slab on either side of the joint .
a loaded truck shall then be moved into position with the center of the num kip axle num foot behind the joint and the outside test wheel num foot from the pavement edge both gauges shall be read .
the loaded truck shall be moved across the joint to a position num foot past the joint and both gauges read again .
deflection testing shall be performed when the slabs are not experiencing curl or joint closure .
this normally takes place between midnight and num a.m .
the engineer may stop testing earlier if there is evidence of slab lockup due to thermal expansion of the slabs .
the engineer may allow the testing to continue after the hour specified providing the slabs are not interlocked or under compression .
upon completion of preliminary deflection testing of joints the engineer will determine the deflection range that warrants undersealing .
c. weather and seasonal limitations grout undersealing shall not be performed when the pavement surface temperature is below numf or if the subgrade or base course is frozen .
d. equipment num .
grout plant the grout plant shall consist of a positive displacement cement injection pump and a high speed colloidal mixing machine .
the colloidal mixing machine shall operate between num and num rpm creating a high shearing action and subsequent pressure release to make a homogeneous mixture undersealing num page num the injection pump shall have pressure capability from num to num psi when pumping a grout slurry mixed to a num second flow cone time .
the pump shall be capable of continuous pumping at rates as low as num gallons per minute or have the system modified by adding a recirculation hose and valve at the discharge of the pump .
num .
drilling an air compressor and rock drills or other devices capable of drilling the injection holes through the pavement shall be required .
the equipment shall be operated in such a manner that holes are vertical and not out of round .
holes shall be drilled in a manner that prevents breakout at the bottom of the pavement .
the downward force of the drill shall not exceed num pounds .
e. drilling holes a hole pattern for grout injection will be determined by the engineer in consultation with the contractor .
variations from plans quantity will not be considered cause for renegotiation of the contract unit prices .
holes shall be between num and num inches in diameter drilled vertically and round to a depth sufficient to penetrate any stabilized base and into the subgrade material .
subgrade penetration shall not exceed num inches .
holes may be washed to create a small cavity allowing initial spread of grout .
f. subsealing during subsealing operations the upward movement of the pavement shall not exceed num inches unless otherwise allowed by the engineer .
the contractor shall supply equipment to measure slab deflection and lift .
this equipment shall be capable of detecting simultaneously the movement of the pavement edge or any two outside slab corners adjacent to a joint and the adjoining shoulder .
the equipment shall have the capacity of accurately measuring to num inches .
measurement devices to detect slab movement with respect to a stable reference point shall be subject to approval before use .
pavement that has been raised in excess of this amount may be subject to removal and replacement or grinding to the correct grade as determined by the engineer .
an expanding rubber packer or other approved device connected to the discharge from the plant shall be lowered into the hole .
the discharge end of the packer or hose shall not extend below the lower surface of the concrete pavement .
each hole shall be pumped until maximum pressure is built up or material is observed flowing from hole to hole .
maximum pressure shall be num psi .
a short surge up to num psi will be allowed when starting to pump the hole .
the pressure shall be monitored by a gauge in the grout line that is protected from the grout slurry .
mixed material shall not be held in the mixer or injection sump pump for more than one hour after mixing .
any material held longer than one hour shall be wasted and will not be paid for .
additional water shall not be added after initial mixing of the grout .
water displaced from the void structure by the grout shall be allowed to flow out freely .
excessive loss of the grout through cracks joints other drilled holes or from back pressure in the hose or in the shoulder area will not be tolerated and will not be paid for .
num undersealing page num if the engineer determines that continued grout injection at a specific location is no longer feasible due to major voids the engineer may direct the contractor to cease grout injection at that location .
upon completion of undersealing and prior to the injection grout drying on the sides of the drill holes the drill holes shall be filled with a fast setting sandcement mixture or other patch material approved by the engineer .
if the injection grout has dried on the sides of the drill holes the sides of the drill holes shall be sand blasted and blown out prior to filling the holes with fast setting sandcement mixture .
g. radial cracks cracks emanating radially from the grout injection holes will be presumed to have been caused by improper injection techniques by the contractor .
for each num linear feet of crack measured the pay quantity will be reduced by num cubic foot of grout .
as an alternative the engineer may require replacement of the damaged panel or a portion of the damaged panel at the contractors expense .
h. transverse cracks if cracks develop between adjacent grout injection holes the contractor shall repair the cracks by a satisfactory method approved by the engineer .
as an alternative the engineer may require replacement of the entire panel or a portion of a damaged panel at the contractors expense .
num method of measurement a. pcc drill holes the holes accepted will be measured per each .
the holes drilled after the deflection testing will not be included for payment .
b. pcc pavement undersealing pavement undersealing will be measured to the nearest cubic foot .
portland cement will be the only material measured for payment .
one bag of cement num pounds of pcc pavement undersealing num bags of cement shall of pcc pavement undersealing .
c. deflection testing the test locations will be measured per each .
testing before and after undersealing at the same joint will be measured as separate locations .
if the deflection testing after undersealing is in excess of num inches further undersealing will be required .
should the testing after the undersealing is performed indicate a need for further undersealing at that joint all additional testing at that joint will be at no additional cost to the department .
num basis of payment a. pcc drill holes the holes drilled will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for all materials equipment tools and incidentals required to drill plug and seal the holes after the undersealing is completed .
undersealing num page num b. pcc pavement undersealing pavement undersealing will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot .
payment will be full compensation for all materials including fly ash and water labor equipment tools and incidentals required .
c. deflection testing testing will be paid for at the contract unit price per each test location .
payment will be full compensation for all materials equipment tools and incidentals required .
num undersealing page num this page intentionally left blank pavement jacking num page num num description this work consists of hydraulic pressure jacking pcc pavement to correct the pavement profile .
jacking is accomplished by drilling injection holes and pumping a cementfly ash slurry or liquid polyurethane foam under the slab .
num materials a. jacking slurry design mix the design mix for grout shall conform to the following proportions by absolute volume num part portland cement num parts fly ash water to achieve the specified fluidity fluidity of the grout when measured by a flow cone in accordance with astm cnum shall have a time of efflux between num and num seconds .
during initial injection at each hole an efflux time between num and num seconds will be permitted .
the use of material with an efflux time between num and num seconds shall be discontinued prior to movement of the pavement .
the contractor shall be required to perform this test prior to placing any material .
the contractor shall submit for approval materials proposed for use .
the submittal shall include mill certification for cement physical and chemical analysis for fly ash and tests of the grout slurry by a department approved testing laboratory .
tests shall show one three and seven day strengths flow cone times shrinkage and expansion observed and time of initial set .
the seven day strength shall be at least num psi as measured in accordance with astm cnum .
as an alternate standard num inch diameter by num inch high water tight concrete cylinder molds may be used to determine seven day strength .
when the cylinder molds are used the strength shall be num psi .
minimum .
alternate jacking slurry design mixes may be submitted to the engineer for approval .
b. portland cement type i or type ii cement is required .
the cement shall meet the requirements of section num .
c. fly ash fly ash shall conform to section num .
d. water water shall conform to section num .
e. jacking foam water blown formulation of highdensity polyurethane .
the high density closed cell polyurethane shall be hydrophobic and shall exhibit the following physical characteristics and properties the polyurethane foam shall be designed for pavement jacking have a free rise density of num to num pounds per cubic foot in accordance with astm dnum and shall have a minimum compressive strength of num psi in accordance with astm dnum .
the material shall be resistant to oils gasoline and most solvents .
num pavement jacking page num num construction requirements a .
general the contractor or subcontractor performing the pavement jacking shall have prior experience with pavement jacking operations and shall have personnel on the project with expertise in determining injection hole patterns and jacking sequences .
prior to awarding the contract the department may require the contractor to substantiate previous experience with this type of work .
the contractor upon department request shall be required to submit a list of at least three projects on which the contractor or the pavement jacking subcontractor have satisfactorily completed similar work .
the contractor shall not start any new location unless the new location can be completed in the same day .
if any location is started and can not be completed prior to the end of the days work the entire area including adjacent lanes shall be undersealed in accordance with section num before stopping for the day .
if pcc pavement foam jacking is specified foam may be used to underseal adjacent areas .
the contractor shall take the necessary precautions to avoid slurry or foam from entering areas such as pipes culverts voids behind abutments and other such areas that may hinder the functionality of the roadway .
if foam or slurry enters these areas it shall be removed to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional expense to the department .
b .
weather and seasonal limitations pavement jacking shall not be performed when the pavement surface temperatures are below numf or if the subgrade or base course is frozen .
pavement jacking shall not be performed when the subgrade contains an abnormal amount of moisture from recent rainfall as evidenced by standing water on the pavement or in the joints or cracks .
c. equipment num .
grout plant when jacking slurry is specified the grout plant shall consist of a positive displacement cement injection pump and a high speed colloidal mixing machine .
the colloidal mixing machine shall operate between num and num rpm creating a high shearing action and subsequent pressure release to make a homogeneous mixture .
num .
drilling an air compressor and rock drills or other devices capable of drilling the injection holes through the pavement shall be required .
num .
pumping unit when jacking foam is specified the contractor shall furnish a truckmounted pumping unit capable of injecting the highdensity polyurethane formulation between the concrete pavement and the subbase and capable of controlling the rate of rise of the pavement .
the pumping unit shall be equipped with a metering device to measure the quantity of material pumped .
pavement jacking num page num num .
laser leveling unit the contractor shall furnish a laser leveling unit to ensure that the concrete is raised to an even plane and to the required elevation .
d. drilling holes when jacking slurry is specified a hole pattern for grout injection will be determined by the engineer in consultation with the contractor .
the engineer may delete any location or add new locations of pavement to be raised .
holes shall be between num and num inches in diameter drilled vertically and round to a depth sufficient to penetrate any stabilized base and into the subgrade material .
holes may be washed to create a small cavity allowing initial spread of grout .
holes shall be drilled in a manner that prevents breakout at the bottom of the pavement .
the downward force of the drill shall not exceed num pounds .
variations from plans quantity will not be considered cause for renegotiations of the contract unit prices .
when jacking foam is specified a hole pattern for injection will be determined by the contractor in consultation with the engineer .
the engineer may delete any location or add new locations of pavement to be raised .
holes shall be between num inch and num inch in diameter drilled vertically and round to a depth sufficient to penetrate any stabilized base and in the subgrade material .
holes shall be drilled in a manner that prevents breakout at the bottom of the pavement .
e. slurry pavement jacking string lines shall be established and blocked up from the pavement high points to monitor movement .
an expanding rubber packer or other approved device connected to the discharge from the plant shall be lowered into the hole .
the discharge end of the packer or hose shall not extend below the lower surface of the concrete pavement .
the contractor shall pump in a pattern and in the amount required to raise the pavement to within num foot of the specified grade .
grade tolerances are applicable to both transverse and longitudinal grades .
after the pavement has been raised to the desired elevation all holes shall be injected to ensure complete filling of voids .
continuous pressures up to num psi will be permitted .
pressures up to num psi will be allowed only for short periods .
if the pavement is bonded to the subbase brief pressure rises num seconds or less up to num psi will be allowed .
mixed material shall not be held in the mixer or injection sump pump for more than one hour after mixing .
any material held longer than one hour shall be wasted and will not be paid for .
additional water shall not be added after initial mixing of the grout .
excessive loss of the slurry through cracks joints other drilled holes or from back pressure in the hose or in the shoulder area will not be tolerated and will not be paid for .
if the engineer determines that continued slurry injection at a specific location is no longer feasible due to major voids the engineer may direct the contractor to cease slurry injection at that location .
num pavement jacking page num upon completion of jacking and prior to the injection slurry drying on the sides of the drill holes the drill holes shall be filled with a fast setting sandcement mixture or other patch material approved by the engineer .
if the injection slurry has dried on the sides of the drill holes the sides of the drill holes shall be sand blasted and blown out prior to filling the holes with fast setting sandcement mixture .
f. foam pavement jacking the highdensity polyurethane formulation is to be injected under the slab .
the amount of rise shall be controlled using the pumping unit and by regulating the rate of injection .
the contractor shall inject in a pattern and in the amount required to raise the pavement to within num foot of the specified grade .
grade tolerances are applicable to both transverse and longitudinal grades .
a tight string line or laser level shall be used to monitor and verify elevations .
after the pavement has been raised to the desired elevation all holes shall be injected to ensure complete filling of voids .
excessive loss through cracks joints other drilled holes from back pressure in the hose in the shoulder area or as a result of cleaning lines will not be paid for .
the contractor shall provide a scale for weighing the waste material .
if the engineer determines continued foam injection at a specific location is no longer feasible due to major voids the engineer may direct the contractor to cease foam injection at the location .
upon completion of the jacking the upper num inches of the drilled holes shall be filled with a fast setting sandcement mixture or other patch material approved by the engineer .
the foam material shall be removed from the injection hole appropriately to ensure a good bond between the fast setting sandcement mixture and the in place concrete .
g. radial cracks the slab shall not be raised more than num inch while pumping in any one hole at any one time .
cracks emanating radially from the injection holes will be presumed to have been caused by improper injection techniques by the contractor .
for each num feet of crack measured the pay quantity will be reduced by num cubic foot of grout or num pounds of polyurethane foam material .
h. transverse cracks if cracks develop between adjacent injection holes the contractor shall repair the cracks by a satisfactory method approved by the engineer .
i. pavement raised above tolerances pavement raised above specified tolerances shall be brought to grade by grinding .
if over jacking is greater than num foot satisfactory removal and replacement shall be required at no cost to the department .
num method of measurement pcc pavement jacking slurry will be measured to the nearest cubic foot .
portland cement will be the only material measured for payment .
one bag of cement num pounds shall equal num cubic foot of pcc pavement jacking slurry .
pavement jacking num page num pcc pavement jacking foam will be measured to the nearest pound .
num basis of payment pcc pavement jacking slurry will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot .
payment will be full compensation for all materials including fly ash water labor equipment tools and incidentals required .
pcc pavement jacking foam will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound .
payment will be full compensation for all materials including highdensity polyurethane foam labor equipment tools and incidentals required .
num pavement jacking page num this page intentionally left blank cracking and seating of pcc pavement num page num num description the work consists of cracking and seating concrete pavement prior to placing an asphalt concrete leveling course .
num materials not specified num construction requirements a .
general cracking and seating shall proceed continuously during normal work hours until the set of lanes under construction is completed .
the pavement shall be seated on the same working day that it is cracked .
the asphalt concrete leveling course shall be placed within num hours after the pavement has been cracked and seated .
pcc pavement crossovers shall be cracked with the same pattern used for the driving lanes .
work shall be performed during daylight hours .
prior to cracking the concrete pavement existing asphalt concrete overlays shall be removed .
b .
equipment num .
pavement breaker pavement cracking shall be accomplished with a spade or guillotine type breaker mounted on a vehicle capable of controlled forward and transverse movement .
the breaker shall be capable of fracturing the pavement to the full depth while maintaining the fractured face interlock of the aggregate .
num .
roller a pneumatic roller with a minimum loaded weight of num ton shall be used to seat the cracked pavement .
c. cracking locations pavement cracking shall be performed transverse to centerline at num foot intervals num inches .
breakers shall not be operated closer than num feet from an existing transverse joint .
cracking shall be full pavement depth without loss of interlock .
d. test section before routine cracking operations commence the contractor shall demonstrate on a num foot test section on the project that the cracking and seating procedure is satisfactory to the engineer .
when inspecting the cores for cracking it may be necessary to wet the core to verify cracking .
the contractor shall core or saw samples of sufficient size to establish adequacy of cracking .
a minimum of four samples will be required in the test section and one sample per lane mile for routine operations .
if subsequent samples indicate that the established cracking procedure is not producing acceptable results additional test sections may be required to reestablish an acceptable cracking and seating procedure .
num cracking and seating of pcc pavement page num e. seating the cracked pavement shall be seated by a minimum of two passes with the pneumatic roller .
if two roller passes have not provided a firm seating of the cracked pavement the rolling shall continue until the engineer determines that the seating is adequate or pavement removal is required .
f. cleaning the cracked and seated pavement shall be cleaned of dirt spalls and loose material by power brooming prior to tack coating .
the cracked surface shall be cleaned of loose material at the end of each working day .
num method of measurement a. cracking and seating pcc pavement cracking and seating pcc pavement will be measured to the nearest num square yard .
b. cored or sawed sample cored or sawed sample will be measured per each .
num basis of payment a. cracking and seating pcc pavement cracking and seating pcc pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard and shall be inclusive of cracking seating test strips surface cleaning and all tools equipment and labor necessary to perform the work .
b. cored or sawed sample cored or sawed sample will be paid for at the contract unit price per each and will include all tools equipment and labor necessary to perform the work .
if additional cores or sawed samples are required because previous samples indicated unacceptable results the additional cores will be at the contractors expense .
rubblize pcc pavement new section num page num num description this work consists of rubblizing the existing concrete pavement in preparation for an overlay .
num materials not specified num construction requirements a .
general rubblization of the concrete pavement shall be accomplished across the width and full depth of the pavement .
the rubblization shall be done in partial widths when necessary to maintain traffic .
the breaker shall be operated to avoid damaging the base and underlying structures including but not limited to pipe box culverts edge drains and utilities .
if damage occurs to the base or underlying structures the contractor shall repair any damage at no additional expense to the department .
the contractor shall minimize the dispersion of dust from the rubblizing operation until the rubblized surface is overlaid by the application of water or other approved method .
work shall be performed during daylight hours .
b .
equipment num .
requirements for all breakers rubblize the existing pcc pavement using either a selfcontained selfpropelled multihead pavement breaker or a selfcontained self propelled resonant frequency pavement breaker .
whip hammers piledriving hammers crane and wrecking ball operations and other equipment using up guided freefalling weights are not acceptable .
the equipment used shall deliver such energy as necessary to provide a crack which is distinguishable to the naked eye from a standing position without the use of water or other materials .
the breaker shall be equipped with a screen to ensure debris will not enter the adjacent lane during the fracturing process if traffic is maintained .
num .
multi head breaker breaking of the concrete pavement shall be accomplished with a selfcontained selfpropelled unit with hammers mounted laterally in pairs with half the hammers in a forward row and the remainder diagonally offset in a rear row so that there is continuous breakage from side to side .
the multihead breaker must be capable of rubblizing a full lane width in a single pass to the degree specified in section num c. num .
resonant breaker breaking the concrete pavement shall be accomplished with a selfcontained selfpropelled resonant frequencybreaking unit capable of producing low amplitude num pound force blows at a nominal frequency of not less than num cycles per second .
the rubblizing operation shall proceed in a longitudinal direction beginning at a shoulder or previously broken edge and progress toward the opposite shoulder or longitudinal centerline of the roadway .
the resonant num rubblize pcc pavement new section page num breaker must be capable of rubblizing the full width of the pavement in multiple passes to the degree specified in section num c. num .
rollers a steel vibratory roller fitted with a z pattern grid on the drum face having a gross weight mass of at least num tons operated in vibratory mode .
a smooth drum steel vibratory roller having a gross weight mass of at least num tons operated in vibratory mode .
a pneumatic roller having a gross weight mass of at least num tons .
c. rubblization prior to rubblization a joint shall be cut full depth at an existing joint on ramps or mainline where rubblization abuts concrete pavement which is to remain in place .
in areas where the roadway must be covered one lane at a time initial rubblization will extend a minimum of num inches beyond the width of the pavement to be covered .
the contractor shall break the concrete pavement uniformly across the pavement width into particles that have a maximum dimension less than or equal to num inches .
in addition num of the particles as the engineer determines visually must have a maximum dimension less than or equal to the following in the bottom half of the slab num inches in the top half of the slab num inches at the surface of the slab num inches the engineer may direct or allow larger maximum particle dimensions .
prior to the acceptance of the rubblizing procedure to be used the contractor shall rubblize and roll a num foot test strip in one lane for evaluation as designated by the engineer .
break the test strip using sufficient energy and an operating speed such that the existing pavement is rubblized fulldepth to the degree specified above .
a num foot by num foot test hole shall be excavated from the edge to the middle of the lane at a location selected by the engineer to determine if the breaker is producing pieces of the specified sizes .
the material from the test hole shall be removed from the project and the hole shall be filled using base course or base course salvage .
for the remainder of the project the contractor shall excavate the equivalent of one test hole per lane mile unless waived by the engineer .
if necessary to achieve the above rubblization size requirements in areas where the concrete pavement is not able to deflect the engineer and contractor may mutually agree to precrack the concrete pavement with a device meeting the requirements of section num b.num .
reinforcement in the rubblized pavement if any shall be left in place .
however if any reinforcement is exposed at the surface from rubblizing or compaction it shall be cut off rubblize pcc pavement new section num page num num inches below the surface and removed .
any loose joint filler expansion material or other similar items shall be removed .
d. seating seat the rubblized pavement using vibratory steel wheel and pneumatic tired rollers .
the two types of breakers are listed below with the corresponding sequence required for each .
num .
multi head breaker num coverages with a steel vibratory roller fitted with a z pattern grid on the roller face .
num coverage with a pneumatic roller .
num coverage with a steel vibratory roller immediately prior to the overlay .
num .
resonant breaker num coverages with a steel drum vibratory roller .
num coverage with a pneumatic roller .
num coverage with a steel vibratory roller immediately prior to the overlay .
a roller coverage is defined as forward and back over the entire surface area of the rubblized pavement .
the roller shall operate at a speed not to exceed num miles per hour .
additional coverages may be required by the engineer to satisfactorily seat the rubblized pavement .
num method of measurement rubblize pcc pavement rubblize pcc pavement will be measured to the nearest num square yard .
num basis of payment rubblize pcc pavement rubblize pcc pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard and shall include the cost of furnishing all labor equipment materials and incidentals necessary for rubblizing the pcc pavement precracking the pavement if required all rolling and seating dust control breaking and excavation of test holes fill material and compaction of test holes and any subsequent test holes required by the engineer to demonstrate specification compliance sawing at retained pavement and appurtenances removing exposed reinforcing steel and removal and satisfactory offsite disposal of waste materials .
num rubblize pcc pavement new section page num this page intentionally left blank part e structures num steel structures page num num description this work consists of furnishing fabricating and erecting structural steel and miscellaneous steel required for structures .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections a .
steel steel shall conform to section num b. bolts bolts shall conform to sections num and num .
c. paint paint shall conform to section num .
d. stud shear connectors stud and shear connectors shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements structural steel fabricating plants shall be certified in the aisc quality certification program major steel bridge category to fabricate steel bridge girders trusses bearings and main supporting members .
structural steel fabricating plants shall be certified in the aisc quality certification program simple steel bridge structures to fabricate highway sign structures parts for bridges such as bridge traffic rail cross frame diaphragms and unspliced rolled beam girders .
facilities certified in the bridge categories must have aisc quality certification program endorsement f if fracture critical members are indicated on the plans .
structural steel shall be fabricated erected welded and painted in accordance with these specifications .
a .
shop plans shop plans will be required for all structural steel and miscellaneous metal parts for structures .
shop plans for steel structures and structural steel components shall give full detailed dimensions and sizes of component parts of the structures and details of all miscellaneous parts such as pins nuts bolts drains etc .
where specific orientation of plates is required the direction of rolling of plates shall be shown .
shop plans shall identify the material type and grade for each piece of structural steel .
each drawing shall be completely titled according to the contract plans including structure number project number and county .
each drawing shall pertain to only one structure .
the contractor is responsible for the shop drawings satisfying contract requirements regardless of any approval by the engineer .
unless otherwise specified in the plans the contractor shall submit shop plans in accordance with the following prior to fabrication the contractor shall submit shop plans to the department for the departments review and approval .
the contractor shall send an email with the shop num steel structures page num plans attached as a pdf to the project engineer and office of bridge design .
upon request the project engineer will provide the contractor the appropriate email addresses .
the contractor shall not begin fabrication prior to the departments review and final approval of shop plans .
within num calendar days of receiving the initial shop plans the office of bridge design will send a response to the contractor and submitter with the departments final approval or one reviewed copy of the shop plans with changes to the design marked .
the contractor will make the necessary changes if any to the shop plans .
the contractor will then send the project engineer and the office of bridge design an email with the final shop plans as a pdf for distribution .
b .
inspection num .
notice of beginning of work the contractor shall require the fabricator to give the engineer a minimum num calendar day notice prior to beginning work in the shop so inspection may be provided .
work shall not be done in the shop prior to notification .
num .
facilities for inspection facilities for the inspection of material and workmanship in the shop shall be furnished .
the inspector shall be allowed free access to the work .
num .
rejections the acceptance of any material or finished members by the inspector shall not preclude the subsequent rejection if found defective by the engineer .
rejected material and workmanship shall be replaced or repaired .
num .
identification of steel the contractor shall require the fabricator to demonstrate by a written procedure and by actual practice a method of material application and traceability visible at least through the fit up operation of the main stress carrying elements of a shipping piece .
the traceability method shall be capable of verifying proper material application as it relates to material specification designation .
heat number if required .
material test reports for special requirements where required .
c. welding and welding inspection shop and field welding and welding inspection of structural steel and steel railing shall be done in accordance with the latest edition of the ansiaashtoaws dnum or dnum whichever is applicable bridge welding code hereinafter referred to as the code .
magnetic particle testing shall be in accordance with the code except that only the yoke ac method shall be used .
in addition to the code requirements magnetic particle testing is required for fillet welds attaching diaphragm stiffeners to girder flanges .
when this detail is present on the plans magnetic particle testing shall be in accordance with the following requirements num of all such joints shall be tested full length .
the term joint as used above shall be interpreted as meaning the short fillet welds on each side of the stiffener connecting one end of the stiffener to either the top or bottom flange .
steel structures num page num approved welding procedure specifications wps are required for all welding .
wpss shall be based upon procedure qualification record pqr in accordance with the code .
the cost of the wps and pqr shall be incidental to the contract lump sum price for structural steel .
electroslag or electrogas welding processes shall not be used .
shear connectors shall be welded and inspected in accordance with the requirements of section num of the code .
shear connectors shall be end welded with automatically timed stud welding equipment .
d. welder qualification welders welding operators and tack welders hereafter the term welder shall refer to all three shall be qualified in accordance with the latest edition of the code .
welders except tack welders shall be qualified for an unlimited thickness groove weld in test position numg vertical .
if the project requires overhead welding qualification in position numg overhead will also be required .
tack welders shall be qualified in accordance with the code .
welder qualification shall be performed under the supervision of an aws certified welding inspector cwi qualified and certified in accordance with the provisions of aws qcnum .
in addition to these requirements shop welders shall be certified for the process and position that is to be used in fabrication .
the fabricator shall keep records of the process and position that all welders are qualified for .
inspectors performing nondestructive inspection other than visual inspection shall be qualified in accordance with the american society for nondestructive testing asnt recommended practice no .
sntctcnuma level ii .
test results shall be recorded on a code approved welder and welding operator qualification record signed by the inspector and submitted to the departments bridge construction engineer bce .
if approved the bce will issue a welder certification card to the welder .
welding will not be allowed without a valid welder certification card .
the bce will accept a code approved form for review on which the test date is not more than one year old .
if the test date is more than one year but not more than two years old the bce will also require evidence of continued employment as a welder or welding operator .
if the test date is more than two years old retesting will be required .
welder certification cards will remain valid indefinitely unless the welder is not engaged in the processes of welding for which he is qualified for a period exceeding six months .
if the welder does not properly prepare the joint as shown on wps or provide an acceptable weld the engineer may revoke the welder certification card wcc .
to regain a wcc for sddot administered projects the welder must provide a satisfactory retest .
e. shop assembling num .
cleaning surfaces surfaces of metal in contact shall be cleaned before assembling .
num steel structures page num when weathering steel is specified or used all structural steel surfaces of the superstructure shall be blast cleaned to a commercial finish in accordance with sspc spnum at the fabricator .
abrasives used for blast cleaning shall be clean dry sand steel shot mineral grit or manufactured grit .
fins tears slivers and burred or sharp edges shall be removed by grinding and then reblasted to achieve the specified finish .
num .
bolted connections all fastener holes shall be either punched or drilled .
in all cases hereafter drilling may be substituted for punching of full size holes subdrilling may be substituted for subpunching and holes may be drilled in assembly from the solid instead of being subpunched or subdrilled and reamed .
drilling in assembly shall be done with the material in the same configuration required for reaming .
holes punched or drilled full size shall be num inch larger than the nominal diameter of the fasteners .
subpunched holes for fastener diameters greater than num inch shall be num inch smaller than the nominal diameter of the fasteners .
for smaller fasteners the holes shall be subpunched to the fasteners nominal diameter .
subpunched or subdrilled holes shall be reamed to num inches larger than the nominal diameter of the fastener .
holes in carbon steel thicker than num inch or alloy steel thicker than num inch shall be drilled or subdrilled and reamed .
punching or subpunching shall not be permitted .
where reaming is not required holes in carbon steel up to num inch thick or in alloy steel up to num inch thick may be punched to their final specified size .
holes for main truss or arch connections field connections of skewed portals splices or rigidly framed end connections of main beams or girders and rigid frames carrying design loads shall be subpunched and reamed with members assembled in the shop .
for beams and girders this assembly may be made in the webhorizontal position except horizontally curved members shall be assembled with the web vertical unless webhorizontal assembly is approved by the engineer .
the assembly including the camber alignment and accuracy of subpunched holes and milltobear joints shall be approved by the engineer before reaming is commenced .
holes may be punched or drilled to their final specified size for field connections of secondary items including lateral bracing for girders truss chords and arch ribs hanger supports for laterals and utilities portal and sway bracing and cross frames or diaphragms that do not require reamed holes .
all holes for end field connections of floor beams shall be subpunched or subdrilled to a hardened steel template and corresponding holes in the members to which they connect shall be reamed with the members assembled .
stringer connections to floor beams may have holes punched or drilled to their final specified size .
reaming templates shall have hardened steel bushings and reference lines inscribed to locate the template on the members .
steel structures num page num computernumericallycontrolled cnc equipment may be used to produce full sized holes in components otherwise requiring reamed subsized holes subject to the engineers approval and the demonstrated accuracy of the cnc system .
accuracy must be verified by periodic check assemblies of components and the contractors quality control plan for the system must be acceptable to the engineer .
errors detected by check assemblies will require additional assemblies to define the extent of problems and subsequent cnc work may be restricted or prohibited until system corrections are accepted by the engineer .
a. punched holes the diameter of the die shall not exceed the diameter of the punch by more than num inch .
holes shall be cleanly cut without torn or ragged edges .
b .
accuracy of unreamed holes all subdrilled or subpunched holes shall be so accurate that after steel is assembled and before reaming a cylindrical pin num inch smaller in diameter than the punched hole may be inserted perpendicular to the face of the member without drifting through at least num of the holes in the connection or the pieces will be rejected .
holes punched or drilled to their final specified size without assembly shall be so accurate that fasteners may be installed without reaming or additional drilling .
c. reamed or drilled holes reaming and drilling shall be perpendicular to the faying contact surface of the connection .
drilling shall be done with twist drills and reaming with fluted or adjustable reamers .
where practical reaming shall be directed by mechanical means and done after all the components are assembled and firmly secured .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer assembled parts shall be taken apart for removal of cutting oil shavings and burrs caused by drilling and reaming .
d. accuracy of reamed and drilled holes where full size holes are reamed drilled from the solid or made by cnc equipment num of the holes in any group shall show no offset greater than num inch between adjacent thicknesses of metal .
the contractor shall be responsible for the accuracy of all holes regardless of tolerance in dimensions of rolled sections or fabricated members .
if the required accuracy can not be obtained otherwise holes shall be drilled with the members assembled .
e. assembly only the girder or beam sections involved in the reaming of a particular connection must be assembled at any one time .
the sections involved including all splice plates and filler plates shall be assembled and firmly drawn together with bolts before reaming .
a num inch or greater difference in plate thickness or member depths across a bolted splice shall be rectified with shims included during reaming match marked and shipped with the member .
the cost for additional shim plates required due to no fault of the department shall be borne by the contractor .
num steel structures page num f. disassembly after disassembly all burrs and shavings produced by the reaming operation shall be removed .
f. painting structures painting structures shall be in accordance with section num .
new structural steel shall have all paint including the finish coats of paint applied in the shop prior to shipment unless otherwise specified in the plans .
g. transportation handling storage and erection structural steel shall be loaded transported unloaded and stored without damaging the material .
material shall be stored on skids above the ground so the materials can be kept clean and drained .
girders and beams shall be placed upright and shored .
long members such as columns and chords shall be supported on skids properly spaced to prevent deflection .
high strength bolts shall be stored so they will be kept free from rust or foreign material .
girders shall not be placed until the supporting concrete including grout used to construct bearing pads has met the time and strength requirements of section num o .
forming operations for the deck shall not begin until all of the girders in a continuous unit have been erected and adjusted and required erection elevations taken .
num .
falsework the falsework shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num .
bearings and anchorages bridge bearings shall be set level in exact position and must have full and even bearing on the concrete .
elastomeric bearing pads shall set directly on the concrete .
cast iron steel or rolled steel bearings shall be bedded on the concrete with a single thickness sheet of preformed fabric bearing pad .
anchor bolts and anchor rods may be set in the concrete or the concrete blocked out and the bolts set later with grout .
when holes are blocked out they shall be approximately four inches in diameter to allow for horizontal adjustment of the bolts or rods .
grout shall be injected into the bottom of a clean dry hole with a grout pump .
grout shall be placed from the bottom up to eliminate air pockets and voids .
location of anchors and setting of rockers or rollers shall take into account any variation from the mean temperature at time of setting and anticipated lengthening of bottom chord or bottom flange due to dead load after setting .
at mean temperature or the temperature indicated in the plans and under dead load the rockers and rollers shall set vertical and the anchor bolts at expansion bearings shall be centered in their slots .
full and free movement of the superstructure at the movable bearings must not be restricted by improper setting or adjustment of bearings or anchor boltsrods and nuts .
bridge bearings shall not be placed on masonry bearing areas which are irregular or improperly formed .
steel structures num page num grout used to set anchor bolts and anchor rods and construct bearing pads shall conform to the requirements of section num num .
straightening bent material and cambering the straightening of plates angles other shapes and builtup members shall be done by methods that will not produce fracture or other injury .
distorted members shall be straightened by mechanical means or by the carefully planned and supervised application of a limited amount of localized heat .
heat straightening of astm anumanum steel members shall be done only under rigidly controlled procedures .
the maximum temperature of the astm anumanum steel shall not exceed numf nor shall the temperature exceed numf within num inches of weld metal .
heat shall not be applied directly on weld metal .
in all other steels the temperature of the heated area shall not exceed numf .
temperature shall be controlled by indicatingcrayons liquids or infrared thermometers .
parts to be heat straightened shall be free of stress and external forces except stress resulting from mechanical means used with the application of heat .
following the straightening of a bend or buckle the surface of the metal shall be inspected for evidence of fracture .
correction of errors in camber in welded beams and girders of astm anumanum material shall be done only under rigidly controlled procedures .
num .
field assembly the parts shall be accurately assembled and matchmarks shall be followed .
the material shall be handled so parts will not be bent broken or damaged .
hammering which injures or distorts the members shall not be done .
bearing surfaces and surfaces to be in permanent contact shall be cleaned before the members are assembled .
unless erected by the cantilever method truss spans shall be erected on blocking to give the trusses proper camber .
the blocking shall be left in place until the tension chord splices are fully bolted and all other truss connections pinned and bolted .
permanent bolts in splices of butt joints of compression members and permanent bolts in railings shall not be tightened until the span has been swung .
splices and field connections shall be faired up with a sufficient number of fitup bolts or erection pins to maintain dimensions and plumbness of the structure and allow free entry of the bolts used in the final connection .
girder erection data given in the plans shall be utilized to establish proper girder profile prior to final tightening to the bolts in the splices .
drifting during assembly to bring the parts into position shall not enlarge holes or distort the metal .
num .
highstrength bolts shall conform to section num and the following a. highstrength bolts shall be new astm anum bolts .
the highstrength bolts shall be type num for painted steel structures and type num for weathering steel bridges .
num steel structures page num b .
unless otherwise specified highstrength bolts require tightening using direct tension indicators .
the average load indicator gap shall be reduced to num inches while tightening .
the appropriate num inch feeler gauge shall be supplied .
c. fasteners shall be protected from accumulating dirt prior to installation .
d. high strength fasteners shall be subjected to a rotationalcapacity test in accordance with sd num. e. a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or other acceptable bolt tension indicating device may be furnished by the department at each job site during bolt installation .
the contractor shall notify the department a minimum of num calendar days prior to installing bolts .
num .
connections using high strength bolts girder splices and other structural joints utilizing high strength bolts in frictiontype connections shall use direct tension indicators .
a .
direct tension indicator protrusions shall bear against a hardened surface .
the direct tension indicators shall be capable of indicating the required bolt tension when the measured gap between the direct tension indicator and the surface against which the protrusions bear is reduced to that specified .
the direct tension indicator shall be specifically marked to identify the type of bolt for which it is to be used .
a different marking shall be used for astm anum bolts than for astm anum bolts .
direct tension indicators shall be new and unused .
b. bolt lengths shall be determined as shown in the following table num bolt length bolt size inches add to gripnum to determine bolt length inches num num num num num num num num num num num grip is thickness of material to be connected exclusive of washers .
for each flat washer add num inch to the grip .
for each bevel washer add num inch to the grip .
for each direct tension indicator add num inch to the grip .
irregular lengths shall be adjusted to the next longer num inch increment .
c. bolted parts shall fit solidly together when assembled and shall not be separated by gaskets or other interposed compressible material .
steel structures num page num when assembled all joint surfaces including those adjacent to the bolt heads nuts or washers shall be free of scale burrs dirt other foreign material and defects that would prevent solid seating of parts .
tight mill scale does not apply .
in girder splices bolted splices and other frictiontype connections all contact surfaces shall be free of oil paint lacquer and other coatings except as specified in section num b.num .
when weathering steel is specified or used all faying surfaces of connections shall be blast cleaned to a nearwhite finish in accordance with sspc spnum immediately prior to assembling connections in the field .
d. all fasteners shall have a hardened washer under the element turned in tightening .
for installations utilizing astm anum bolts where the steel work comprising the grip has a specified yield strength less than num ksi special requirements for hardened washers will be noted on the contract .
when the outer face of the bolted parts has a slope of more than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis a smooth hardened beveled washer shall be used to compensate for the lack of parallelism .
in the normal installation the direct tension indicator shall be placed on the bolt with the protrusions bearing against the underside of the bolt head .
for this type installation the nut is the turned element and the hardened washer will be placed between the steelwork and the nut .
if required due to bolt entering and wrench operation clearances it will be permissible to use the bolt head as the turned element .
in this type installation a hardened washer shall be placed under the bolt head and the direct tension indicator placed on the bolt with its protrusions bearing against the hardened washer .
in those installations where inspection of the bolt head is too difficult it will be permissible to place the direct tension indicator at the nut end .
the direct tension indicator shall be placed on the bolt with protrusions facing toward the nut .
a hardened washer is then placed on the bolt against the protrusions and the nut is installed .
with this type installation the nut is the turned element .
the surface contacting the protrusions of a direct tension indicator shall not turn during the tightening operation .
for those type installations where the direct tension indicator is used adjacent to a hardened round washer some slight movement of the hardened round washer is acceptable .
on bolt installations where beveled washers are used or galvanized bolts are specified or slotted or oversize holes are used special requirements for hardened round washers and direct tension indicators must be observed as provided in the contract .
num steel structures page num e. all bolts in a joint shall be tightened to reduce the gap between the washer face of the bolt head and the face of the direct tension indicator .
if the direct tension indicator is installed nearest to the turned element between the face of the direct tension indicator and the hardened round washer the average gap shall conform to that specified in section num g.num.b .
when the average gap is equal to or less than that specified in section num g.num.b the minimum required fastener tension shall be assumed satisfied unless the engineer determines additional verification is required .
a sufficient number of bolts shall first be placed in the joint and snugged to insure that all faying surfaces are in firm contact prior to tightening .
snug tight is defined as the tightness attained by a few impacts of an impact wrench or the full effort of a man using an ordinary wrench .
bolts shall be placed in any remaining holes and snugged tight as erection bolts or pins are removed .
all bolts in the joint shall then be tightened progressing systematically from the center most rigid part of the joint to its free edges .
when tightening the element not turned shall be held with a hand wrench to prevent rotation .
the gap between the bolt head and the face of the direct tension indicator is reduced while tensioning due to the bolt clamping force which flattens the washer protrusions .
when tightening complete closure of the gap around the circumference should be avoided to prevent over tightening the bolt .
the gap may not be uniform around the circumference of the direct tension indicator as the wrench may pull the bolt off center in the hole resulting in nonuniform compression of the protrusions .
when nonuniform gap exists the average gap criteria is satisfied if the gap measured at several points around the circumference shows num of the measurements to be equal to or less than the value specified in section num g.num.b .
if there is no gap at only one point on the circumference the bolt is properly tightened and no further tightening shall be attempted .
impact wrenches shall be of adequate capacity to perform the required tightening of each bolt in approximately num seconds .
astm anum bolts shall be tightened with an electric or hydraulic wrench .
the contractor shall check the gap on all bolts to assure that the completed joint meets the requirements of this specification .
a metal feeler gauge capable of probing between adjacent protrusions of the direct tension indicator shall be supplied by the contractor .
the contractor shall supply the engineer with an identical gauge for inspection .
after all bolts in a joint have been tightened the contractor shall return to the first bolts tightened to assure that they have not loosened .
lost tension may be restored by tightening so that the gap is slightly less than originally measured .
steel structures num page num f. in order to determine acceptability of direct tension indicators the engineer shall num sample and test the direct tension indicators in accordance with sd num .
the cost for the bolts and direct tension indicators used for field verification shall be incidental to the cost for the structural steel .
num have full opportunity to witness installation of bolted connections and shall periodically observe the installation and tightening operation to ensure that proper procedures are being adhered to .
num determine that all bolts have been tightened upon completion of a bolted joint .
a minimum of num but not less than four bolts in each joint shall be inspected with a metal feeler gauge .
if all gaps checked are within the allowable distance described the joint shall be accepted as properly tightened .
if gaps checked are in excess of that specified the contractor shall reinspect and retighten each bolt in the joint as required and resubmit the joint for inspection .
the metal feeler gauge shall be used as a no go inspection tool by inserting the tapered nose of the gauge into the openings between protrusions .
if the gauge does not reach the shaft of the bolt but a gap is evident the installation is acceptable .
g. the turnofnut method for bolt tightening may be used when specified in the plans .
when the turnofnut installation method is specified hardened washers are not required except as specified in section num g.num.d .
a sufficient number of bolts shall first be placed in the joint and snugged to insure that all faying surfaces are in firm contact prior to tightening .
snug tight is defined as the tightness attained by a few impacts of an impact wrench or the full effort of a man using an ordinary wrench .
bolts shall be placed in any remaining holes and snugged tight as erection bolts or pins are removed .
all bolts in the joint shall then be tightened the amount shown in table num progressing systematically from the center most rigid part of the joint to its free edges .
when tightening the element not turned shall be held with a hand wrench to prevent rotation .
num steel structures page num table num nut rotation from snugged conditionnum geometry of outer faces of bolted parts bolt length measured from underside of head to end of bolt both faces normal to bolt axis one face normal to bolt axis and other face sloped not more than num bevel washer not used both faces sloped not more than num from normal to bolt axis bevel washers not used up to and including num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diametersnum num turn num turn num turn num nut rotation is relative to bolt regardless of the element nut or bolt being turned .
for bolts installed by num turn and less the tolerance is plus or minus num degrees for bolts installed by num turn and more the tolerance is plus or minus num degrees .
num applicable only to connections in which all material within grip of the bolt is steel .
num no research work has been performed by the research council riveted and bolted structural joints to establish the turnofnut procedure when bolt lengths exceed num diameters .
therefore the required rotation must be determined by actual tests in a suitable tension device simulating the actual conditions .
num .
pin connections pilot and driving nuts shall be used in driving pins .
they shall be furnished by the contractor without charge to the department .
pins shall be driven so the members will take full bearing on them .
pin nuts shall be screwed up tight and the threads burred at the face of the nut with a pointed tool .
num .
misfits when approved by the departments bridge construction engineer the correction of minor misfits involving harmless amounts of reaming or grinding will be considered a legitimate part of the erection .
any error in the shop fabrication or deformation resulting from handling and transportation which prevents the proper assembling and fitting of parts by the moderate use of drift pins or by a moderate amount of reaming or grinding shall be reported immediately to the engineer .
the engineers approval of the method of correction shall be obtained .
the correction shall be made in the engineers presence .
the contractor shall be responsible for all misfits errors and injuries and shall make the necessary corrections and replacements .
steel structures num page num num method of measurement field measurement of structural steel will not be made .
adjustment in the contract price will not be made if the weight furnished is more or less than the estimated weight .
the weights of rolled shapes slabs and plates will be computed on the basis of their nominal weights and dimensions .
the weight will be computed on the following basis unit weights of material in pounds per cubic foot cast iron num copper sheet num lead sheet num steel cast copper bearing silicone nickel or stainless num wrought iron num zinc num bronze or copperalloy bearing plates num the quantities of the various other pay items which constitute the completed and accepted structure will be measured for payment according to the plans and specifications .
num basis of payment structural steel will be paid for at the contract lump sum price unless otherwise specified in the plans .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing fabricating delivery erecting ready for use for the required nondestructive weld testing by radiographing magnetic particle ultrasonic inspection or other specified alternate test procedures .
payment shall also include painting of the structural steel unless a separate bridge painting bid item is included in the contract .
the cost of the required shear studs bolts nuts washers and direct tension indicators shall be incidental to the cost of the structural steel .
if changes in the work which vary the weight of steel to be furnished are ordered the payment will be adjusted as follows the value per pound of the increase or decrease in the weight of structural steel involved in the change shall be determined by dividing the contract lump sum amount by the estimate of weight shown on the plans .
the overall contract payment will be the contract amount plus or minus the value of the steel involved in the change .
the accepted quantities will be paid for at contract unit price .
num steel structures page num this page intentionally left blank shop painting num page num num description this work consists of shop cleaning metal surfaces and shop application of the specified coating system .
num materials coatings including primer intermediate if used finish and field repair coats shall all be from the same manufacturer and shall be one of the systems from the departments approved product list for shop paint new construction .
num construction requirements a .
general the coatings shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
a written copy of the manufacturers recommendations including product data sheet shall be furnished to the department prior to painting .
the recommendations shall indicate the recommended minimum and maximum dry film thickness dft for each coating layer of the system mixing and thinning directions recommended spray nozzles and pressures minimum drying time maximum time to recoat cure time based on application temperature maximum coating application temperature and the recommended procedures for coating galvanized bearings bolts nuts and washers .
coatings shall be shipped from the manufacturer with a date stamp to indicate expiration .
coatings outside of the expiration window shall not be used .
whenever the manufacturers recommendations are more stringent than the provisions of this section the manufacturers recommendations shall apply .
coatings shall not be applied when the surface temperature is below numf or above numf when the air is misty when the humidity exceeds num when the surface temperature is less than numf above the dew point or when conditions are otherwise unsatisfactory .
coatings shall not be applied when the metal is hot enough to cause the paint to blister or produce a porous paint film .
coatings shall not be applied on damp or frosted surfaces .
coatings applied under cover in damp or cold weather shall remain under cover until dry or until weather conditions are suitable .
coatings shall be applied in a uniform even coat and shall be worked into all corners and crevices .
coatings shall be applied with approved equipment .
on surfaces which are otherwise inaccessible the coating may be applied with sheepskin daubers .
coatings that do not meet the requirements of this section shall be removed .
the metal shall be reblasted cleaned and recoated at no expense to the department .
during coating application scaffolding or other safe devices shall be provided to permit inspection of the steel .
the contractor shall provide protective devices as necessary to prevent damage to the work and to other property or persons from all cleaning and painting operations .
num shop painting page num paint or paint stains that result in an unsightly appearance on surfaces not designated to be painted shall be removed or obliterated by the contractor at the contractors expense .
b .
coating new structures num .
surface preparation surfaces to be coated shall be abrasive blast cleaned to a near white finish in accordance with sspc sp num .
abrasives used for blast cleaning shall be steel shot mineral grit or manufactured grit and shall have a gradation that provides a uniform steel surface profile of num to num mils .
air compressors used for surface preparation shall have a functioning moisture separator to reduce steel surface contamination .
fins tears slivers and burred or sharp edges shall be removed by grinding and the area reblasted to provide the profile specified .
blast residue shall be removed from steel surfaces with a commercial grade vacuum cleaner equipped with a brush type cleaning tool or by double blowing .
steel shall be kept dust free and dry .
steel shall be primed within num hours after cleaning .
num .
mixing and thinning paint the coating shall be thoroughly mixed so the pigment is completely in suspension and the consistency is uniform .
the coating shall be strained over a sieve having openings no larger than a num sieve .
after straining the mixed coating shall be kept under continuous agitation until application is completed .
when thinning is necessary for proper application it shall be accomplished in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
coating application the prime coat the intermediate coat if used and the finish coat shall be applied in the shop except where specified otherwise .
after the surface has been satisfactorily cleaned the primer shall be applied producing a uniform even coating bonded with the metal .
the finish coat shall not be applied until the prime and intermediate coats if used have been determined acceptable by the department .
the minimum curing time between coats shall be as recommended by the manufacturer .
coatings shall be applied in accordance with sspc panum .
surfaces to be coated include contact surfaces of bolted field splices .
the dry film thickness dft of the prime coat intermediate coat if used and top coat shall meet the manufacturers recommendations .
the contact or faying surfaces of bolted field splices bolted shop splices and any other bolted faying surface shall be given a prime coat only and masked during subsequent coating operations .
dft shall be measured in accordance with sspc pa num .
when measuring dft in accordance with sspc pa num the areas to be measured shall be set up to ensure the total dft primer intermediate if used and top coat is not less than the dft recommended shop painting num page num by the manufacturer on the following surfaces top of the bottom flange top of horizontal stiffeners and top surfaces of diaphragms .
bolted shop connections and bolted cross frames or diaphragms shall be removed and disassembled prior to the abrasive blasting and coating of the girders .
the removed parts shall be abrasive blasted and primed separately allowed to dry reassembled and the bolts fully tightened .
galvanized components including nuts bolts and washers shall be cleaned after assembly with a mineral spirit solvent followed by a hot water rinse and thorough drying given a prime coat an intermediate coat if used and then coated with the finish coat .
to avoid runs bubbles and sags each coat shall be applied in multiple passes of the spray gun mist coat with each pass separated by several minutes .
if applying a polyurethane top coat over an inorganic zinc primer a mist coat is required .
where excessive coating thickness produces mud cracking the coating shall be scraped back to soundly bonded coating and the area recoated .
areas of deficient primer thickness shall be thoroughly cleaned with power washing equipment to remove all dirt .
the area shall then be wire brushed vacuumed and recoated .
each member shall have an erection mark for field identification .
a diagram shall be furnished showing the erection marks .
the mark shall not be visible after erection .
num .
handling and shipping material shall not be loaded for shipment until the shop coating has been determined acceptable by the department .
extreme care shall be exercised in handling the steel in the shop during shipment during erection and during subsequent construction of the bridge to prevent damage to the coating .
overhang brackets shall be padded where they bear on the web .
deck formwork shall be mortar tight to prevent leakage onto the girders .
the coating shall be protected from all chains slings hooks and other apparatus used to lift or turn the coated steel .
during shipment padding shall be used to prevent damage from rubbing and other causes .
diaphragms and other parts shall be padded and packed to prevent damage .
the steel shall be stored off the ground on padded supports to prevent damage .
girders shall be stored so they can not fall on or touch one another .
the steel shall not be shipped until the contractor has the necessary equipment for handling and storing the steel .
the contractors proposed methods for handling and storing the steel will be discussed at the preconstruction meeting .
num .
field repair all field repairs shall be made in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
field repairs shall consist of application of a prime coat an intermediate coat if used and a finish coat .
paint used for field repairs shall be the same paint system as the paint applied in the shop .
field repair shall be accomplished after the deck is poured and falsework removed and includes painting galvanized bolts primed areas of splice plates diaphragm connections and other num shop painting page num areas requiring touch up or finish painting .
faying surfaces of bolted connections including splice plates shall be coated only with the primer .
the structural steel shall have oil and grease removed by wiping with clean rags soaked in an appropriate solvent in accordance with sspc spnum .
the steel surfaces shall then be power tool cleaned in accordance with sspc spnum to provide a rust scale free surface .
abrasive blast cleaning as per sspc spnum shall be required on areas where heavy rusting is causing rusting scale .
after satisfactory surface preparation has been completed the steel shall be given a prime coat .
after the prime coat has properly cured an intermediate coat if used shall be applied .
after the intermediate coat if used has properly cured a finish coat shall be applied .
the dft of the prime coat intermediate coat if used and top coat shall meet the manufacturers recommendations .
coatings shall be applied in accordance with sspc panum .
dft shall be measured in accordance with sspc panum .
the prime coat intermediate coat if used and finish coat may be applied by spraying brushing or rolling as determined by manufacturers recommendations .
the contact or faying surfaces of bolted field splices bolted shop splices and any other bolted faying surface shall be given a prime coat only .
c. repainting existing structures repainting existing structures shall conform to section num .
num method of measurement measurement for the item bridge painting will not be made .
num basis of payment bridge painting will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
payment will be full compensation for surface preparation furnishing and applying the coating field repair of damaged or uncoated areas and other incidentals required .
bridge field painting repainting num and paint residue containment page num num description this work consists of the removal containment and disposal of existing paint on steel surfaces preparing the steel surfaces and the field paintingrepainting of steel surfaces .
num materials a. solvent cleaners shall be as recommended by the paint manufacturer .
b .
paint system coatings including primer top coat and field repair coats shall be from the same manufacturer and unless otherwise specified shall be one of the systems from the departments approved products list for bridge field paint .
the contractor shall supply the engineer with a copy of the manufacturers data sheets prior to painting .
c. paint color when only spot painting the work affected areas the contractor shall obtain a paint chip sample from the structure and submit the structure sample and a paint chip from the paint supplier to the office of bridge design for approval .
prime coat the prime coat color shall sharply contrast with the top coat as approved by the engineer .
intermediate coat if used the intermediate coat if used color shall sharply contrast with the top coat as approved by the engineer .
top coat the color shall match existing paint unless otherwise specified .
num construction requirements a .
surface preparation and painting unless otherwise specified in the plan notes the following requirements shall apply to field painting and bridge repainting class i and class ii as identified in the plans .
num .
solvent cleaning the affected areas shall be visually inspected for contamination of oils and greases prior to removal of the existing paint .
when contamination is found on any of the areas that will be painted the affected area shall be cleaned with solvent soaked rags and dried with clean rags .
num .
surface preparation a .
new steel to be field painted when new steel is to be field painted the steel surfaces to be painted shall be prepared in accordance with the following num following any solvent cleaning required surfaces to be coated shall be abrasive blast cleaned to a condition equivalent to sspc spnum commercial blast cleaning .
num bridge field painting repainting and paint residue containment page num abrasive for blast cleaning shall be either steel shot mineral grit or manufactured grit and shall have a gradation that provides a uniform steel surface profile .
the bare steel shall be prepared to have a surface profile of num mil minimum and num mils maximum prior to application of the prime coat .
the surface profile obtained on the prepared surface will be verified by astm specification dnum standard test method field measurements of surface profile of blast cleaned steel method a b or c. if the surface profile can not be maintained below the maximum limit specified the final coating thickness shall be increased to ensure that the minimum coating thickness is achieved over the entire area to be painted .
num fins tears slivers and burred or sharp edges shall be removed by grinding and the area reblasted to provide the profile specified .
num blast residue shall be removed from the steel surfaces with a commercial grade vacuum cleaner equipped with a brush type cleaning tool or by two applications of blowing with compressed air .
num steel surfaces shall be kept clean dust free and dry .
steel surfaces shall be primed within num hours of abrasive blast cleaning .
b. bridge repainting class i when bridge repainting class i is specified the steel surfaces to be painted shall be prepared in accordance with the following num following any required solvent cleaning all loose rust and paint shall be removed from the work affected areas by power tool cleaning .
the entire surface to be painted shall be prepared to a condition equivalent to sspc standard spnum power tool cleaning .
all power tools shall be shrouded at the cleaning head and equipped with a vacuum collection system to contain the paint residue .
the power tool cleaning shall not remove any base metal .
num contain and collect all existing paint residue in accordance with section num b. c. bridge repainting class ii when bridge repainting class ii is specified the steel surfaces to be painted shall be prepared in accordance with the following num following any required solvent cleaning abrasive blast clean the steel surfaces to remove all old paint corrosion and mill scale .
to minimize the potential for the abrasive blasting media and paint residue being a hazardous material the abrasive blasting process shall utilize a thoroughly mixed blend of abrasive blasting media and blastox or other approved product .
the blastox shall be added in the amount of num by weight .
the abrasive media used in the abrasive blasting process shall be a silica free abrasive and shall be of a type and size in which the formation of dust during the abrasive blasting process is minimized .
the entire surface to be painted shall be cleaned to a condition equivalent to the sspc standard spnum commercial blast cleaning .
bridge field painting repainting num and paint residue containment page num num the bare steel shall be prepared to have a surface profile of num mil minimum and num mils maximum prior to application of the prime coat .
the surface profile obtained on the prepared surface will be verified by astm specification dnum standard test method field measurements of surface profile of blast cleaned steel method a b or c. if the surface profile can not be maintained below the maximum limit specified the final coating thickness shall be increased to ensure that the minimum coating thickness is achieved over the entire area to be painted .
num the cleaned areas shall be thoroughly dry before priming .
num do not clean a larger area than can be prepared and primed within num hour period .
if the prepared area is not primed within the num hours the area shall have the blast cleaning repeated .
num contain and collect all of the existing paint residue and abrasive blasting media according to section num b .
num .
mixing of paint the paint shall be thoroughly mixed with a power mixer in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations before being applied and the pigments shall be kept in suspension .
the manufacturers recommended pot life times shall not be exceeded .
num .
paint application after the specified surface preparation the paint shall be applied according to the following requirements a .
the coating thickness shall meet the dry film thickness dft recommended by the manufacturer .
dft shall be measured in accordance with sspc pa num. b .
coatings shall be applied in accordance with sspc panum the manufacturers written recommendations or the requirements as herein specified whichever is more stringent .
a copy of the manufacturers written instructions shall be given to the engineer prior to painting .
c. remove all overspray drips and spills at no cost to the department .
d. apply paint only when the surface to be coated is and remains at least numf above the dew point .
the relative humidity shall be less than num during paint application .
apply paint only when the coating materials substrate and air temperature are between numf and numf .
coatings shall not be applied on damp or frosted surfaces .
coatings applied under cover in damp or cold weather shall remain under cover until dry or until weather conditions are suitable .
coatings shall not be applied when the metal is hot enough to cause the paint to blister or produce a porous paint film .
e. do not use thinners unless absolutely necessary for paint application .
do not exceed the manufacturers recommendations with regard to quantity and type of num bridge field painting repainting and paint residue containment page num thinner .
use thinners only according to the manufacturers written instructions and under the engineers supervision .
f. using a brush stripe coat the edges and corners of all metal work rivet heads bolts nuts other hardware and fasteners and all individual members bars shapes and plates prior to the application of the primer intermediate if used and top coats .
g. the contractor shall protect pedestrian vehicular watercraft and other traffic upon or underneath the structure and all portions of the structure against damage or disfigurement by paint overspray .
when painting over waterways the contractor shall implement such controls as are necessary to avoid paint spills into the water or depositing paint films on the water during spraying operations .
b .
paint residue containment collection and storage num .
bridge repainting class i the existing paint residue on the surfaces to be painted shall be contained collected and stored according to the plan notes and the following requirements a .
all paint residue shall be placed in a num gallon drum after collection .
the num gallon drum shall be supplied by the contractor and shall become the property of the department .
if the num gallon drum is not new it shall not have previously contained any petroleum products and must meet the epa definition of a reusable container .
all paint removal residue collection and temporary storage shall be performed by the contractor .
disposal will be performed by the department .
b .
when bridge repainting class i is specified it is anticipated that less than num pounds of paint residue will be produced .
therefore the waste will not require sampling testing and disposal as a hazardous waste .
the contractor must collect and weigh all paint residue to document that less than num pounds of waste material was produced .
if more than num pounds of waste material is produced the office of bridge design shall be contacted immediately for further instructions .
c. the contractor shall not place materials or trash other than paint residue rags containing solvent or paint residue and blasting media in the barrels .
d. the contractor is responsible for complying with all regulations and for taking all necessary measures and precautions to ensure worker safety for work involving lead particles .
num .
bridge repainting class ii the existing paint residue on the work affected areas shall be contained collected and stored according to the plan notes and the following requirements bridge field painting repainting num and paint residue containment page num a .
the contractor shall contain collect and temporarily store all paint residue and blasting media .
the material shall then be loaded transported to the location specified in the plans and unloaded by the contractor .
b .
the contractor shall use best management practices as defined by the environmental protection agency to contain and collect all paint residue removed from the steel surfaces and all abrasives used in blast cleaning .
containment and collection of the abrasives used in blast cleaning is required even when not mixed with paint residue .
c. when bridge repainting class ii is specified it is anticipated that more than num pounds of paint residue and blasting residue will be produced .
therefore the residue material shall be sampled and tested to determine if it is a hazardous waste .
when the first num gallon drum is filled the engineer will collect a sample and immediately submit the sample to the departments bridge construction engineer .
d. the contractor shall submit a written containment plan to the engineer at the preconstruction meeting .
the engineer will forward the proposed containment plan to the office of bridge design for review and approval .
possible containment methods include draped collectors suspended from the structure tarps laid on the ground below the structure when not near a waterway or in an urban environment complete enclosures and shrouded power tools with vacuum containment .
e. if a draped collector is used it shall conform to the following minimum requirements num the collector shall be suspended from the structure and shall extend a minimum of num feet in all directions than the area in which work is underway .
num the collector shall be positioned in a manner acceptable to the engineer and such that no loss of blast cleaningpaint residue occurs .
num the collector shall be emptied at least once a day and shall not remain in place overnight without being emptied .
f. blast cleaning and other operations shall not be performed when the direction and velocity of the wind is such that residue falls outside the limits of the collector .
g. the contractors containment plan shall outline the procedures that will be followed to empty the collector and prevent spilling of the contents .
h. paint residue including abrasive blasting residue shall be placed in num gallon drums after collection .
the num gallon drums shall be supplied by the contractor and shall become the property of the department .
if the num gallon drums are not num bridge field painting repainting and paint residue containment page num new the drums shall not have previously contained petroleum products .
the drums shall meet the epa definition of a reusable container .
i .
only paint residue blasting media and solvent soaked rags are allowed to be placed in the containment drums .
these drums shall not be used for other garbage or waste .
j .
the num gallon drums shall be filled properly sealed temporarily stored loaded hauled to the location specified in the plans and unloaded by the contractor .
temporary storage of the material on the site shall be at a location where there is no possibility of a spill entering any waterway .
k. until test results are obtained to substantiate that the material is not hazardous each num gallon drum shall be marked with the words hazardous waste and shall be dated with the date on which the drum was filled .
this shall be done by using a permanent waterproof marker .
l. disposal of the barrels containing the paint residue and blasting media will be the responsibility of the department .
m. if the contractor elects to use containers other than num gallon drums to hold paint residue the contractor shall be responsible for all testing and disposal at a permitted regional landfill .
the contractor shall be responsible for compliance of laws and regulations regarding storage handling and shipping .
the containers shall be watertight and have a lid .
the contractor shall mark the containers with the words hazardous waste .
containers shall be stored in a locked enclosure .
copies of all tests shipping and disposal documents shall be provided to the office of bridge design .
n. the contractor is responsible for complying with all regulations and for taking all of the necessary measures to ensure worker safety for work involving lead particles .
c. inspection all materials and work shall be subject to inspection by the department .
the contractor shall provide the engineer adequate and safe access to the work area including ladders and scaffolding at all times .
when bridge repainting class ii is specified the contractor shall blast a test area of a girder web to sspc standard spnum prior to the start of the abrasive blast cleaning operations .
this test area shall be full depth of the web and shall be three feet in length .
using the visual and profile standards the engineer will inspect the area to determine when adequate surface preparation has been achieved .
after adequate surface preparation has been achieved this area shall be preserved for reference purposes during the remainder of the abrasive blast cleaning operation .
if deterioration of this area occurs due to weathering dampness or other conditions a new area shall be prepared at no additional cost to the department .
bridge field painting repainting num and paint residue containment page num num method of measurement measurement for the items field painting bridge repainting and paint residue containment will not be made .
num basis of payment a. bridge repainting class i and bridge repainting class num will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
payment will be full compensation for surface preparation furnishing and applying the coating system repair of damaged areas cleanup providing inspection access and all incidentals to satisfactorily complete the work .
b .
paint residue containment will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
payment will be full compensation for all direct and incidental costs to remove contain and temporarily store paint residue .
when specified in the plan notes payment will also be full compensation for loading the residue transporting the residue to the location specified and unloading the residue .
num bridge field painting repainting and paint residue containment page num this page intentionally left blank structure excavation num page num num description this work consists of the necessary foundation excavation for box culverts and bridges .
num materials not specified num construction requirements a .
depth of excavation the elevations of the bottoms of footings shown on the plans are approximate and the engineer may order in writing such changes in elevations of footings as necessary .
b .
treatment of foundation rock or other hard foundation material shall be free of loose material cleaned and cut to a firm surface .
the surface may be level stepped or serrated as approved by the engineer .
where concrete is placed on an excavated surface other than rock special care shall be taken not to disturb the bottom of the excavation .
concrete shall not be placed until the depth of excavation has been checked and the suitability of the foundation material approved .
foundation excavation may be trimmed to the exact size of the footing and the footing forms omitted when approved by the engineer .
removal of unstable material below the bedding grade of box culverts shall be performed as set forth in section num .
where foundation piles are used the excavation of each foundation bed shall be completed before the piles are driven .
after the pile driving is completed loose and displaced material shall be removed or compacted to a smooth solid bed at or below plan elevation .
c. disposal of excavation material the excavated material shall be used for backfill and embankment or disposed of as directed .
excavated material shall not be placed in stream beds .
d. preservation of channels excavation shall not be made outside of caissons cribs cofferdams steel piling or sheeting and the natural stream bed adjacent to the structure shall not be disturbed .
if any excavation or dredging is done at the site of the structure before caissons cribs or cofferdams are in place the contractor shall backfill all excavation to the original ground surface or stream bed with satisfactory material after the foundation is in place .
e. cofferdams and cribs cofferdams and cribs shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num structure excavation page num f. inspection the engineer shall be notified as soon as each excavation is completed .
concrete or piling shall not be placed until the engineer determines that the depth and size of the excavation and the foundation material are acceptable .
g. backfill above bedding grade material used for backfill shall be of an acceptable quality and shall be free from large or frozen lumps wood and other extraneous material .
spaces not occupied by abutments piers or other permanent work shall be backfilled to match the surface of the surrounding ground with a sufficient allowance for settlement .
backfill shall be satisfactorily compacted in horizontal layers not to exceed num inches loose depth .
the slope bounding the excavation for abutments and wingwalls shall be stepped or roughened to prevent wedge action of the backfill against the concrete .
backfill placed around box culverts columns piers and walls shall be deposited equally on both sides of the structure .
backfill shall be compacted in accordance with section num .
num method of measurement excavation for drilledin foundations will be measured as set forth on the plans .
the removal of water will not be considered a measurable item nor will allowance be made for duplication sloughed material or material removed due to mud flows .
the plan shown quantity will be the quantity accepted for payment .
field measurements for structure excavation quantities will not be made unless the department determines that conditions warrant such measurement .
structure excavation will be measured to the nearest cubic yard .
a .
structure excavation bridge the volume of an old structure or the volume of excavation performed as part of the removal of an old structure will be included in the pay quantity of excavation for the new bridge .
the excavation allowed above the plan shown bedding grade for piers and abutments will be that volume bounded by vertical planes num inches outside of and parallel to the neat lines of the footings regardless of the volume of material actually excavated .
authorized excavation below the plan shown bedding grade will be that volume actually removed within the limits bounded by vertical planes num inches outside of and parallel to the neat lines of the footings .
when foundation piles are used no measurement will be made for excavation below the plan shown bedding grade unless the engineer orders the foundation lowered .
measurement will not be made for excavation necessary for foundation seals .
structure excavation num page num the plan shown line denoting the lower limit of unclassified excavation or the as constructed line in the event it is lower will be considered the upper limit for structure excavation with the following exceptions the existing ground line will be considered the upper limit for structure excavation if at the time of foundation excavation the existing ground line is lower than the plan shown line denoting the lower limit of unclassified excavation or a line denoting the lower limit of unclassified excavation is not shown on the plans .
b .
structure excavation box culvert when a box culvert is constructed at or above the specified flow line the plan shown quantity of structure excavation will be the pay quantity .
this quantity of excavation is equal to the theoretical volume of concrete below the box culvert flow line .
when the engineer orders the box culvert flow line lowered on construction the material excavated between the plan shown box culvert flow line and the as constructed box culvert flow line will be measured for payment as unclassified excavation unless it is unstable material and must be removed by a dragline backhoe or similar equipment in which case it will be measured as structure excavation .
c. structure excavation retaining wall measurement will not be made for structure excavation retaining wall .
plans quantity shall be used for payment .
d. structure excavation miscellaneous measurement will not be made for structure excavation miscellaneous .
plans quantity shall be used for payment .
num basis of payment payment for work under this item will be made at the contract unit price per cubic yard for structure excavation bridge structure excavation box culvert structure excavation retaining wall or structure excavation miscellaneous .
in the case of piers and abutments for bridges excavation ordered by the engineer below the plan shown bedding grade will be paid for in accordance with section num .
in the case of box culverts payment for excavation of unstable material which must be removed by means of a dragline backhoe or similar equipment will be as per section num .
work that is classed as unclassified excavation will be paid for at the contract unit price for unclassified excavation or as extra work when an item of unclassified excavation is not provided in the contract .
payment will be considered full compensation for furnishing materials labor equipment tools and incidentals including furnishing installing and removing any cofferdams cribs sheeting or other temporary works necessary to complete the work .
num structure excavation page num this page intentionally left blank box pipe and plate pipe culvert undercutting num page num num description this work consists of the removal of unstable material and rock either in ledge or boulder formation below the bedding grade of box pipe and plate pipe culverts and the backfilling of undercut areas .
num materials a. backfill material material for backfilling the undercut areas of pipe and plate pipe culverts shall consist of stable material free of organic matter and rock .
when specified in the plans or as required by the engineer the backfill material shall conform to that used for backfilling undercut areas of box culverts .
if backfill material conforming to that used for backfilling undercut areas of box culverts is not included in the plans but is required by the engineer the engineer will process a cco to provide for compensation to the contractor for the added cost of the changed material .
material for backfilling the undercut areas of box culverts shall conform to the following sieve passing num num inch num num inch num num num num num num num num if undercut depth exceeds num feet below the bottom of the structure and stable material is not encountered oversized rock material may be used up to the bottom of the undercut limits shown on the plans .
b. bedding material for precast concrete box culverts bedding material for precast concrete box culverts shall be sand or selected sandy soil conforming to the following sieve passing num inch num num num num c. extruded insulation board polystyrene extruded insulation board polystyrene shall conform to aashto mnum .
num construction requirements a .
general if the engineer determines field conditions warrant change the plan limits of the undercutting may be increased decreased or eliminated .
the width of undercutting for pipe culverts will be the outside diameter of the pipe plus num feet or the outside span of arch pipe plus num feet .
if the undercut material is disposed of the disposal shall be at locations acceptable to the engineer .
backfill shall be compacted in accordance with section num b.num.a specified density method .
backfill shall be compacted to num or greater of the maximum dry density in num box pipe and plate pipe culvert undercutting page num horizontal layers not to exceed num inches loose depth .
if the backfill material does not contain enough fines to allow for conventional density testing sd num or sd num the natural material will be compacted in the manner described in section num b.num.a for a num and anum soils .
compaction of anum and anum soils shall provide a firm unyielding surface satisfactory to the engineer .
b .
box culvert undercut dimensions shall be to the minimum dimensions shown on the plans unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
c. pipe culvert a moisturedensity test is required in the foundation soil under all rural mainline cross pipes prior to installation .
the foundation soil density will be in accordance with the specified density method .
the foundation soil will be improved by one of the following methods as directed by the engineer .
num .
scarifying the foundation soil to a depth of num to num inches and recompacting .
num .
undercutting the foundation soil and replacing or recompacting .
under this item of work the removal of unstable material ledge rock and boulder formation rock below the bedding grade of pipe culverts and the backfilling of undercut areas shall be performed .
pipe culverts placed on embankment soil in the fill and not on natural ground will not require preinstallation testing of the foundation soil provided that the fill area has been included in normal embankment testing zones .
the engineer may order undercutting of pipe not included in the plans .
d. extruded insulation board polystyrene no equipment will be allowed on the uncovered insulation board .
the backfill covering the insulation board shall be spread and compacted in such a manner that the equipment used shall be operated on a minimum of num inches of backfill material at all times .
num method of measurement a .
box culvert undercut undercutting box culverts will be measured by the cubic yard .
the upper limit will be the bedding grade of the box culvert .
the dimensions and lower limits will be as specified on the plans unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
b .
pipe and plate pipe culvert undercut undercutting pipe and plate pipe culverts will be measured by the cubic yard .
the upper limit will be the lower face of the pipe except the upper limit for pipe culverts to be installed on a class b bedding will be num foot below the lower face of the pipe .
the width length and lower limits will be as specified .
c. extruded insulation board polystyrene extruded insulation board polystyrene will be measured to the nearest square yard .
box pipe and plate pipe culvert undercutting num page num num basis of payment a .
box culvert undercut this work will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard under the item box culvert undercut .
the basis of payment will be for plans quantities unless additional undercutting is directed by the engineer .
when additional undercutting is required the adjusted quantity of undercutting will be paid for at the contract unit price regardless of the backfill material used .
payment will be full compensation for equipment labor tools and incidentals required for undercutting and for furnishing placing watering and compacting backfill material including bedding material when specified on the plans .
b .
pipe and plate pipe culvert undercut this work will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard under the item pipe culvert undercut .
all costs for undercutting pipe culverts including equipment labor tools and materials for furnishing placing watering and compacting backfill in place of excavated material shall be incidental to the contract unit price for pipe culvert undercut .
the quantities listed in the table of pipe culvert undercut are based on the undercut width specified above and a depth of num foot for all pipes num inches in diameter and greater .
when undercutting culverts is required at other locations or to a different depth than specified the adjusted quantity of undercutting will be paid for at the contract unit price .
undercutting pipe and plate pipe culverts will be paid for at the rate specified in the special provision for price schedule for miscellaneous items .
all costs for scarifying the foundation soil including equipment labor watering and compacting the scarified soil shall be incidental to the contract unit price per foot for pipe culvert installation .
c. extruded insulation board polystyrene extruded insulation board polystyrene will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment shall be full compensation for labor equipment and incidentals to furnish and install the extruded insulation board polystyrene .
num box pipe and plate pipe culvert undercutting page num this page intentionally left blank drainage fabric protection for cast in place num reinforced concrete box culverts page num num description this work consists of placement of drainage fabric protection around the outside of all cast in place reinforced concrete box culvert joints .
num materials drainage fabric drainage fabric shall conform to section num type a .
num construction requirements drainage fabric shall be placed entirely around each joint in the box culvert barrel .
the fabric shall be placed to provide a minimum of num num feet of fabric centered on the joint .
where required transverse joints in the fabric shall be overlapped a minimum of num feet .
during bottom slab construction the fabric shall be placed prior to concrete placement .
sufficient adhesive will be required along the edges of the fabric to hold it in place during backfilling .
num method of measurement separate measurement will not be made .
num basis of payment separate payment will not be made .
the cost of providing drainage fabric will be incidental to other contract items .
num drainage fabric protection for cast in place reinforced concrete box culverts page num this page intentionally left blank temporary works num page num num description this work consists of the design construction and subsequent removal of all temporary works including but not limited to falsework formwork cofferdams work berms and platforms temporary traffic and stream diversions and temporary retaining structures .
num materials not specified num construction requirements a .
design of temporary works the design of falsework formwork temporary retaining structures and other related temporary works is the responsibility of the contractor .
the design shall conform to the latest edition of the aashto guide design specification for bridge temporary works .
all temporary works in waters of the us are required to be covered in the corp of engineers num permit .
at the time of the preconstruction meeting the contractor shall submit documentation for all temporary works for the purpose of complying with the num permit requirements .
the documentation shall include at a minimum num .
a written description of the proposed temporary works including types of materials to be used how the temporary works will be installed removed and what portion if any will remain in place after construction num .
details showing approximate size and location of the temporary works .
details shall include at a minimum a plan view and a crosssection view of the temporary works .
details shall provide sufficient dimensions such that the approximate size of the temporary works and location of the temporary works from a known point is shown and num .
estimated quantities of all temporary fill material below the ordinary high water elevation .
if the temporary fill is to be placed in a wetland the estimated quantity shall be the amount of temporary fill below the ordinary high water elevation and the amount of wetland loss in acres .
if during the course of construction there is a need for additional temporary works the documentation shall be submitted to the engineer at that time .
the engineer will submit the documentation to the corp of engineers for approval .
construction of temporary works below the ordinary high water mark or in wetlands may not begin until corps of engineers approval is attained by the engineer .
b .
structure falsework falsework plans and design calculations for structures shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state of south dakota .
the contractor shall submit detailed and dimensioned falsework plans with full design calculations to the department for the departments review and approval .
falsework plans shall include a plan and elevation view and any details necessary for the department to check the design .
the falsework plan shall include a minimum num foot num temporary works page num walkway on both sides outside the edge of the concrete pour .
for concrete slab bridges the total dead load deflection shall not exceed num inch .
the contractor shall send an email with the falsework plans and design calculations attached as two separate pdfs to the project engineer and office of bridge design .
upon request the project engineer will provide the contractor the appropriate email addresses .
within num calendar days of receiving the initial falsework plans and design calculations the office of bridge design will send a response to the contractor with the departments final approval or one reviewed copy of the falsework plans and design calculations with changes to the design marked .
the contractor will make the necessary changes if any to the falsework plans and design calculations .
the contractor will then send the project engineer and the office of bridge design an email with the final approved falsework plans and design calculations as a pdf for distribution .
no falsework construction shall be done until the departments review has been made and all deficiencies have been addressed .
the review of the falsework plans by the department shall not relieve the contractor of any responsibility for safely and adequately designing and constructing falsework .
falsework shall be constructed in accordance with the reviewed falsework plans .
before placing any loads on the falsework the contractor shall provide the engineer written certification from the contractors professional engineer stating that the falsework has been assembled in conformance with the approved falsework plans .
if field changes are made during falsework construction new falsework plans prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state of south dakota shall be submitted to the project engineer and office of bridge design for review .
falsework construction affected by the change shall not continue until the change is approved and the contractor has submitted a revised written certification .
the engineer may refuse approval to proceed with other phases of the work if the falsework is determined to be unsafe or inadequate to properly support construction loads .
c. cofferdams cribs and shoring cofferdams cribs and shoring plans with design calculations shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state of south dakota .
the contractor shall submit detailed and dimensioned cofferdams cribs and shoring plans with full design calculations to the department for the departments review and approval .
cofferdams cribs and shoring plans shall include any details necessary for the department to check the design .
the contractor shall send an email with the cofferdams cribs and shoring plans and design calculations attached as two separate pdfs to the project engineer and office of bridge design .
upon request the project engineer will provide the contractor the appropriate email addresses .
within num calendar days of receiving the initial cofferdams cribs and shoring plans with design calculations the office of bridge design will send a response to the contractor with the departments final approval or one reviewed copy of the cofferdams cribs and shoring plans and design calculations with changes to the design marked .
the contractor will make the necessary changes if any to the cofferdams cribs and shoring plans and design calculations .
the contractor will then send the project engineer and the office of bridge design an email with the final approved cofferdams cribs and shoring plans and design calculations as a pdf for distribution .
no cofferdams cribs or shoring temporary works num page num construction shall be done until the departments review has been made and all deficiencies have been addressed .
the review of the cofferdams cribs and shoring plans by the department shall not relieve the contractor of any responsibility for safely and adequately designing and constructing cofferdams cribs and shoring .
cofferdams cribs and shoring for foundation construction shall be carried to adequate depths and heights be safely designed and constructed and be made watertight as necessary for the proper performance of the work .
when the bottom of the excavation is of sandy or porous material which will not permit the footing to be poured in the dry the excavation shall be sealed in accordance with section num d. the interior dimensions of cofferdams and cribs shall give sufficient clearance for the construction of forms inspection and to permit pumping outside of the forms .
cofferdams or cribs which are tilted or moved laterally during the process of sinking shall be righted reset or enlarged to provide the necessary clearance at the expense of the contractor .
cofferdams cribs and shoring shall be constructed to protect fresh concrete against damage from sudden rising of the stream and to prevent damage to the foundation by erosion .
timber or bracing that extends into the substructure concrete shall not be left in the cofferdams or cribs .
after completion of the substructure cofferdams cribs and shoring including all sheeting and bracing shall be removed without disturbing or otherwise damaging the finished concrete .
d. foundation seals a foundation seal shall not be used unless specified on the plans or approved by the engineer .
if the necessity for a foundation seal is due to inadequate or improper cofferdam construction the engineer may order the removal andor reconstruction of the cofferdam or permit the placing of a foundation seal at the expense of the contractor .
when a foundation seal is specified on the plans the construction of the foundation seal shall be in accordance with these specifications unless otherwise specified on the plans .
when no foundation seal is specified in the plans the contractor shall be responsible to design the foundation seal in accordance with the aashto guide design specifications for bridge temporary works .
foundation seal plans and design calculations shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state of south dakota .
the contractor shall submit detailed and dimensioned foundation seal plans with full design calculations to the department for the departments review and approval .
foundation seal plans shall include any details necessary for the department to check the design .
the contractor shall send an email with the foundation seal plans and design calculations attached as two separate pdfs to the project engineer and office of bridge design .
upon request the project engineer will provide the contractor the appropriate email addresses .
within num calendar days of receiving the initial foundation seal plans and design calculations the office of bridge design will send a response to the contractor with the departments final approval or one reviewed copy of the foundation seal plans and design calculations with changes to the design marked .
the contractor will make the necessary changes if any to the foundation seal plans and design calculations .
the contractor will then send the project engineer and the num temporary works page num office of bridge design an email with the final approved foundation seal plans and design calculations as a pdf for distribution .
unless otherwise specified in the plans the contractor shall submit a foundation seal concrete mix design for approval .
foundation seal concrete shall be placed in accordance with section num m and shall be placed up to the elevation of the bottom of the footing elevation unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
the pumping of water from the interior of any foundation enclosure shall be done without moving water through any freshly placed concrete .
pumping will not be permitted during concrete placement or for at least num hours thereafter unless it can be done from a suitable sump which separates fresh concrete from the water .
dewatering of the foundation enclosure may proceed when the foundation seal concrete has attained sufficient strength to withstand the hydrostatic pressure .
after dewatering all laitance and other unsound material on the top of the foundation seal shall be removed by scraping chipping or other approved methods prior to placing the footing .
e. formwork num .
wood forms forms shall be designed built and maintained to sustain the pressure and weight of the concrete and construction loads .
the design of the forms shall take into account the effect of vibration of the concrete as it is placed .
forms and form lumber shall be clean and in good condition .
lumber that is split warped bulged marred or that has other defects shall not be used .
forms for concrete surfaces shall be constructed to produce mortar tight joints with smooth even concrete surfaces .
forms shall be filleted at all sharp corners and shall be given a bevel or draft in all projections such as girders and copings .
plywood shall be orientated in the strong direction and continuous over three or more supports unless the design shows an alternate orientation is adequate for strength and deflection .
the required strength and smoothness may be obtained by lined forms or metal forms .
metal ties and anchorages within the forms shall be constructed to permit placement without injury to the concrete .
ties used in the presence of epoxy coated reinforcement shall be epoxy coated or made of other corrosion resistant material .
if ordinary or epoxy coated wire ties are permitted all wires shall be cut back at least num inch from the face of the concrete after the forms are removed .
fittings for metal ties shall be designed so on removal the resulting cavities will be the smallest practical size .
forms shall be set and maintained true to the line designated .
when forms appear to be unsatisfactory either before or during the placing of concrete the work shall be stopped until the defects have been corrected .
forms shall be surface treated with an approved form oil or saturated with water immediately before placing the concrete .
for members with exposed faces the temporary works num page num forms shall be surface treated with an approved form oil to prevent the adherence of concrete .
material which will adhere to or discolor the concrete shall not be used .
num .
metal forms the requirements for wood forms in regards to design mortar tightness filleted corners beveled projections bracing alignment reuse and oiling shall apply to metal forms .
the metal used for forms shall be of such thickness that the forms will remain true to shape .
bolt and rivet heads shall be countersunk .
clamps pins and other connecting devices shall hold the forms rigidly together and allow removal without injury to the concrete .
metal forms which do not present a smooth surface or line up properly shall not be used .
special care shall be exercised to keep metal forms free from rust grease and other foreign matter which will discolor and contaminate the concrete .
f. removal of temporary works unless otherwise specified on the plans or approved by the engineer all temporary works except foundation seals shall be removed .
the removal of temporary works shall be done in such a manner that no damage occurs to the structure .
the removal of falsework and formwork shall be in accordance with section num o. and num p. num method of measurement no field measurement will be made for any temporary works unless otherwise specified in the plans .
num basis of payment no payment will be made for temporary works .
all costs involved in designing constructing and removing temporary works shall be incidental to the other contract items .
num temporary works page num this page intentionally left blank bridge end backfill num page num num description this work consists of backfilling bridge abutments and sills .
num materials a. porous backfill the porous backfill material shall conform to the requirements of section num with the following modifications the material shall consist of natural sand .
crushed material is not acceptable .
the percentage of material passing a num sieve shall not exceed num .
b. granular bridge end backfill the granular bridge end backfill material shall conform to section num .
c. reinforcement fabric mse the reinforcement fabric shall conform to section num reinforcement fabric mse .
d. drainage fabric the drainage fabric shall conform to section num drainage fabric type b. e. polyethylene sheeting the polyethylene sheeting shall be a minimum thickness of num mils and shall be sufficiently durable so the polyethylene sheeting will not puncture or tear when installed as intended .
f. drainage tubing the drainage tubing shall be corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing conforming to section num .
g. black steel pipe the black steel pipe shall conform to astm anum .
h. vertical drain composite the vertical drain composite shall be a geocomposite sheet drain material consisting of a drainage core with a subsurface drainage geotextile attached to or encapsulating the core .
include all necessary fittings and material to splice one sheet panel or roll to the next .
the drainage core shall be of a material using long chain synthetic polymers composed of at least num by mass of polypropylene polyester polyamide polyvinyl chloride polyolefin or polystyrene .
the core shall be fabricated in sheets panels or rolls of adequate strength to resist installation stresses and longterm loading conditions .
the core shall be built up in thickness by means of columns cones nubs cusps meshes stiff filaments or other approved configurations .
the geocomposite sheet drain shall have a minimum compressive strength of num psi when tested in accordance with astm dnum procedure a. splices fittings and connections shall be of sufficient strength to maintain the integrity of the system during construction handling and under permanent loading without impeding flow or damage to the core .
the geocomposite drain material shall be covered with an opaque ultraviolet resistant waterproof covering during storage .
the maximum allowable exposure to ultraviolet radiation prior to installation is num calendar days .
num bridge end backfill page num the horizontal and vertical flow of water within the geocomposite sheet drain shall interconnect at all times for the full height of the core .
the drainage core with the goetextile laminated to one side of the core shall provide a minimum flow rate of num gallons per minute per foot of width when tested in accordance with astm dnum under the following test conditions num .
num inch long specimen num .
applied load of num psi num .
gradient of num num .
num hour seating period num .
closedcell foam rubber between platens and geocomposites if the core construction separates the flow channel into two or more sections only the flow rate on the inflow face is considered in determining the cores acceptability .
the geotextile shall be firmly attached to the core so folding wrinkling or other movement can not occur either during handling or after placement .
attachment shall be through the use of a nonwatersoluble adhesive heat sealing or other method recommended by the manufacturer .
adhesive shall not be used on areas of the geotextile fabric where flow is intended to occur .
heat sealing shall not weaken the geotextile below the required strength values .
num construction requirements a. underdrain adjacent to abutment backwall the underdrain system adjacent to the abutment backwall if specified shall be installed in accordance with the following num .
prior to placement of the bridge end embankment and the granular bridge end backfill polyethylene sheeting shall be placed to the specified limits and attached to the abutment backwall with a construction adhesive .
the polyethylene sheeting shall be placed on impervious soil that has been graded to drain away transversely from the roadway at a rate of num inch per foot .
lapped joints in the polyethylene sheeting shall be placed transverse to the direction of flow with a num foot minimum overlap in the direction of flow .
vehicles and equipment shall not be operated directly on the polyethylene sheeting .
num .
prior to placement of the bridge end embankment and granular bridge end backfill the vertical drain composite shall be rigidly attached to the abutment backwall such that it will remain in place during backfilling .
the method of attachment shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
overlap of the vertical drain composite at splices shall be a minimum of num inches or as recommended by the manufacturer .
horizontal splices shall be such that the top section of the vertical drain composite is over the top of the lower section .
num .
place num to num inches of porous backfill material on top of the polyethylene sheeting to the limits specified .
care shall be taken such that no damage occurs to the polyethylene sheeting during placement of the porous backfill .
the porous backfill bridge end backfill num page num material shall be shaped to receive the num inch diameter perforated drainage tubing such that the drainage tubing will be immediately adjacent to the vertical composite drain and will drain transversely away from the roadway at a rate of num inch per foot .
the perforated drainage tubing shall then be backfilled with porous backfill to the specified limits .
a galvanized wire mesh rodent screen shall be installed to the outlet end of the black steel pipe .
drainage fabric shall be placed on top of the porous backfill to the specified limits and attached to the vertical drain composite with a construction adhesive .
b. bridge end embankment and granular bridge end backfill num .
the granular bridge end backfill shall be placed to the specified limits in accordance with the following and the bridge end embankment shall be placed to the specified limits in accordance with section num except as modified by the following a .
it may be necessary for material for the bridge end embankment to be stockpiled during the grading operations .
it is the responsibility of the contractor to coordinate his work such that the required embankment material is available when needed .
b .
prior to placing the bridge end embankment the approach berm shall be scarified to a minimum depth of num inches and recompacted to a minimum of num of maximum dry density as determined by sd num. c. the bridge end embankment shall be continuously benched into the existing roadway embankment .
d. the bridge end embankment and the granular bridge end backfill shall be built simultaneously in horizontal layers .
bridge end embankment shall not exceed num inch loose lifts .
granular bridge end backfill shall not exceed num inch loose lifts .
each layer shall be compacted before the next layer is placed .
e. the bridge end embankment shall be compacted to a minimum of num of maximum dry density .
soil used to construct the embankment shall have an optimum moisture of less than num .
maximum dry density and optimum moisture shall be determined by sd num. f. granular bridge end backfill shall be compacted with at least num complete passes using a smooth face vibratory roller or vibratory plate compactor .
each layer of granular material shall be thoroughly watered prior to and during compaction .
g. additional density tests shall be performed by the department on the bridge end embankment material behind each abutment .
the density testing and moisture testing frequency shall be in accordance with the departments materials manual .
the density tests shall be evenly spaced between num foot above the bottom of the abutment backwall and the theoretical subgrade elevation under the approach slab area .
num bridge end backfill page num num .
for phased construction the edge of the first phase of bridge end embankment and granular bridge end backfill between phases shall be mechanically stabilized in accordance with the plans details and the following a .
each layer of granular bridge end backfill and bridge end embankment shall be inspected and approved by the engineer prior to the placement of the next layer .
b .
any equipment used to install the granular bridge end backfill and the bridge end embankment over the geotextile fabric shall be operated in such a manner that the geotextile fabric is not damaged .
to avoid damage to the geotextile fabric the equipment used to place spread and compact material over the geotextile shall not be operated on less than num inches of material .
c. the geotextile fabric may be oriented in any direction .
to minimize the horizontal deflection of the mechanically stabilized vertical face it is extremely important to make sure that the geotextile fabric is taut and free of wrinkles during placement of the bridge end embankment and granular bridge end backfill material .
d. any geotextile fabric that is torn or punctured shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
the repair shall consist of a patch of the same type of geotextile fabric being placed over the ruptured area such that it overlaps the damaged area a minimum of num feet measured from any damaged edge .
a sewn patch meeting the same requirements for seam strength as that of the fabric being repaired is allowed .
e. seams that are perpendicular to the face of the mechanically stabilized backfill may be constructed by overlapping the fabric a minimum of num feet .
all other seams as well as those in which the num foot minimum overlap can not be accomplished shall be sewn .
all seams shall be inspected by the engineer and any deficient seams repaired by the contractor prior to placement of the next layer of embankment or backfill material .
geotextile fabric that is joined by sewn seams shall have strength properties at the seam equal to the specified strength requirements of the geotextile fabric .
high strength polyester polypropylene or kevlar thread shall be used for sewn seams .
nylon threads shall not be used .
the edges of the fabric shall be even and shall be completely penetrated by the stitch .
f. during periods of shipment and storage the geotextile fabric shall be enclosed in a heavy duty opaque wrapping such that the fabric is protected from direct sunlight ultraviolet rays dirt and debris .
the geotextile fabric shall not be subjected to temperatures greater than numf .
c. approach slab underdrain the bridge end embankment shall be placed to the specified limits prior to excavation for the approach slab underdrain .
the excavation for the approach slab underdrain shall be to limits specified and shall be done with minimal disturbance to the underlying material .
bridge end backfill num page num excavation for the num to num inch wide trench shall be by a method that will provide a nearly vertical sided trench with the least amount of disturbance to the underlying soil .
the bottom of the trench shall be graded to drain away transversely from the roadway at a rate of num inch per foot .
the num inch diameter perforated drainage tubing shall be placed in the bottom of the trench .
porous backfill material shall then be placed in the trench and compacted to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num method of measurement a. granular bridge end backfill the quantity specified on the plans is the theoretical quantity based on plans dimensions .
the plan quantity will be the quantity accepted for payment .
field measurement for granular bridge end backfill will not be made .
b. bridge end embankment the quantity specified on the plans is the theoretical quantity based on plans dimensions .
the plan quantity will be the quantity accepted for payment .
field measurement for bridge end embankment will not be made .
c. porous backfill the quantity specified on the plans is the theoretical quantity based on plans dimensions .
the plan quantity will be the quantity accepted for payment .
field measurement for porous backfill will not be made .
d. approach slab underdrain excavation the quantity specified on the plans is the theoretical quantity based on plans dimensions .
the plan quantity will be the quantity accepted for payment .
field measurement for approach slab underdrain excavation will not be made .
e. underdrain pipe the quantity specified on the plans is the theoretical quantity based on plans dimensions .
the plan quantity will be the quantity accepted for payment .
field measurement for underdrain pipe will not be made .
f. precast concrete headwall for drain the precast concrete headwalls for drain will be measured by the number of complete precast concrete headwalls furnished and installed .
num basis of payment a. granular bridge end backfill the accepted quantity will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment materials water and all other items incidental to furnishing and installing the polyethylene sheeting vertical drain composite drainage fabric geotextile fabric and granular bridge end backfill material .
b. bridge end embankment the accepted quantity will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment materials water and all other items incidental to furnishing and installing the geotextile fabric excavating for the backfill and for furnishing and installing the embankment material including any hauling or stockpiling required .
num bridge end backfill page num c. porous backfill the accepted quantity will be paid for in accordance with section num .
d. approach slab underdrain excavation the accepted quantity will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment materials and all other items incidental to excavating the material to the specified limits including disposal of the excavated material .
e. underdrain pipe the accepted quantity will be paid for in accordance with section num except payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment materials and all other items incidental to furnishing and installing the drainage tubing black steel pipe fittings rodent screens and vertical drain composite .
f. precast concrete headwall for drain the accepted quantity will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment materials and all other items incidental to furnish and installing the precast concrete headwalls .
approach slab underdrain system new section num page num num description this work consists of excavating in place materials under the limits of a new approach and sleeper slab and installing a drainage system under the sleeper slab when no other bridge end backfill work is specified .
approach slab underdrain systems installed in conjunction with bridge end backfill work shall be completed in accordance with section num .
num materials a. porous backfill the porous backfill material shall conform to the requirements of section num with the following modifications the material shall consist of natural sand .
crushed material is not acceptable .
the percentage of material passing a num sieve shall not exceed num .
b. granular bridge end backfill the granular bridge end backfill material shall conform to section num .
c. drainage fabric the drainage fabric shall conform to section num drainage fabric type b. d. polyethylene sheeting the polyethylene sheeting shall be a minimum thickness of num mils and shall be sufficiently durable so the polyethylene sheeting will not puncture or tear when installed as intended .
e. drainage tubing the drainage tubing shall be corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing conforming to section num .
f. black steel pipe the black steel pipe shall conform to astm anum .
num construction requirements a. excavation requirements excavation for placement of the new approach slab underdrain system shall be done with minimal disturbance to the underlying material .
excavation for the num to num inch wide trench shall be by a method that will provide a nearly vertical sided trench with the least amount of disturbance to the underlying soil .
the bottom of the trench shall be graded to drain away transversely from the roadway at a rate of num inch per foot .
b .
installation requirements after the existing approach pavement has been removed and the ground surface has been shaped for placement of the granular bridge end backfill material the engineer shall inspect the area .
those areas with predominately num inch diameter or larger in place aggregate shall be covered with type b drainage fabric prior to placement of the granular bridge end backfill material .
the surfaces on which the drainage fabric is to be placed shall be smooth and free of obstructions .
lapped joints in the drainage fabric shall be placed transverse to the num approach slab underdrain system new section page num direction of flow with num foot minimum overlap in the direction of flow .
vehicles and equipment shall not be operated directly on the drainage fabric .
the num inch diameter perforated drainage tubing shall be placed in the bottom of the trench to drain toward the precast concrete headwalls .
the porous backfill material shall then be placed in the trench and compacted to the satisfaction of the engineer .
granular bridge end backfill shall be placed in loose lifts not exceeding num inches .
compaction shall be accomplished with at least four complete passes using a smooth face vibratory roller or vibratory plate compactor .
each layer of granular material shall be thoroughly watered prior to and during compaction .
num method of measurement a. granular bridge end backfill the quantity specified on the plans is the theoretical quantity based on plans dimensions .
the plan quantity will be the quantity accepted for payment .
field measurement for granular bridge end backfill will not be made .
b. porous backfill the quantity specified on the plans is the theoretical quantity based on plans dimensions .
the plan quantity will be the quantity accepted for payment .
field measurement for porous backfill will not be made .
c. approach slab underdrain excavation the quantity specified on the plans is the theoretical quantity based on plans dimensions .
the plan quantity will be the quantity accepted for payment .
field measurement for approach slab underdrain excavation will not be made .
d. underdrain pipe the quantity specified on the plans is the theoretical quantity based on plans dimensions .
the plan quantity will be the quantity accepted for payment .
field measurement for underdrain pipe will not be made .
e. precast concrete headwall for drain the precast concrete headwalls for drain will be measured by the number of complete precast concrete headwalls furnished and installed .
num basis of payment a. granular bridge end backfill the accepted quantity will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard in accordance with section num .
b. porous backfill the accepted quantity will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton in accordance with section num .
c. approach slab underdrain excavation the accepted quantity will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard in accordance with section num .
d. underdrain pipe the accepted quantity will be paid for in accordance with section num except payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment materials and approach slab underdrain system new section num page num all other items incidental to furnishing and installing the drainage tubing black steel pipe fittings rodent screens and vertical drain composite .
e. precast concrete headwall for drain the accepted quantity will be paid for at the contract unit price per each in accordance with section num .
num approach slab underdrain system new section page num this page intentionally left blank structural plate pipe and num structural plate pipe arch culverts page num num description this work consists of furnishing and installing structural plate pipe and structural plate pipe arches .
num materials structural plate pipe and pipe arches shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements a .
fabrication plates shall have a num inch lip beyond each end crest therefore the actual length of a given structure will be approximately num inches longer than the nominal length except when skewed or beveled .
plates at longitudinal and circumferential seams shall be connected by bolts .
joints shall be staggered so no more than three plates come together at any point .
b. erection pipe and pipe arches shall be assembled according to the manufacturers assembly instructions .
bolts shall not be torqued above num footpounds c. installation trenches shall be excavated to a width that allows for thorough compaction of the bedding and backfill material under and around the pipe .
where feasible trench walls shall be vertical .
the trench bottom shall be firmly compacted for its full length and width .
the foundation for the bedding shall provide a uniform stable support .
removal of unstable material or rock below the bedding grade shall be performed as set forth in section num .
the bedding shall consist of an earth or gravel cradle of uniform density shaped to fit the lower part of the pipe for at least num of its overall height .
d. backfill above bedding grade material used for backfill shall be embankment material encountered on the project free of organic material and rock or shall be as specified in the plans .
moisture and density requirements for backfill shall meet the requirements of section num or as specified in the plans .
the backfill material shall be premoistened if necessary to obtain uniform moisture .
selected embankment material shall be placed along the pipe in layers not exceeding num inches loose depth and thoroughly compacted by mechanical compactors to the specified density before the successive layers are placed .
the width of the berms on each side of the pipe shall be twice as wide as the external diameter of the pipe or num feet whichever is less .
this method of backfilling shall be continued until the embankment is at least num feet over the top of the pipe .
num structural plate pipe and structural plate pipe arch culverts page num in trench installations the backfill width shall be equal to trench width .
the backfill shall be brought up evenly on both sides of the pipe for its full length .
this method of backfilling shall be continued until the embankment is at least num feet over the top of the pipe .
e. workmanship the completed structure shall show careful finished workmanship in all particulars .
among others the following defects are specified as constituting poor workmanship num .
uneven laps .
num .
elliptical shaping on horizontal axis unless specified .
num .
variation from a straight centerline .
num .
ragged edges .
num .
loose unevenly lined or spaced bolts .
num .
illegible brand .
num .
bruised scaled or broken coating .
num .
dents or bends in the metal itself .
the presence of one or more defect in any individual culvert plate or in any shipment shall constitute sufficient cause for rejection .
num method of measurement structural plate pipe and pipe arches will be measured to the nearest foot .
measurement of length will be made as follows a. vertical end pipe pipe and pipe arches with vertical ends will be measured parallel to the centerline of the structure from end to end of metal exclusive of the num inch lip beyond the crest at each end .
b. beveled end pipe pipe and pipe arches with beveled ends will be measured parallel to the centerline of the structure as the average of the end to end lengths of metal at the top and bottom exclusive of the num inches lip beyond the crest at each end .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot complete in place .
payment will be full compensation for necessary steel and hardware bedding operations cost of selecting and placing backfill furnishing and installing required granular or other bedding materials and necessary excavation required .
authorized excavation of material below pipe foundation will be paid for as specified in section num .
pipe culverts num page num num description this work consists of furnishing and installing polyethylene pipe concrete and metal pipe storm drains and cattle passes excluding structural plate pipe and structural plate pipe arch culverts .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections a. reinforced concrete pipe rcp section num .
b .
corrugated metal pipe section num .
c. corrugated polyethylene pipe section num .
d. high density polyethylene pipe section num .
e. flexible watertight gaskets section num .
f. drainage fabric section num type a .
num construction requirements a. reinforced concrete pipe rcp culvert rcp culverts shall be laid with the groove or bell end of the pipe upstream and inserting the tongue end into the groove .
all rcp sections except pipe located between drop inlets manholes and junction boxes shall be tied with tie bolts as shown in the plans .
all rcp sections only entering or exiting drop inlets manholes and junction boxes shall be tied with tie bolts .
the maximum allowable gap at any point between two sections of rcp shall be num inch .
except where flexible watertight gaskets are used each joint shall be effectively protected against infiltration of backfill soil by filling the joint space with an approved sealer or by providing a circumferential wrap on the exposed portion of the pipe joint above the cradle with a num foot wide strip of drainage fabric around the perimeter of the pipe .
the drainage fabric shall be centered over the joint .
the engineer shall require the use of construction adhesives if the contractors method of installation doesnt secure the drainage fabric over the center of the joint while placing backfill .
a combination of sealer and drainage fabric materials will be allowed .
lift holes shall be covered or plugged to the satisfaction of the engineer to prevent backfill from entering the pipe .
when the plans require the use of rubber gaskets at joints they shall be installed according to manufacturer instructions .
b .
corrugated metal pipe culverts corrugated metal pipe culverts shall be laid with outside laps of circumferential joints pointing upstream and with the longitudinal laps on num pipe culverts page num the sides .
the ends of the pipe sections shall be approximately num inch apart to enable corrugations of the bands to mesh with the corrugations of the pipe .
c. polyethylene pipe culverts corrugated polyethylene pipe culverts and high density polyethylene pipe culverts shall be installed according to manufacturer recommendations .
d. general multiple lines of pipe culverts shall be accurately laid in parallel lines in all planes .
the amount of camber shall depend on the height of fill and nature of the supporting soil .
equipment capable of gently lowering the sections of pipe into place shall be provided .
dropping the pipe into place will not be permitted .
e. excavation trenches shall be excavated to a width that allows for proper jointing of the pipe and compaction of the bedding and backfill material under and around the pipe .
where feasible trench walls shall be vertical .
the trench bottom shall be compacted in accordance with section num c for its full length and width .
a flat bed shall be provided for cattle passes .
the foundation for each type of bedding shall provide a uniform stable support .
removal of unstable material or rock below bedding grade shall be performed as set forth in section num .
f. bedding the pipe bedding shall conform to one of the specified classes described below .
when no bedding class is specified the requirement for class c bedding shall apply .
num .
class a bedding this bedding shall consist of a continuous concrete cradle conforming to the plan details .
num .
class b bedding ring compression design material shall be excavated to a depth of num inches below the external bottom of the pipe and to a width equal to the external diameter of the pipe plus num foot .
the excavated area shall be backfilled with select fill material to form a bed that is at least num of the pipe height above the external bottom of the pipe .
the material shall be thoroughly compacted to provide a firm uniform foundation .
the foundation shall then be shaped cradled to fit the lower part of the pipe and the pipe shall be laid on a num inch thick layer of suitable granular material conforming to section num b .
the contractor shall ensure the cradle is constructed at an elevation such that after placing the num inches of granular material in the cradle the flowline elevation of the pipe is correct .
select fill material shall then be placed in num inch layers and compacted with mechanical tampers to at least num of the overall pipe height .
select fill material shall consist of stable material free of organic matter and large rock .
if granular material is used the granular material shall meet the requirements of section num b .
pipe culverts num page num when the external bottom of the pipe is entirely in new embankment constructed with select fill material the num inch undercut will be waived .
num .
class c bedding this bedding shall consist of an earth or granular cradle of uniform density shaped to fit the lower part of the pipe for at least num of its overall height .
if granular material is used the granular material shall meet the requirements of section num b. g. backfill above bedding grade material used for backfill shall be embankment material encountered on the project free of organic material and rock or shall be as specified in the plans .
moisture and density requirements for backfill shall meet the requirements of section num or as specified in the plans .
the backfill material shall be premoistened if necessary to obtain uniform moisture .
selected embankment material shall be placed along the pipe in layers not exceeding num inches in loose depth and thoroughly compacted by mechanical compactors to the specified density before successive layers are placed .
the width of the berms on each side of the pipe shall be twice as wide as the external diameter of the pipe or num feet whichever is less .
this method of backfilling shall be continued until the embankment is at least num feet over the top of the pipe .
in trench installations the backfill width shall be equal to trench width .
the backfill shall be brought up evenly on both sides of the pipe for its full length .
this method of backfilling shall be continued until the embankment is at least num feet over the top of the pipe .
h. replacing disturbed surfacing material if the pipe culvert installation requires the removal or disturbing of surfacing material and no items or quantities for replacement surfacing are provided disturbed surfacing shall be satisfactorily replaced at no additional cost to the state .
num method of measurement a .
furnishing and installing pipe culverts furnishing and installing pipe culverts will be measured by the foot of the respective types classes and sizes .
the length will be obtained by multiplying the nominal length of the sections by the number of sections used .
when an installation requires that a section of pipe be cut such as storm sewer installations the length will be the actual length required rounded up to the nearest even num feet .
b .
furnishing and installing end sections furnishing and installing end sections for the respective type and sizes of pipe culverts will be measured by the number of complete end sections furnished and installed .
c. replacing disturbed surfacing material measurement will not be made for this item .
num pipe culverts page num num basis of payment a .
furnishing pipe culverts furnishing pipe culverts will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot for the types classes and sizes furnished and accepted .
the contractor may substitute a higher class of pipe than specified at their own expense .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing the pipe special sections gaskets connecting devices and coupling bands and for elongation when specified .
b .
furnishing end sections furnishing end sections will be paid for at the contract unit price per each for the type and size furnished and accepted .
c. installing pipe culverts installing pipe culverts will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot for the types classes and sizes accepted .
payment will be full compensation for installing the pipe culverts special sections gaskets drainage fabric construction adhesive preformed mastic connecting devices and coupling bands .
payment will also be full compensation for necessary bedding operations cost of selecting and placing backfill furnishing and installing required granular or other bedding materials necessary excavation and labor equipment and all incidentals required .
authorized excavation of material below the external bottom of the pipe will be paid for as specified in section num .
d. installing end sections installing end sections will be paid for at the contract unit price per each for the type and size accepted .
e. replacing disturbed surfacing material separate payment will not be made .
the cost of replacement shall be incidental to the pipe installed .
structural concrete num page num num description this work consists of falsework and form construction and the furnishing handling placing curing and finishing of concrete for bridges box culverts and miscellaneous structures .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections a .
cement section num .
type ii cement shall be used unless otherwise specified .
b .
fine aggregate section num .
c. coarse aggregate section num .
d. water section num .
e. admixtures sections num and num .
f. reinforcing steel section num .
g. curing materials section num .
h. preformed expansion joint filler section num .
i .
joint sealer section num .
j .
fly ash section num .
k. grout grout shall be a commercially available nonmetallic nonshrink grout capable of attaining a minimum compressive strength of num psi and shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum .
num construction requirements a .
concrete quality and proportion the contractor shall design and be responsible for the performance of all concrete mixes used in structures .
mix designs shall be modified during the course of the work when necessary to assure compliance with the requirements for strength and consistency .
all mix designs and any modification thereto including changes in admixtures shall be approved by the concrete engineer prior to use .
mix design data and test results shall be recorded on a dotnum and submitted to the engineer a minimum of num calendar days prior to anticipated use .
the mix design shall produce a concrete conforming to the following requirements num structural concrete page num table num class of concrete minimum cement contentnum pounds cubic yard maximum water cementitious material rationum slump range at time of placementnum entrained air content rangenum minimum coarse aggregate content minimum num day compressive strength psi anum anum num num if well gradednum num num num inches num to num num num anum anum num num if well gradednum num num num inches num to num num num anum anum num num if well gradednum num num num inches num to num num num num the slump of concrete used in bridge decks shall be maintained between num and num inches at the time of placement .
num concrete used in bridge decks including barrier curbs shall contain num to num entrained air .
num the maximum cementitious content total cement fly ash and other cementitious admixture content shall be num pounds per cubic yard .
the contractor shall substitute a portion of the cement with class f modified fly ash in accordance with section num for all concrete used in bridge decks bridge sidewalks and barrier curbs .
the amount of cement to be replaced shall be num to num by weight .
the ratio of substitution of fly ash to cement shall be num by weight .
num well graded concrete mixes are those mixes conforming to the aggregate gradation shown in chart a size num coarse aggregate or chart b size num coarse aggregate .
the absolute volume method as described in the american concrete institute publication num shall be used in selecting mix proportions .
if a well graded concrete mix is used the combined aggregate proportions submitted for mix design verification shall conform to chart a or chart b .
the mix design shall be based upon obtaining an average concrete compressive strength num psi above the specified minimum num day compressive strength .
the department may use laboratory trial batches to verify the concrete mix submitted .
structural concrete num page num chart a chart b num num power gradation num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num upper low er seive limit limit num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num power gradation num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num upper lower seive limit limit num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num structural concrete page num num .
concrete mix design performance satisfactory performance of the proposed concrete mix design shall be verified by laboratory tests on trial batches .
the trial batches must be performed by a testing facility approved by the concrete engineer .
trial batches shall be conducted in accordance with the american concrete institute publication aci num aci num astm cnum and the following a .
a minimum of three trial batches shall be performed .
b .
the slump of each trial batch shall be within num inch of the maximum specified .
c. the air content of each trial batch shall be num to num of the maximum specified .
the results of each trial batch test shall be furnished by the contractor to the engineer at the time the proposed mix design is submitted .
the asbatched results shall include the following material weights aggregate moistures fresh concrete test results slump air content unit weight and mix temperature water cementitious material ratios aggregate gradations compressive strengths and aggregate qualities .
in addition aggregate supplier production test results shall be provided .
num .
alternate concrete mix design a concrete mix design previously used will be considered in compliance with the mix design requirements provided all of the following conditions are met a .
the concrete mix proportions are in accordance with section num a. b .
the mix design including all material and admixtures are identical to those previously used and tested .
c. the average num day compressive strength of num or more test results from an approved testing facility is at least num standard deviations above the specified strength .
these test results and associated batch tickets shall be submitted to the engineer .
no more than num in num compressive strength test results may be below specified strength .
d. the contractor submits all supporting information for the mix design including but not limited to fresh concrete tests and material properties .
b .
determination of num day compressive strength and acceptance criteria the engineer will be responsible for the sampling preparing properly curing and breaking of all concrete cylinders for concrete compressive strength in accordance with the materials manual .
the num day compressive strength shall be determined in accordance with sd num .
the num day compressive strength acceptance criteria shall be as follows structural concrete num page num num .
concrete cylinder testing if the num day cylinder compressive strength is greater than or equal to the specified num day compressive strength the quantity of concrete represented by the cylinder shall be accepted .
if the num day cylinder compressive strength is less than the specified num day compressive strength the backup cylinder shall be broken as soon as possible after breaking the num day cylinder .
the compressive strength for the backup cylinder will be the strength at the time it was broken and will not be corrected back to a num day strength .
num .
backup concrete cylinder testing if the backup cylinder compressive strength is greater than or equal to the specified num day compressive strength the quantity of concrete represented by the cylinder shall be accepted .
if the backup cylinder compressive strength is less than the specified num day compressive strength by no more than num psi the departments bridge construction engineer will determine if the unit is structurally adequate at the average compressive strength of the num day and the backup cylinder .
if structurally adequate the concrete will be allowed to remain in place and will be subject to price adjustment based on the average compressive strength of the two cylinders .
if the analysis shows the average cylinder compressive strength is not structurally adequate the concrete will be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
if the average compressive strength of the num day and the backup cylinder compressive strength is more than num psi below the specified num day compressive strength the concrete represented by the cylinders shall be removed and replaced .
num .
suspect test results if there is some reason to suspect that the compressive strength test results are not valid due to a damaged concrete cylinder malfunction of testing equipment etc .
or that the test results are not representative of the in place concrete the department may core the concrete represented by the cylinders .
when cores are deemed necessary by the department and are required at no fault of the contractor the department will arrange for the additional testing and all costs will be borne by the department .
the coring and compressive testing shall be in accordance with the current edition of aashto t num .
if the average core compressive strength is greater than or equal to the specified num day compressive strength the quantity of concrete represented by the cylinders shall be accepted .
if the average core compressive strength is less than the specified num day compressive strength by no more than num psi the departments bridge construction engineer will determine if the unit is structurally adequate at the lower compressive strength .
if structurally adequate the concrete will be allowed to remain in place and will be subject to price adjustment .
if the analysis shows the average core compressive strength is not structurally adequate the concrete will be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
num structural concrete page num if the average core compressive strength is more than num psi below the specified num day compressive strength the concrete represented by the cylinders shall be removed and replaced .
num .
contractor coring option if the contractor disputes the accuracy of the num day cylinder compressive strength the contractor has the option to core the concrete represented by the cylinders .
upon notification of a deviation from the specified compressive strength the contractor shall provide written notification of the intent to core the represented concrete within num calendar days .
coring shall be done in accordance with section num b.num .
if the average core compressive strength is greater than or equal to the specified num day compressive strength the quantity of concrete represented by the cylinder shall be accepted .
if the average core compressive strength is less than the specified num day compressive strength by no more than num psi the departments bridge construction engineer will determine if the unit is structurally adequate at the lower compressive strength .
if structurally adequate the concrete will be allowed to remain in place and will be subject to price adjustment .
if the analysis shows the average core compressive strength is not structurally adequate the concrete will be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
if the average core compressive strength is more than num psi below the specified num day compressive strength the concrete represented by the cylinders shall be removed and replaced .
num .
coring compressive testing if the contractor utilizes the option to core as specified in section num b.num the contractor shall arrange for an independent testing laboratory to perform the coring and compressive testing within num calendar days of notification of the failing compressive strength of the backup cylinder .
the independent testing laboratory must be approved by the departments concrete engineer prior to starting the coring and compressive testing .
the coring and compressive testing shall be in accordance with the current edition of aashto t num .
the independent testing laboratory will take num cores of the area representing the cylinders in which the compressive strength is in question and test them for compressive strength .
the coring and compressive testing shall be witnessed by the departments region materials engineer .
the contractor will be responsible to locate the reinforcing steel prior to coring .
it is critical that the coring operation avoids all reinforcing steel .
the core holes shall be grouted with a grout that conforms to section num .
the average compressive strength of num cores will be used for the determination of acceptance of concrete represented by each set of num day cylinders .
one cores compressive strength may be num below the specified strength if the average of the num cores compressive strength is above the specified strength .
astm enum structural concrete num page num standard practice for dealing with outlying observations will be used with the num significance level to deal with excessively high or low core strengths .
if a core compressive strength is an outlier then the set of cores will be averaged using the num remaining cores .
the average compressive strength of the cores will prevail over all other compressive strength determination methods .
if it is determined by the additional testing that the concrete is in compliance with the specified num day compressive strength the department will reimburse the contractor for the cost of the coring and compressive testing .
if it is determined by the additional testing that the num day compressive strength is less than that specified all costs for the coring and compressive testing will be borne by the contractor and the concrete shall be either accepted or rejected as per section num b.num .
the following information shall be provided for each core taken a .
include dot project number county pcn .
b .
core identification number location of each core representing cylinder number structure number location of cores sketch date concrete was cast date cores taken date cores tested c. age of the concrete at the time of testing .
d. length diameter of each core tested .
e. unit weight of each core .
f. end preparation capped or neoprene .
g. date of last calibration of the compression machine .
h. what if any correction factor was used to compute the compressive strength .
i .
actual calculations including load crosssectional area .
j .
type of fracture as per astm cnum .
note if the bond to the coarse aggregate is not adequate due to cement adhesion .
k. any defects in either the core or the cap .
c. equipment equipment shall be available in advance of the start of construction operations to allow for thorough examination by the engineer .
num .
batching equipment batching equipment shall be automatic or a department inspector shall be present during batching operations .
the contractor shall provide satisfactory means for obtaining material samples from the batching plant .
batching plant structures shall be leveled so the accuracy of the weighing mechanism is maintained .
hoppers shall fully discharge without jarring the scales .
clearances between scale parts hoppers and bin structure shall be maintained to avoid displacement of or friction between parts due to materials accumulations num structural concrete page num vibration or other cause .
exposed fulcrums clevises and similar working parts shall be kept clean .
to maintain accuracy weighing hoppers and other parts which are affected by wind action shall be protected by shelters or wind breaks .
the scale display shall be completely enclosed in weather proof cases and provided with glass opening to permit observation and reading .
the equipment for weighing aggregates cement water and admixtures shall be an integral part of the batching equipment .
the scalesload cells shall be accurate within num at any point throughout the range of the scaleload cell .
graduations shall be not greater than num of the capacity of the scaleload cell .
the scalesload cells shall be sensitive to the weight indicated by one graduation .
the batching equipment shall operate within a delivery tolerance of num of the net weight for each aggregate weighed .
the hopper inlet mechanism shall be interlocked against opening when the discharge gate is open .
the hopper discharge mechanism shall be interlocked against opening while the hopper is being charged .
the hopper discharge mechanism shall be interlocked against opening if any material in the hopper is either overweight or underweight by more than num of the specified weight .
the cement batching equipment shall operate within a delivery tolerance of num of the net weight of the cement per batch .
the cementitious material cement and fly ash batching equipment shall also operate within a delivery tolerance of num of the net weight of the total cementitious material per batch .
water may be measured by volume or weight .
the measuring equipment shall operate within a delivery tolerance of num of the net weight or volume of water .
when water is measured by volume means for determining the accuracy of the measuring device shall be provided .
airentraining or other admixtures may be measured by volume or by weight .
the measuring equipment shall operate within a delivery tolerance of num of the net weight or volume per batch .
num .
computerized batching equipment the following provisions shall apply to all class a or class m concrete batched by computerized batching equipment a printed computer generated ticket shall be automatically produced for each load of concrete batched .
the printed computer ticket shall accompany each load of structural concrete num page num concrete to the project and shall be presented to the engineer prior to discharging the load at the project site unless the engineer approves an alternate procedure .
the printed ticket must contain the following minimum information truck number date and time batched total volume of the load in cubic yards dot mix design number actual weight mass or volume of each component of the mix coarse aggregate fine aggregate cement fly ash water batch water admixtures air entraining admixtures water reducers retarders accelerators others moisture in aggregate either free moisture or total moisture maximum water allowed maximum water allowed weight of mix design water weight of free water wc ratio asbatched the final wc ratio for acceptance shall be calculated using the following formula and rounded to the nearest num of cement weight of supplementary cementitious material weight weight of free water weight of batch water weight of added water wc ratio free moisture total moisture in aggregate absorption of aggregate weight of free water free moisture x weight of aggregate weight of batch water total weight of water added to the batch either at the plant or in the truck weight of added water total weight of water added after batching process typically added at point of delivery the weight of free water shall be calculated for both the fine aggregate and the coarse aggregate .
the above information must be automatically printed in such a manner that the engineer may verify the mix adheres to the proportions specified by the design mix .
num .
mixing and hauling equipment mixers and agitators shall have attached in a prominent place a manufacturer plate or plates showing the various uses for which the equipment is designed and the capacity of the drum or container in terms of volume of mixed concrete .
num structural concrete page num the pickup and throwover blades in the drum shall be restored or replaced when any part or section is worn num inch or more below the original height of the manufacturers design .
the contractor shall maintain a copy of the manufacturers design showing original dimensions and arrangement of blades .
mixers that have an accumulation of hard concrete or mortar shall not be used .
mixers except truck mixers shall be equipped with an approved timing device to track the total mixing time of the concrete batch .
truck mixers shall be equipped with counters to record the number of revolutions of the drum or blades .
the revolution counter on the truck mixers shall be set to zero as each new load is batched .
mixers shall be capable of combining the concrete ingredients into a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and shall uniformly discharge the concrete .
the hauling bodies of nonagitating equipment shall be smooth mortartight metal containers equipped with gates and vibrators that will permit uniform control of the discharge of the concrete .
num .
forms and falsework forms and falsework shall conform to section num .
d. handling measuring and batching materials the separate aggregate components shall not become intermixed prior to being weighed and the weigh hopper or hoppers shall be charged so the batched weights are within the tolerances of num c.num num .
cement shall be measured by the sack or by weight .
when cement is weighed separate scales and hoppers shall be used with a device to indicate positively the complete discharge of the batch of cement into the mixing drum .
num .
admixtures shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
when multiple types of admixtures are being used the admixtures shall be individually dispensed .
compatibility of the admixtures shall be verified prior to use .
num .
the amount of batch water and aggregates added to the mix shall be adjusted accordingly using the results of the most recent two hour moisture tests .
if automatic moisture sensing equipment is used the engineer may allow the use of the automatic moisture sensing results to make adjustments .
e. mixing concrete concrete shall be mixed at a central stationary plant site or in truck mixers .
mixing and agitating speeds shall be as designated by the manufacturer of the equipment .
mixers shall not be charged in excess of the rated capacity .
when a concrete batch is transported in a truck mixer or agitator and the batch is smaller than num of the rated capacity of the truck mixer or agitator the following structural concrete num page num percentage of additional cementitious material at the same proportions as listed on the mix design shall be added to the batch percent of rated capacity additional cementitious material required num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num the above provisions regarding additional cementitious material shall also apply to the mixing of small batches in central plants .
additional cementitious material will not be required when the small batch is mixed in a drum that is sufficiently coated with mortar to withstand the loss of cementitious material .
sufficient mortar coating as determined by the engineer may include mortar coating the drum from a previously mixed batch during continuous mixing operations .
additional cementitious material will be required if more than num minutes has passed from the mixing of the previous batch if the drum has been cleaned following the previous batch or if the mortar coating the drum has been disturbed following the previous batch .
num .
central plant mixing the batch shall be charged in the drum so a portion of the mixing water enters in advance of the cement and aggregates .
the flow of water shall be uniform and all water shall be in the drum by the end of the first num seconds of the mixing period .
concrete shall be mixed for a period of not less than one minute after all materials are in the mixer .
concrete mixed less than the specified mixing time shall be discarded and disposed of .
num .
truck mixing original mixing time for truck mixed concrete shall be not less than num or more than num revolutions of the drum at mixing speed after all ingredients including water are in the drum .
additional revolutions beyond num shall be done at agitating speed .
the mixing water shall be added at the time of batching .
additional water cement or admixtures may be added to the full load after completion of the original mixing provided that slump entrained air and water cement specifications are adhered to .
addition of water cement or admixtures to partial loads is not allowed partial loads of concrete are defined as loads that have been partially discharged .
admixtures shall be added in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
when additional water cement or admixture is added the batch shall be mixed an additional num revolutions at mixing speed .
the contractor shall provide means to accurately measure the amount of additional materials added .
num structural concrete page num num .
watercementitious material ratio the watercementitious material ratio of the concrete placed shall not exceed the maximum watercementitious ratio established for the mix design .
f. limitations of mixing concrete shall be mixed in the quantities required for immediate use and shall be placed before initial set has occurred .
concrete in which initial set has begun prior to beginning placement shall be wasted at the contractors expense .
retempering of concrete after initial set has occurred will not be allowed .
concrete shall not be mixed and placed unless the natural light is sufficient for finishing operations or an adequate artificial lighting system is provided .
mixing water shall not be heated above numf .
aggregates shall not be heated above numf and shall be free of frozen lumps ice and snow .
g. delivery requirements when concrete is continuously agitated in the hauling unit the concrete shall be discharged within num minutes after the cement has been placed in contact with the aggregates and discharged and screeded within num minutes after the cement has been placed in contact with the aggregates .
when the concrete temperature is numf or above the time limitation shall be reduced to discharged within num minutes and discharged and screeded within num minutes .
when concrete is not continuously agitated in the hauling unit the concrete shall be discharged within num minutes after the cement has been placed in contact with the aggregates and discharged and screeded within num minutes .
when the concrete temperature is numf or above the time limitation shall be reduced to discharged within num minutes and discharged and screeded within num minutes .
the rate of delivery of concrete shall be uniform .
the interval between batches shall not exceed num minutes .
for delivery of concrete in remote locations where the preceding concrete delivery requirements will be difficult to meet the contractor may be allowed to use a set retarding admixture to control initial set when approved by the engineer .
when set retarding admixtures are allowed the concrete delivery requirements may be adjusted with approval from the departments concrete engineer .
h. construction tolerances construction tolerances shall be in accordance with the latest edition of aci num standard tolerances for concrete construction and materials .
i. prepour inspection requirements for concrete bridge decks prepour inspections will be conducted for all new concrete bridge decks .
the contractor shall advise the engineer num hours in advance of the time when deck preparation will be complete and ready for inspection .
the following items of work shall have been completed at the time of inspection num .
formwork formwork and decking shall be complete and joints made mortar tight .
structural concrete num page num num .
reinforcing steel reinforcing steel shall be accurately placed in accordance with the tolerances of aci num secured and tied according to specifications .
num .
screed screed rails shall be set and adjusted for final grade .
num .
finishing machine finishing machine shall be adjusted for crown slope and placed upon the screed rails .
num .
safety necessary walkways and safety railing shall have been installed .
num .
inspections a responsible contractor employee shall be designated to accompany the engineer during the prepour inspection .
following the prepour inspection any corrective work required shall be completed during the normal work shift and shall not extend past the normal project work hours .
violation of this provision will be cause to postpone the scheduled deck placement .
j .
placing concrete the contractor shall give sufficient notice before starting to place concrete to permit inspection of forms reinforcing steel and preparation for placing .
concrete shall not be placed without approval of the engineer .
placement of concrete on a frozen foundation will not be permitted .
the surface temperature of forms steel and adjacent concrete which will come in contact with the concrete being placed shall be raised to a temperature above freezing prior to placement .
the temperature of concrete immediately after placing shall not be less than numf or more than numf .
the top limit for bridge deck concrete shall be numf except as indicated below .
during periods of extreme and sustained hot weather it may become extremely difficult to maintain the numf maximum concrete temperature for bridge deck concrete .
when such conditions exist the engineer may authorize the maximum concrete temperature to be raised to numf provided the following conditions are met num .
the coarse aggregate piles must be flushed with water for a minimum of num hours .
num .
a minimum rate of pour of num cubic yards per hour or as listed in the plans must be maintained .
num .
wet curing blankets and polyethylene sheeting must be placed as soon as possible after the pour .
num .
if the ambient temperature is numf or less the concrete shall be cured as specified in section num m. whenever the ambient temperature exceeds numf a continuous fogging shall be applied from the time of initial strike off until the curing process specified in section num m is in place .
this continuous fogging shall be in addition to the curing process specified in section num m. num structural concrete page num fogging equipment shall be capable of applying a fine mist not a spray under pressure through an atomizing nozzle .
the fogging option will not be allowed when wind conditions preclude complete coverage .
placement of concrete for bridge decks will not be permitted during the period from november num to april num inclusive without written authorization from the engineer .
authorization will be given only if there is a distinct advantage to the department .
barrier curbs will not be allowed to be placed with slipform paving equipment .
before placing concrete sawdust chips debris and extraneous matter shall be removed from the interior of forms .
temporary struts stays and braces holding the forms in the correct shape and alignment shall be removed when the fresh concrete has reached an elevation rendering their service unnecessary .
these temporary members shall not be buried in the concrete .
the slope of chutes for concrete placement shall allow the concrete to flow slowly without segregation .
the delivery point of the chute shall be as close as possible to the point of deposit .
chutes and spouts shall be kept clean and shall be thoroughly flushed with water before and after each run .
the flush water shall be discharged outside the forms .
free fall of concrete shall not exceed num feet .
in thin walls or columns where the reinforcement prohibits the use of chutes the method of placement shall prevent objectionable separation of coarse aggregate .
the sequence of placing concrete including the location of construction joints shall be as specified .
concrete shall be placed in continuous horizontal layers .
each subsequent layer shall be placed before the preceding layer has attained its initial set .
the concrete shall be consolidated by vibrating internally externally or both without displacement of reinforcing or forms .
the vibration shall be of sufficient duration and intensity to thoroughly consolidate the concrete without causing segregation localized areas of grout or damage to concrete forms and reinforcement .
vibration shall not be applied directly to reinforcement which extends into sections or layers of concrete which are not plastic under vibration .
vibrators shall not be used to move concrete over distances or to transport concrete in the forms .
accumulations of mortar splashed upon the reinforcing steel and the surfaces of forms shall be satisfactorily removed .
care shall be exercised not to injure or break the concrete to steel bond at and near the surface of the concrete while cleaning the reinforcing steel .
dried mortar chips and dust shall be removed and not left in the unset concrete .
k. underwater concrete placement concrete placed under water shall be placed as per section num m. structural concrete num page num l. surface finish the surfaces of all structural concrete shall be worked during placing .
the working shall force all coarse aggregate from the surface and thoroughly work the mortar against the forms to produce a smooth finish relatively free of water air pockets and honeycombing .
as soon as the concrete has set in accordance with section num o the forms on all exposed surfaces shall be carefully removed and all depressions resulting from the removal of metal ties or other causes shall be carefully pointed with a mortar of sand and cement in the same proportions as the concrete being treated .
all fins and rough corners on the surfaces shall be removed to present a neat and uniform appearance .
additional finishing will be required as follows num .
rubbed brushed and commercial texture finishes one of these three finishes will be required for all railing curbs parapets wing walls and other surfaces not subject to wear which are visible to the traveling public unless otherwise designated in the plans .
the selected finish shall be used throughout the entire structure except the finish for the top and inside of the curb may be different than that used for the other parts of the structure .
these finishes will not be required on surfaces which are not visible to the traveling public such as box culvert wing walls box culvert parapets bridge wing walls and backsides of curbs on bridges provided the forms result in a smooth unblemished surface .
a .
rubbed finish as soon as the pointing has set sufficiently the surfaces to receive a rubbed finish shall be thoroughly wetted with a brush and rubbed with a medium coarse carborundum stone or an abrasive of equal quality using a small amount of mortar on stone face .
the rubbing shall be continued until all form marks and projections are removed producing a relatively smooth clean surface free from pits or irregularities .
the final finish shall be obtained by rubbing with a fine carborundum stone or an abrasive of equal quality .
this rubbing shall continue until the entire surface has a smooth texture and a uniform color .
b .
brushed finish this finish will be permitted only if it is accomplished within num hours of concrete placement .
the forms shall be removed as soon as the concrete is able to stand firm without slumping .
the surface shall be worked with a rubber float which may be dipped in a very wet three parts sand to one part cement grout mixture .
immediately after the surface is worked into a lather a soft bristle brush shall be used to smooth the surface leaving a fine grained smooth but sanded texture .
a plastering job resulting from the use of an excess of grout on the surface will not be permitted .
c. commercial texture finish the objective is to obtain a surface that is reasonably smooth and uniform in texture and appearance .
repairing surface blemishes bug holes form lines etc .
to prevent show through prior to application of the commercial texture finish is required .
the commercial texture num structural concrete page num finish shall be performed using an approved system from the departments approved products list .
the departments approved products list contains two separate classes class a and class b for commercial texture finish .
unless otherwise specified on the plans either class a or class b systems may be used .
the contractor is required to provide a copy of the manufacturers recommendations to the engineer prior to performing any commercial texture finish work .
unless otherwise noted in the manufacturers recommendations commercial texture finish shall not be applied to any surface until the concrete is a minimum of num days old .
the surfaces to receive commercial texture finish shall be abrasive blast cleaned to break the surface film to remove all laitance and other foreign material and to provide an absorptive surface .
when allowed in the manufacturers recommendations pressure washing may be used to prepare the surface in lieu of abrasive blast cleaning .
the commercial texture finish mixture shall be mixed in accordance with the method specified in the approved list for the system being used .
the same materials and application method shall be used for all surfaces on any one structure .
commercial texture finish mixtures may be applied by a brushing rolling or by spraying as per the manufacturers recommendations .
the mixture shall cover the original surface with a one coat application .
the one coat application shall not be too thick to cause runs sags or a plastered effect .
after drying the final surface shall be uniform in color and texture with no laps or breaks in continuity .
the color of the system shall closely simulate the color of the original concrete unless otherwise specified on the plans .
the application of the commercial texture finish shall not be started until all other work that could damage the finish has been completed .
the finishing operations shall be continuous until completion of the finish application on any one surface .
corrective work at the contractors expense will be required on any surfaces which have not been satisfactorily finished or on finished surfaces that have been damaged during subsequent work .
the repair work will include as much adjacent surface area as necessary to achieve a uniform appearance .
num .
special surface finish special surface finish will be required on the concrete surfaces designated on the plans .
the special surface finish shall be performed using an approved class a or class b system from the departments approved products list of materialsmixes for commercial texture finish .
surface preparation shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num l.num.c except that abrasive blast cleaning is required for all in place concrete surfaces .
pressure washing is not an acceptable method of surface preparation on these surfaces .
structural concrete num page num mixing and application of the special surface finish shall be in accordance with section num l.num.c for commercial texture finish .
num .
float finish unformed surfaces except bridge decks approach slabs and sleeper slab top surfaces poured with the approach slab shall be given a float finish .
after the concrete has been struck off the surface shall be thoroughly worked and floated with a suitable floating tool .
before the finish has set the surface cement film shall be removed with a fine brush in order to have a finegrained smooth but sanded texture .
num .
bridge deck approach slab and sleeper slab top surface poured with the approach slab finish immediately after the concrete has been placed and consolidated as required by section num j the surface shall be struck off and finished with an approved finishing machine .
for bridge decks the finishing machine shall meet the following minimum requirements the finishing machine shall be a selfpropelled rotating cylinder type with one or more rotating steel cylinders and augers .
the machine shall span the concrete placement width .
the cylinders and augers shall spread and consolidate the concrete to the established profile by traversing the placement width transverse to the roadway centerline .
the machine shall be capable of forward and reverse motion under positive control and be capable of raising all cylinders and augers to clear the surface when traveling in reverse .
any modifications to the factory product will require approval by the engineer .
the portion of the deck adjacent to curbs shall be neatly finished to a true surface with a wooden hand float .
before the concrete has attained its initial set the concrete shall be given a final finish by transverse brooming or carpet drag to provide a surface microtexture .
the surface of concrete bridge decksshall be given a transverse metaltine finish .
tining depth and spacing shall be measured according to sd num .
the metaltine finish shall provide a groove width of num inch and a groove depth of num inch num inch .
the spacing between the individual grooves shall be randomly spaced and shall vary between num inches to num inches with num of the spaces being num inch or less .
the repeating random pattern on the tining device shall be avoided .
successive passes of the tining shall not overlap .
the num inch width of the deck next to curb shall be left ungrooved .
the surface of approach slabs and sleeper slab top surfaces poured with the approach slab shall be given a metaltine finish in accordance with the metaltine finish for bridge decks or a longitudinal metaltine finish in accordance with section num j.num.b .
after the concrete has hardened the surface and joints shall be tested for smoothness in accordance with sd num .
the permissible longitudinal and transverse surface deviation shall be num inch in num feet .
any portion of the deck approach slab and sleeper slab top surface poured with the approach slab showing variation from the template of more than num inch shall be either ground to an elevation that will be within the permissible deviation or be accepted without corrective action and will be num structural concrete page num subject to price reduction as determined by the engineer under the provisions of section num .
the contractor shall accomplish corrective grinding with specially prepared circular diamond blades mounted on a horizontal shaft .
the contractor shall daylight corrective grinding to the outside edge .
the contractor shall repair and replace joint sealant damaged by corrective grinding as directed by the engineer and at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor shall not leave ground areas smooth or polished .
the contractor shall ensure ground areas have a uniform texture equal in roughness to the surrounding unground concrete .
the contractor shall reestablish the tining with a mechanical tining machine in all areas where the corrective grinding exceeds num square feet .
the contractor shall remove and replace all joint sealant within the area where tining is replaced .
m. curing concrete concrete surface except bridge decks approach slabs and sleeper slab top surfaces poured with the approach slab shall be cured in accordance with section num m.num .
bridge decks approach slabs and sleeper slab top surfaces poured with the approach slab shall be cured in accordance with section num m.num .
num .
concrete surface except bridge decks approach slabs and sleeper slab top surfaces poured with the approach slab shall be cured as follows concrete surfaces shall be kept continuously wet by ponding spraying or covering with materials that are kept continuously and thoroughly wet .
such materials shall consist of a double layer of a curing blanket or other materials as approved by the engineer which does not discolor or damage the concrete .
forms shall be considered as adequate cover for curing the formed surface as long as the forms remain in place without loosening .
curing shall continue for not less than seven days after placing the concrete .
other precautions to ensure development of strength shall be taken as the engineer may direct .
in lieu of the above method of curing liquid membrane curing compound may be used .
the compound shall be uniformly applied immediately after the final finishing operations are completed and the free water has left the surface .
the curing compound may be applied in one or two applications in accordance with the directions of the manufacturer .
if applied in two applications the second shall be applied within num minutes of the first .
equipment workmen and materials will not be allowed on the surface for a minimum of seven days after application of the curing compound unless the surface is adequately protected with an approved material .
this protection shall not be applied for at least eight hours after application of the curing compound .
if the membrane film is broken or damaged within the seven day curing period the areas affected shall be given a duplicate treatment of the curing material at the same application rate as the first treatment .
surfaces which are to receive a finish as per section num l.num .
and num l.num shall not be treated with curing compound curing shall be accomplished with a double structural concrete num page num layer of curing blankets and polyethylene sheeting .
membrane curing compound will not be allowed on any surface to which concrete is to be bonded .
num .
bridge decks shall be cured in accordance with section num m.num.a unless otherwise specified in the plans .
a .
immediately after concrete finishing a fog shall be applied to the exposed concrete surfaces until such time that wet curing blanket or other materials as approved by the engineer is in place in such a way as to prevent drying of the concrete surface .
maintain the fogging to produce a gloss to semigloss water sheen on the concrete surface until the wet curing blanket is applied .
the bridge deck surface shall not be treated with curing compound .
fogging equipment shall be capable of applying a fine fog mist in sufficient quantity to curb the effects of rapid evaporation of mixing water from the concrete resulting from wind high temperature or low humidity or a combination of these factors .
the fogging equipment shall be capable of being turned off and on as necessary or as directed by the engineer .
only equipment capable of producing a fog or mist shall be used .
moisture from the fog applicators under pressure shall not be applied directly upon the concrete and can not accumulate on the surface in a quantity sufficient to cause a flow or wash the surface .
fog misting shall not be used to apply water to the surface of the concrete to facilitate lubrication for finishing purposes .
water on top of the fogged concrete surface shall not be worked into the surface of the concrete .
fogging equipment shall be such that the fog spray is produced from nozzles that atomize the droplets and are capable of keeping a large area damp without depositing excess water .
use high pressure equipment that generates at least num psi at num gallons per minute or low pressure equipment having nozzles capable of supplying a maximum flow rate of num gallons per minute .
handheld weed sprayers are not allowed .
water shall not be allowed to drip flow or puddle on the concrete surface during fog misting .
the contractor shall demonstrate the fog mist system at the bridge deck prepour inspection to verify that sufficient volume and coverage will be attained .
a fogging system shall not be used until approved by the engineer .
apply fog spray upwind of the concrete placement during finishing texturing and until the concrete is covered by wet curing blanket .
a single layer of wet curing blanket shall be placed as soon as possible and within a distance of num feet behind the finish machine .
in the case the placement of the wet curing blanket within num feet is not practical the contractor shall keep the surface wet by fogging .
in the event of a delay in concrete placement or finishing the wet curing blanket shall be placed on as much of the exposed num structural concrete page num concrete behind the finish machine as is practical .
the curing blanket shall be prewetted by soaking in water for a minimum of num hours and then draining the soaked curing blanket such that the free water is removed prior to placement .
if nonwoven polypropylene geotextile is used prewetting may be done immediately prior to placement .
caution shall be used when placing wet curing blanket so that no damage occurs to the surface .
placement of dry curing blanket and then wetting the curing blanket once it is in place is not allowed .
the curing blanket shall be kept continuously wet by misting with water until such time that the concrete can support soaker hoses without causing deformation to the concrete .
at that time soaker hoses shall be placed on top of the curing blanket and the curing blanket and soaker hoses covered with polyethylene sheeting .
in lieu of the preceding paragraph the contractor may immediately cover the wet curing blanket with polyethylene sheeting .
once the concrete can be walked on without damaging it the contractor shall then pull back the polyethylene sheeting and place the soaker hoses between the curing blanket and polyethylene sheeting .
the curing blanket shall not be exposed for such duration that it dries prior to being recovered with the polyethylene sheeting .
the soaker hoses must be placed and recovered within num hours of completion of the deck pour .
water shall be run through the soaker hoses periodically as required to keep the curing blanket continuously wet but at a minimum of once per day .
these wet cure procedures shall be continued for a period of num days after completion of the deck pour .
b. bridge decks when specified in the plans approach slabs and sleeper slab top surfaces poured with the approach slab shall be cured as follows as soon as bridge deck approach slab and sleeper slab top surfaces poured with the approach slab concrete has received the final surface finish linseed oil base emulsion curing compound shall be uniformly applied at the specified rate .
this application is not a substitute for curing with curing blankets and polyethylene sheeting but is required for moisture retention until the curing blankets and polyethylene curing materials can be placed .
the curing blankets and polyethylene sheeting curing materials shall be in place not later than num hours after completion of deck finishing .
the concrete surfaces which are to have superimposed concrete placed upon or against them shall be protected from the curing compound and shall be cured with curing blankets and white polyethylene sheeting .
all reinforcing steel shall be protected from the compound application .
num .
application of curing compound application of linseed oil base emulsion curing compound shall conform to the following requirements a .
prior to and during application the material shall be mixed to a uniform consistency without the use of air violent agitation or thinning .
structural concrete num page num b .
the material shall be maintained above numf during application .
c. the material shall be applied with a spray applicator of sufficient capacity and with spray nozzles of proper size and design to provide a uniform application at the specified rate immediately after the concrete has received the final finish .
d. the minimum application rate shall be as follows num carpet drag or broom finish num gallon per num square feet .
num groove finish num gallon per num square feet .
num .
curing blankets and polyethylene surfaces cured with curing blankets and polyethylene sheeting shall be cured in the following manner a .
the surface to be cured shall be entirely covered with a double layer of curing blankets .
the curing blankets shall cover the entire surface with sufficient material beyond the periphery of the area to assure adequate curing of the edges .
the curing blankets shall be thoroughly saturated with water and shall be placed with the wettest side down .
combination burlappolyethylene sheets may be substituted for one layer of curing blanket and the polyethylene film with the engineers approval .
b .
immediately after placement the curing blankets shall be entirely covered with white polyethylene sheeting .
adjacent sheets shall be lapped at least num inches .
the sheeting shall be placed and weighted down to ensure contact with the surface .
c. curing shall be maintained for seven days .
the curing blankets shall be kept moist by periodic applications of water .
n. protection of concrete the following provisions apply to all class a concrete in addition to the requirements for curing contained in section num m. vibrations caused by any work activities that may be detrimental to the freshly placed concrete will not be allowed for at least num hours after placement or until the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
if the engineer suspects that construction activities may be causing excessive vibration a num x num inch stake shall be driven solidly into the ground adjacent to the freshly placed concrete .
a small container of water shall then be placed on top of the stake .
if the water surface remains calm the construction activity will be allowed to continue .
when the water surface shows any movement vibrations are reaching the freshly placed concrete and the construction activities shall be either stopped or altered such that vibrations at the freshly placed concrete are eliminated .
num structural concrete page num enclosures for protection of concrete shall be capable of maintaining the temperature specified and permit free circulation of artificial heat .
open flame type heating units are prohibited .
form insulation shall be bats of fiberglass rockwool balsam wool or similar commercial insulation material .
insulation shall remain in place for the full protection period .
the forms may be loosened slightly to control the temperature of the concrete below the maximum value specified .
the contractor shall drill holes in the forms and provide thermometer wells num inch to num inch in depth at locations established by the engineer to determine the temperature of the concrete .
num .
concrete for sidewalks curb and gutter drop inlets manholes ditch checks pipe headwalls sleeper slabs approach slabs pavement etc .
shall be maintained above numf until it has attained num psi compressive strength .
num .
concrete for bridges box culverts retaining walls anchor blocks median barriers light and signal footings and other structures shall be maintained at a temperature of numf or above for the first num hours after the concrete has been placed .
the concrete shall be maintained at a temperature of numf or above for the next num hour period .
if low temperatures are recorded during this protection period one extra day of protection time above numf shall be added to the original five days of protection for each day that the minimum concrete temperature falls below the specified temperature .
if an additional bag of cement per cubic yard is used or if high early strength cement is permitted the concrete shall be maintained at a temperature of numf or above for num hours .
if temperatures less than numf are recorded during this protection period the protection time required shall revert back to that in the preceding paragraph with its provision for low temperatures also being applicable .
until one of the protection periods have been satisfied cold weather protection shall continue falsework shall remain in place live loads shall not be applied and the concrete temperature shall be maintained above numf .
at the end of the protection period the concrete temperature shall not be permitted to fall more than numf in each subsequent num hour period .
the surface temperature of concrete protected by housing and heating or insulated forms shall not exceed numf during the protection period .
it will be permissible to flood concrete with water to a minimum depth of num foot for num calendar days after the concrete is placed maintaining a water temperature which prevents freezing of the water in contact with the concrete .
o .
removal of temporary works and construction of superimposed elements methods of removal of temporary works likely to cause overstressing of the concrete structural concrete num page num shall not be used .
temporary works shall be removed such that the concrete gradually and uniformly takes stresses due to its own weight .
falsework forms and other temporary works shall not be removed and superimposed elements shall not be placed without the approval of the engineer .
falsework and forms may be removed from the affected concrete and placement of superimposed elements may proceed when the concrete reaches the strength specified in table num .
concrete compressive strength shall be used as the basis for falsework removal form removal and placement of superimposed elements whenever possible .
falsework removal form removal and superimposed element placement may be allowed on the basis of time only when concrete compressive strength is not able to be determined and shall be exclusive of periods of time when the temperature is below numf .
table num formworkform removal placement of superimposed elements structural elements concrete strength psi time concrete strength psi time footingssleeper slabs num num hrs .
num num hrs .
columns num num hrs .
num num days pier walls num num hrs .
num num days abutmentsills num num hrs .
num num days bent capspier caps num num days num num days grout pads num num hrs .
num num days concrete diaphragms num num hrs .
num num days bridge decks girder bridges continuous conc .
bridges rigid frame bridges other deck slabs num num num num num days num days num days num days num num num num num hrs .
num hrs .
num hrs .
num hrs .
box culvert floor wing wall footings walls top slab num num num num hrs .
num hrs .
num days num num num num hrs .
num days num hrs .
other vertical surfaces not carrying load num num hrs .
p. backfilling and application of liveload all concrete shall attain full design strength and all falsework shall be removed prior to backfilling and applying highway live loads to the structure .
construction vehicles materials and equipment weighing less than num pounds in total will be allowed on any span provided the most recently placed concrete has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
loads over num pounds will not be allowed until the concrete has attained design strength and all falsework has been removed .
the only exceptions are that footings columns curb and gutter and sidewalks sidewalks on bridge decks are not included shall not be backfilled until permission has been given by the engineer .
the approach slabs may be opened to traffic when they have attained a compressive strength of num psi .
num structural concrete page num backfill material shall be placed in accordance with section num g. luminaires sign poles signals and sign bridges shall not be installed on their footings until the concrete has reached full design strength .
q .
joints surfaces of fresh concrete at horizontal joints shall be rough floated sufficiently to consolidate the surface .
all construction joints shall be cleaned of surface laitance curing compound and other foreign materials prior to placing fresh concrete against the joint .
drainage fabric shall be placed around construction joints on cast in place box culverts in accordance with section num .
num method of measurement structural concrete will be measured in accordance with the neat line dimensions shown on the plans to the nearest num cubic yard unless changes are ordered in writing .
deductions will not be made for the volume of concrete occupied by utility conduits num inch or smaller drainage pipe reinforcing steel encased structural steel pile heads anchors sleeves and encased grillage or for volume of concrete displaced by weep holes joints drains and scuppers or for fillets chamfers or scorings num square inch or less in cross section .
concrete approach and sleeper slabs will be measured to the nearest num square yard .
concrete used for foundation seals will not be measured for payment .
commercial texture finish will not be measured for payment .
the special surface finish will be measured along the neat line dimensions shown in the plans for the surfaces designated .
the special surface finish will be computed to the nearest square foot .
concrete curing will not be measured .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of concrete will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
concrete approach and sleeper slabs will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment tools materials and all other items of work required in furnishing forming placing finishing curing protecting and all other items incidental to the structural concrete .
reinforcing and structural steel will be paid for separately .
structural concrete num page num when a bid item for concrete is provided it will be considered full compensation for excavation necessary to construct the structure unless a separate item is provided for such excavation .
commercial texture finish will be incidental to the contract unit price per cubic yard for structural concrete .
special surface finish will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
num structural concrete page num this page intentionally left blank concrete for incidental construction class m num page num num description this work consists of site preparation form construction and the furnishing handling placing curing and finishing of concrete for minor structures and incidental construction .
num materials material shall conform to the following sections a .
cement section num .
type ii cement shall be used unless otherwise specified .
b .
fine aggregate section num .
c. coarse aggregate section num .
d. water section num .
e. admixtures sections num and num .
f. reinforcing steel section num .
g. curing materials section num .
h. preformed expansion joint filler section num .
i .
joint sealer section num .
j .
fly ash sectionnum .
k. grout section num k. num construction requirements the supplier of class m concrete will be required to furnish a written statement certifying the concrete furnished meets the applicable requirements of section num for class m concrete .
with the exception of section num a the requirements of section num shall not apply to class m concrete produced at a commercial precast facility regularly producing other precast items under section num .
class m concrete produced at a commercial precast facility shall conform to section num and section num a .
a .
concrete quality and proportion the concrete specified in this section will be designated as class mnum concrete .
num .
the following requirements shall apply for class mnum concrete num concrete for incidental construction class m page num a .
the concrete aggregate mixture shall contain a minimum of num coarse aggregate by weight .
b .
the mixture shall contain at least num pounds of cement per cubic yard .
c. the minimum num day compressive strength shall be num psi .
when class mnum concrete is specified the design mix for class anum concrete may be substituted when approved .
num .
class mnum concrete shall conform to the following slump and entrained air requirements a .
the slump at time of placement shall be maintained between num inch and num inches .
when high range water reducing admixtures hrwra are used at a commercial precast facility regularly producing other precast items under section num the slump at time of precast concrete placements shall be maintained between num inches and num inches .
b .
the entrained air content for cast in place concrete shall be num plus num minus num .
the entrained air content for precast concrete cast at a commercial precast facility regularly producing other precast items under section num shall be num plus or minus num .
b .
forms wood and metal forms shall conform to num c.num .
c. mixing concrete concrete mixing shall conform to section num e. d. limitations of mixing limitations of mixing shall conform to section num f. e. delivery requirements concrete delivery shall conform to section num g. f. placing concrete concrete placing shall conform to section num j. g. underwater concrete placement depositing concrete in water shall conform to section num m. h. surface finish surface finish shall conform to section num l. i. curing concrete curing concrete shall conform to section num m. j .
protection of concrete concrete shall be protected in accordance with section num n. concrete shall be maintained above numf until it has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
k. subsequent construction removal of formwork construction of superimposed elements backfilling and application of liveloads shall conform to section num o. and section num p. concrete for incidental construction class m num page num l. joints joints shall conform to section num q .
num method of measurement class m concrete will be measured in accordance with neat line dimensions shown on the plans unless changes are ordered during construction .
volumes will be computed to the nearest num cubic yard .
deductions will not be made for concrete displaced by pipes or conduits less than num inches in diameter reinforcing and structural steel weep holes joints drains and chamfers or fillets less than one square inch in cross section .
num basis of payment the accepted quantity of class m concrete will be paid for at contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment materials and incidentals required for placing finishing and curing the concrete .
num concrete for incidental construction class m page num this page intentionally left blank controlled density fill new section num page num num description this work consists of furnishing handling and placing controlled density fill .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections .
a .
cement section num .
type i type ii type iii or type v cement may be used unless otherwise specified .
b .
fine aggregate fine aggregate shall be a natural sand conforming to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num num num c. water section num .
d. admixtures controlled low strength material clsm performance additive foaming admixture as listed on the departments approved products list .
e. fly ash section num class c. num construction requirement a .
general controlled density fill shall be a mortar material with a free flowing consistency .
b .
mix design the controlled density fill mix design shall be in accordance with section num except as modified below unless specified otherwise the controlled density mix may conform to either of the two alternate mix designs .
num .
standard mix design material rate per cubic yard cement num pounds fine aggregate num pounds water num gallons fly ash num pounds num controlled density fill new section page num num .
clsm mix design material rate per cubic yard cement num pounds fine aggregate num pounds water num gallons clsm performance additive as recommended by the clsm performance additive manufacturer to produce a target air contentnum of num num num evaluated for specification at mix design only both alternate mix designs shown above are designed to produce a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
c. placement the contractor may adjust the proportion of water during placement to provide the necessary consistency of the mix as approved by the engineer .
controlled density fill shall be contained within the required limits with sandbags or other methods approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall prevent floatation uplift and movement due to the buoyant force of the controlled density fill until the controlled density fill hardens .
overlying surfacing materials shall not be placed sooner than num hours after placement of the controlled density fill .
num method of measurement measurement for controlled density fill will not be made .
plans quantity will be used for payment .
if changes are ordered by the engineer the volume will be measured to the nearest num cubic yard and the quantity adjusted .
num basis of payment controlled density fill will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing the controlled density fill and for all sandbags equipment labor material and all other incidental items required to complete the work .
drilled shaft construction num page num num description this work consists of all labor materials equipment and services required in the construction of drilled shafts .
num materials a .
concrete drilled shaft concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num except where modified by this section .
at least num calendar days before constructing drilled shafts the contractor shall submit to the departments materials surfacing central laboratory sufficient materials including a water reducer for a design mix .
the concrete mix will be designed to produce a concrete having the following characteristics num .
minimum cement content of num pounds per cubic yard of type ii cement conforming to section num num .
minimum num day compressive strength of num psi num .
slump at time of placement shall be between num and num inches for concrete that is placed by the freefall or tremie method .
the slump at the time of placement shall be between num and num inches for concrete that is pumped through a tremie .
in addition the slump shall be maintained above num inches for num hours from the time of batching regardless of the placement method .
slump loss shall be tested in accordance with sd num .
num .
entrained air content of num with an allowable tolerance of num to num .
num .
the mix design shall establish a maximum water cementitious material ratio for the concrete mix never to exceed num .
the use of a water reducer will be required to achieve the above properties .
water reducers conforming to aashto m num type c accelerating and type e water reducing and accelerating will not be permitted .
b. casing casing shall be smooth steel of sufficient thickness to withstand handling stresses concrete pressure and surrounding earth and fluid pressures .
the casing shall be of the diameter specified and shall have teeth at the bottom to facilitate proper seating of the casing into the plans specified formation .
c. access tubes for crosshole sonic log csl testing access tubes shall be num to num inch i.d .
steel pipe conforming to astm anum .
the selected pipes must have a round diameter free of defects or obstructions including any at the pipe joints in order to permit a free unobstructed passage of the source and receiver probes .
the pipes must be watertight and free from corrosion with clean internal and external faces to ensure smooth passage of the probes and to secure a good bond between the concrete and tubes .
num drilled shaft construction page num the pipes shall each be fitted with a watertight shoe on the bottom and a removable cap on the top .
d. grout grout for filling the access tubes at the completion of the csl tests shall conform to the requirements of section num or shall consist of portland cement water and a water reducing admixture mixed in the following proportions portland cement type i or ii num sack num lbs .
water num gallons maximum water reducing admixture manufacturers recommendation fly ash optional num pounds maximum num construction requirements a. drilled shaft installation plan not less than num calendar days before beginning drilled shaft construction the contractor shall submit an installation plan for approval to the office of bridge design through the area engineer .
the installation plan shall provide the following information num .
a list of all proposed equipment to be used and available on site including but not limited to cranes drill augers pilot bits bailing buckets final cleaning equipment dewatering pumps tremies concrete pumps casing etc .
include the casing diameter and wall thickness in the equipment list num .
details of the overall shaft construction sequence in each substructure unit or group of drilled shafts num .
a detailed explanation of how the casing is to be installed .
it is required that a tbar be on the project site such that the casing can be twisted into the specified formation to achieve as watertight of a seal as possible .
tamping or pounding the casing into the ground will not be allowed num .
details of shaft excavation methods to be used num .
methods to be used to clean the shaft excavation num .
details of reinforcement centering devices and their spacing num .
details and methods for supporting and lifting reinforcing steel cages num .
details of the tremie tube that is to be used in the event that a wet excavation is encountered .
include all other details of concrete placement such as free fall allowed only for shafts num inches in diameter or greater pumping etc .
a tremie tube is required to be on the project site .
details for the disposal of contaminated concrete from a wet excavation shall also be included and drilled shaft construction num page num num .
the contractor shall verify all existing ground and water elevations and establish the elevations of any work platforms etc .
that may be used .
these elevations shall be included in the drilled shaft installation plan .
b .
general requirements a drilled shaft preconstruction meeting is required to be held a minimum of num working days prior to beginning drilled shaft construction .
a representative from the bridge contractor drilled shaft subcontractor concrete supplier area office and office of bridge design is required to attend this meeting .
the drilled shaft installation plan will be discussed at the meeting and the responsibilities of each of the parties involved clearly identified .
the contractor shall perform the excavation for the shafts through the various types of materials that are encountered .
the excavation shall be to the dimensions and elevations shown in the plans .
contractor methods and equipment shall be suitable for the intended purpose and materials encountered .
all of the equipment listed in the drilled shaft installation plan shall be on the project site prior to the start of work .
the following equipment is required to be available for use on the project site at all times during drilled shaft construction num .
tremie of sufficient length to reach the bottom of the drilled shaft num .
tbar for installing casing num .
cleanout bucket of the proper size num .
graduated measuring device to determine excavation and water depth num .
pilot bit capable of drilling through rock and num .
a pump of sufficient capacity to remove the displaced water during underwater placement of concrete and for filling the excavation with water when required due to caving in or water bearing soils .
dewatering is a requirement prior to concrete placement by the free fall method .
unless otherwise specified on the plans the contractor shall begin drilled shaft excavation using the dry construction method .
the contractor shall use the temporary casing construction method when specified on the plans or when caving soils or ground water is encountered during excavation that is begun by the dry construction method .
the permanent casing construction method shall be used only when specified on the plans or approved by the office of bridge design .
upon completion of the excavation of a drilled shaft a cleanout bucket shall be used to remove all loose material from the bottom of the shaft .
after cleanout the reinforcing steel shall immediately be installed and the concrete placed prior to start of excavation for another drilled shaft .
num drilled shaft construction page num for drilled shaft concrete pours of num cubic yards and less the contractor shall have all of the concrete necessary to complete the drilled shaft at the project site and tested prior to placing any concrete in the drilled shaft .
vibrations caused by any work activities that may be detrimental to the freshly placed concrete will not be allowed for at least num hours after placement or until the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
if the engineer suspects that construction activities may be causing excessive vibration a num x num inch stake shall be driven solidly into the ground adjacent to the freshly placed concrete .
a small container of water shall then be placed on top of the stake .
if the water surface remains calm the construction activity will be allowed to continue .
when the water surface shows any movement vibrations are reaching the freshly placed concrete and the construction activities shall be either stopped or altered such that vibrations at the freshly placed concrete are eliminated .
c. dry construction method the dry construction method consists of drilling the shaft removing loose material from the excavation and placing the concrete in a relatively dry excavation .
the engineer must be able to inspect the sides and bottom of the excavation before placing the reinforcing steel cage and concrete .
the dry construction method shall be approved by the engineer when the shaft excavation has a water accumulation rate of num inches or less per hour the sides and bottom of the excavation remain stable without detrimental caving sloughing or swelling and loose material and water can be removed before inspection and concrete placement .
d. temporary casing construction method the temporary casing construction method shall be used when excavations begun by the dry construction method encounter water bearing or caving soil formations or when specified on the plans .
if during dry drilling the contractor encounters caving or water bearing soils the contractor shall stop drilling and fill the hole with water to a point above the ground water elevation .
if practical a positive num foot head of water shall be maintained above the ground water elevation .
when necessary a temporary casing may be required to achieve this head .
if caving soil is encountered a sufficient head of water shall be maintained to stop the caving .
once the hole is filled with water the excavation shall be advanced by drilling to a depth at which an impervious formation is reached .
a sufficient head of water shall be maintained during the drilling operation .
a temporary casing shall then be placed into the impervious formation by use of a tbar and twisting the casing into the specified formation to produce a watertight seal at the bottom .
other methods of seating the casing may be used with the engineers approval .
the casing and the seal at the bottom of the casing shall be watertight .
water shall be pumped out of the temporary casing and the excavation continued using the dry construction method .
during concrete placement the casing shall be withdrawn .
if a watertight seal can not be achieved at the bottom of the casing the shaft shall be drilled to the final elevation while keeping the hole full of water to maintain an adequate fluid head to control caving .
concrete shall then be placed using proper underwater concrete placement methods .
drilled shaft construction num page num num .
if the contractor elects to remove a casing and substitute a longer casing through caving soils the excavation shall be backfilled before a new casing is installed .
other methods may be used to control the stability of the excavation and protect the integrity of the foundation soils when approved by the engineer .
num .
temporary casing shall be removed before any of the drilled shaft concrete attains initial set .
before the casing is withdrawn the level of fresh concrete in the casing shall have sufficient head so all water trapped behind the casing is displaced upward without contaminating or displacing the concrete .
when water seepage can not be stopped and water is required to maintain stability of the perimeter of the hole the concrete shall be placed in the shaft using a tremie or pump .
simultaneously extract the casing and tremie or pump at a slow uniform rate .
maintain a sufficient head of concrete above the bottom of the casing to overcome the hydrostatic pressure outside the casing .
the bottom of the tremie or pump shall always be embedded a minimum of num feet into the fresh concrete during the extraction .
num .
temporary casing shall be removed at the time of concrete placement .
when a casing becomes bound in the excavation drilled shaft construction shall cease and the engineer will immediately inform the office of bridge design .
e. permanent casing construction method the permanent casing construction method shall be used only when specified on the plans or approved by the office of bridge design .
this method consists of placing a casing to a prescribed depth before excavation begins .
if full penetration can not be attained the engineer may require excavation of material within the embedded portion of the casing or excavation of a pilot hole ahead of the casing or both until the casing reaches the desired penetration .
over reaming to the outside diameter of the casing may be required before placing the casing as approved by the engineer .
a tbar shall be used to twist the permanent casing into the specified formation to achieve a watertight seal at the bottom .
other methods of seating the permanent casing may be used with the engineers approval .
the casing and the seal at the bottom of the casing shall be watertight .
if the contractor elects to remove a casing and substitute a longer casing through caving soils the engineer may require that the excavation be backfilled before a new casing is installed .
other methods may be used to control the stability of the excavation and protect the integrity of the foundation soils when approved by the engineer .
if during dry drilling the contractor encounters caving or water bearing soils the contractor shall stop drilling and fill the hole with water to a point above the ground water elevation .
if practical a positive num foot head of water shall be maintained above the ground water elevation .
if caving soil is encountered a sufficient head of water shall be maintained to stop the caving .
once the hole is filled with water the excavation shall be advanced by drilling .
a sufficient head of water shall be maintained during the drilling operation .
num drilled shaft construction page num upon completion of drilling install reinforcing steel and place concrete .
after the concrete has attained the specified strength the section of the casing between the plan shown cutoff elevation and the top shall be removed .
when the cutoff elevation is not shown on the plans the cutoff elevation is assumed to be flowline or ground line as appropriate .
the casing shall be cutoff by use of a cutoff saw .
use of an oxyacetylene torch or other methods which produce high heat damaging the concrete will not be allowed .
casings may only be cutoff and removed when both of the following conditions are met num .
the drilled shaft concrete has cured for num hours according to the specifications .
num .
the drilled shaft concrete has attained num psi minimum compressive strength .
f. excavation and drilling equipment excavation and drilling equipment shall have adequate capacity including power torque and downward force .
the excavation and over reaming tools shall be of adequate design size and strength to perform the work shown in the plans and described in this specification .
the excavation and drilling equipment shall be capable of excavating to the plans depth without the use of an extension bar .
when the material encountered can not be drilled using conventional earth augers and under reaming tools the contractor shall provide special drilling equipment including but not limited to rock core barrels rock tools air tools blasting materials and other equipment as necessary to excavate the shaft to the size and depth required .
approval by the engineer is required before any excavation by blasting is conducted .
g. reinforcing steel cage construction and placement the reinforcing steel cage consisting of longitudinal bars spirals or tie bars cage stiffener bars spacers crosshole sonic log csl access tubes and centralizers shall be completely assembled and placed as a unit into the excavated shaft .
placement of the reinforcing steel cage shall take place immediately after the shaft excavation is inspected and approved by the engineer and before concrete placement .
the reinforcing steel cage shall be tied and supported in the shaft so the cage will remain within the specified tolerances .
welding of the reinforcing steel cage will not be allowed .
concrete centralizers or other approved noncorrosive centering devices shall be used within num foot of the bottom .
centralizers shall also be used at intervals not exceeding num feet along the length of the shaft .
each level of centralizers shall be rotated num degrees in the horizontal plane relative to the level below .
concrete centralizers shall be constructed of concrete equal in quality and durability to the concrete specified for the shaft .
the concrete centralizers shall have the ends beveled to minimize the potential for catching on obstructions during reinforcing steel placement and they shall have a minimum of two tie wires cast in the concrete .
wrapping wires around the concrete centralizers to hold them in place is not an acceptable method of attachment .
any type of steel used as centralizers shall be epoxy coated .
the reinforcing steel cage shall not be in contact with the bottom of the shaft .
the elevation of the top of the reinforcing steel cage shall be checked before and after the concrete is placed .
if the reinforcing steel cage is not maintained within the specified drilled shaft construction num page num tolerances corrections to the cage support shall be made by the contractor as required by the engineer .
no additional shafts shall be constructed until the contractor has modified the reinforcing steel cage support to prevent vertical movement in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
h. installation of crosshole sonic log csl access tubes the contractor shall install access tubes as detailed in the plans for csl testing in all specified drilled shafts to permit access for the cls test probes .
the access tubes shall be evenly spaced and securely attached to the interior of the reinforcement cage of the shaft as shown in the plans .
the tubes shall be as near to vertical and parallel as possible .
even moderate bending of the tubes will result in large regional variations of the data .
the tubes shall extend from num inches above the bottom of the drilled shaft to at least num feet above the construction joint .
under no circumstances should the tubes be allowed to rest on the bottom of the drilled excavation .
during placement of the reinforcement cage care shall be exercised as to not damage the tubes .
after placement of the reinforcement cage the tubes shall be filled with clean water as soon as possible and the tube tops capped to keep debris out .
the tubes must be filled with water and capped either before the pouring of the concrete or no later than num hours after the pouring of the concrete otherwise debonding of the access tubes from the concrete will occur resulting in data which indicates poor quality concrete .
the contractor shall ensure the tubes remain filled until grouting occurs .
care shall be taken during the removal of the caps from the pipes after installation so as not to apply excess torque hammering or other stresses which could break the bond between the tubes and the concrete .
upon completion of the csl testing and acceptance of the drilled shaft by the engineer the water shall be removed from the access tubes and any other drilled holes .
the access tubes and the holes shall then be completely filled with grout .
the access tubes shall be filled using grout tubes that extend to the bottom of hole .
the access tubes shall be cut off flush with the top of the drilled shaft .
i. csl testing all equipment testing and reporting procedures shall be provided and performed in accordance with astm dnum and the following .
num .
testing the testing and analysis shall be performed by an independent testing organization proposed by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall furnish and install access tubes as specified to accommodate the csl testing .
the csl testing shall be performed after the shaft concrete has cured at least num hours .
additional curing time prior to testing may be required if the shaft concrete contains admixtures such as set retarding admixture or water reducing admixture .
the additional curing time prior to testing required under these circumstances shall not be grounds for additional compensation or extension of time to the contractor .
after placing the shaft concrete and before beginning csl testing of a shaft the contractor shall inspect the access tubes .
each access tube that the test probe num drilled shaft construction page num can not pass through shall be replaced at the contractors expense with a num to num inch diameter hole cored through the concrete for the entire length of the shaft .
location of the core hole shall be determined by the csl testing firm and shall not damage the shaft reinforcement .
descriptions of inclusions and voids in cored holes shall be logged and a copy of the log shall be submitted to the engineer .
findings from cored holes shall be preserved identified as to location and made available for inspection by the engineer .
num .
equipment csl equipment shall consist of the following components a digitizing card for conversion of analog csl data to digital a microprocessor based csl system for recording processing analyzing displaying and log printing of digitally converted csl data ultrasonic source and receiver probes capable of logging num to num inch i.d .
pipes an ultrasonic voltage pulser to excite the source combined with a synchronized triggering system to prompt the recording system a depth measuring device used to correlate records with depth and appropriate filteramplification and cable systems for csl testing .
num .
procedure for the csl test information on the shaft bottom and top elevations and length along with construction dates must be provided to the testing organization before or at the time of testing .
ultrasonic transmitterreceiver probes are then lowered to the bottom of a pair of access tubes .
all slack is removed from the cable in order to assure accurate depth measurements .
the two probes are then pulled simultaneously as to maintain a near horizontal ray path between them .
measurement shall be made at num foot intervals or less as the probes ascend the tube pairs .
this process is repeated for all test paths along the outer perimeter as well as across the inner diagonals of the shaft .
the data is analyzed and anomaliesdefects characterized by longer travel times and lower signal amplitudes should be reported to the engineer at the time of testing .
num .
csl results the csl results shall be presented in report form .
digitized raw data files shall also be submitted with the report .
this report shall contain csl logs and waterfall diagrams for each tube pair tested combined with an analysis of the first arrival time or compressional wave velocity and signal amplitude of the pulse versus depth .
any anomalydefect zones shall be discussed in the report where appropriate .
the report shall identify and provide detailed discussion of each anomalous zone detected by the csl .
anomalous zones are areas where velocity reduction exceeds num of the shaft average velocity .
within these zones collect and process additional data to construct threedimensional color coded tomographic images with two dimensional crosssections between tubes within the anomalous zone .
drilled shaft construction num page num j. csl testing organization and personnel at least num calendar days prior to beginning shaft construction the contractor shall submit the name of the independent testing organization and the names of the personnel conducting the csl tests to the engineer for approval .
the submittal shall include documentation that the qualifications specified below are satisfied .
the independent testing organization and the testing personnel shall meet the following minimum qualifications num .
the testing organization shall have performed csl tests on a minimum of three deep foundation projects in the last two years .
num .
personnel conducting the tests for the testing organization shall have a minimum of one year experience in csl testing and interpretation .
k. acceptance of csl tested drilled shafts the acceptance of each drilled shaft shall be the decision of the engineer based on the results of the csl reports and other information about the shaft placement .
dewatering and grouting of the access tubes and any subsequent work above the construction joint of the drilled shaft shall not be done until after the acceptance of each shaft .
the engineer will provide a response to the contractor within num business days after receiving the test results and analysis submittal .
rejection of the shaft based on csl shall require conclusive evidence that a defect exists in the shaft which will result in inadequate or unsafe performance under service loads .
if the csl records are complex or inconclusive the engineer may require coring or excavation of the shaft to verify shaft conditions .
if no defect is encountered the state shall pay for all coring or excavation costs including the grouting of all core holes .
in the case that any shaft is determined to be unacceptable the contractor shall submit a plan for remedial action to the engineer for approval .
any modifications to the foundation shafts and load transfer mechanisms caused by the remedial action will require calculations and working drawings stamped by a sd registered professional engineer for all foundation elements affected .
all labor and materials required to perform remedial shaft action shall be provided at no cost to the department and with no extension of the contract time .
l. concrete placement the time limitations for drilled shaft concrete placement as specified in section num g shall be waived except that the interval between batches shall not exceed num minutes .
the drilled shaft concrete shall be placed immediately after the reinforcing steel cage is placed and shall be placed according to the requirements of this specification and all related specifications .
when possible drilled shaft concrete shall be placed the same working day in which the excavation is done .
if it is anticipated that the excavation reinforcing steel placement and concrete placement can not be completed before the end of the working day the excavation shall not be started until the following day unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
it is required that drilled shaft concrete be placed within num hours of the excavation reaching the friction bedrock elevation specified in the plans .
in the event that the num hour time limitation is exceeded drilled shaft operations shall cease and the office of bridge design shall be immediately notified .
num drilled shaft construction page num concrete placement shall be continuous until the shaft is full and uncontaminated concrete flows out of the top of the shaft as determined by the engineer .
the use of spud vibrators or other vibrating tools in the drilled shaft concrete will not be permitted .
the free fall method of concrete placement is allowed for shafts num inches in diameter or greater provided that all of the following conditions are met the water accumulation rate in the excavation is num inches or less per hour there is no caving or sloughing of the excavation the excavation is dewatered immediately prior to concrete placement such that there is no more than num inches of standing water in the bottom of the excavation and the concrete placement is directed through a hopper with a drop tube such that the concrete fall is vertical down the center of the shaft and the concrete is not allowed to hit the sides of the shaft or the reinforcing steel cage .
m. underwater placement of concrete num .
tremie the tremie pipe shall be a minimum of num inch thick wall steel pipe with a minimum inside diameter of num num inches .
the tremie pipe shall be smooth and thoroughly cleaned of any hardened concrete rust and all other contaminants .
the tremie pipe shall be marked to allow determination of depth to the mouth of the tremie .
joints between sections of tremie pipe shall be gasketed and bolted to be watertight under placement conditions .
instead of bolted joints welded joints may be used if a smooth finish is maintained on the inside of the tremie pipe at the weld location .
a crane or other lifting device shall be available to remove the tremie from the water for resealing or horizontal relocation .
placement of underwater concrete shall be a continuous operation .
if an interruption of placement occurs the interruption shall not exceed num minutes without removal of the tremie and restarting the concrete placement according to the paragraph below .
an interruption in concrete placement shall not exceed the time for initial set of the concrete .
if the concrete attains the initial set before the concrete placement is completed concrete placement shall cease and the concrete in the shaft shall be rejected and removed from the shaft .
startingrestarting of the concrete placement by tremie shall begin by sealing the bottom of the tremie with a watertight seal before placing the tremie into the water .
the watertight seal shall prevent water from entering the tremie yet will be dislodged when concrete flow is initiated .
the empty tremie pipe shall be sufficiently heavy to be negatively buoyant when empty .
the tremie pipe shall be sealed lowered to the bottom of the shaft or embedded at least num feet into the concrete and drilled shaft construction num page num completely filled with concrete .
fill the tremie slowly to avoid entrapped air and bridging .
when full the tremie shall be slowly lifted num inches off the bottom to start concrete flow .
the concrete supply shall be continuous until soundings indicate the tremie has the required embedment .
after being dislodged the sealing device shall either remain on the bottom or be retrieved by the contractor .
the mouth of the tremie shall always remain embedded in the fresh concrete a minimum of num feet unless the tremie is being completely removed from the water .
at no time shall the concrete be allowed to fall through water .
a tremie shall not be moved horizontally while concrete is flowing through it .
to relocate a tremie lift it from the water reseal relocate and restart as required above .
all vertical movements of the tremie shall be made slowly and shall be carefully controlled to prevent loss of seal .
if loss of seal occurs placement through that tremie shall be halted immediately .
the tremie shall be removed resealed replaced and restarted as directed above .
num .
concrete pump concrete pumps can be used for underwater concrete placement if surging of the pump line can be controlled to keep the pump line sufficiently embedded into the fresh concrete .
if surging of the line can not be controlled a concrete pump shall not be used .
the pump line shall be not less than num inches in diameter .
the portion of the pump line that penetrates the deposited concrete shall be a rigid steel line pipe .
an approved plug shall be inserted into the pump line near the pump in such a way that there is fresh concrete against the plug with no air or water between the plug and concrete .
the plug shall be advanced down the pump line using pressure from the concrete pump to the bottom of the shaft .
placement shall begin with the pump line within num inches of the bottom of the shaft .
after pumping begins the pump line shall be kept within num inches of the bottom until soundings indicate that the pump line is embedded at least num feet into fresh concrete .
the end of the pump line may be raised with the rising column of concrete as long as the end of the pump line remains embedded at least num feet into the concrete .
at no time shall the concrete be allowed to fall through water .
placement of concrete shall be a continuous operation .
interruptions of placement shall not exceed num minutes or the time of initial set of the concrete whichever is shorter .
if the time of initial set is exceeded the concrete shall be rejected and removed from the shaft .
if the pump line is allowed to come out of or is removed from the concrete once placement has begun placement though the pump line shall be restarted .
a watertight seal shall be installed on the end of the pump line .
the line shall then be filled with concrete before the pump line is lowered into the water .
the pump line num drilled shaft construction page num shall be filled in such a way as to eliminate air or water in the line .
once filled the pump line shall be embedded a minimum of num feet into the concrete and pumping resumed .
the sealing device shall be retrieved by the contractor after pumping has been restarted .
n. construction tolerances the following tolerances apply to drilled shafts the drilled shaft shall be within one twelfth of the shaft diameter or num inches whichever is less of the plan shown horizontal position at the plan elevation of the top of the shaft .
the bottom of the shaft shall be drilled to the plan shown elevation within a tolerance of plus or minus num inches .
the vertical alignment of the shaft excavation shall not vary from the plan alignment by more than num inch per num foot of depth or num inches of length or whichever is less .
after all concrete is placed the top of the reinforcing steel cage shall be no more than num inches above nor more than num inches below plan position .
the diameter of the completed shaft shall be the plan diameter with a tolerance of minus num inch plus num inches .
the top of the shaft shall be built to plan elevation with a tolerance of plus or minus num inch .
the plan shown elevation of the top of shaft shall not be changed without prior permission from the office of bridge design .
excavation equipment and methods shall be designed so the completed shaft excavation will have a relatively flat bottom .
num method of measurement a .
class anum concrete drilled shaft the plan quantity shall be the quantity paid for unless a change is ordered in writing .
if a change is ordered measurement will be according to neat line dimensions specified in the change and quantities computed to the nearest num cubic yard .
b. drilled shaft excavation the plan quantity shall be the quantity paid for unless a change is ordered in writing .
if a change is ordered measurement will be according to the neat line dimensions specified in the change and quantities computed to the nearest num cubic yard .
c. permanent casing the length of casing from the plan shown cutoff elevation to the bottom of the casing unless otherwise specified in the plans .
permanent casing shall be measured to the nearest num linear foot for each specified size of casing .
d. crosshole sonic log csl test will be measured by the number of shafts tested .
csl testing will only be measured once per shaft tested .
drilled shaft construction num page num num basis of payment a .
class anum concrete drilled shaft the accepted quantities of concrete will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment tools materials and all incidentals required .
all costs for furnishing installing cutting off and grouting the csl access tubes will be incidental to the unit price bid for class anum concrete drilled shaft .
payment will be for plan quantity regardless of the amount placed .
if a change is ordered payment will be for the changed quantity at the contract unit price .
b. drilled shaft excavation the accepted quantities of excavation shall be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment tools materials and all incidentals required including blasting equipment and temporary casings .
payment will be for plan quantity regardless of the amount placed .
if a change is ordered payment will be for the changed quantity at the contract unit price c. permanent casing the accepted quantities of casing will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for each specified size .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment tools materials and all incidentals required .
d. crosshole sonic log csl test the accepted quantity of cross sonic log tests will be paid at the contract unit price per each test .
payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment tools materials services and incidentals required to perform the tests and analyze the results .
payment will be made only once per shaft tested .
num drilled shaft construction page num this page intentionally left blank railing num page num num description this work consists of fabricating and constructing steel railings .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections a .
structural steel structural steel shall conform to section num .
unless otherwise specified on the plans structural steel for railing shall conform to astm anumanumm grade num except that hollow structural section members shall conform to astm anum grade b .
b. anchor bolts anchor bolts shall be as specified in the plans and shall conform to section num .
c. paint paint shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements railing shall be fabricated and erected in accordance with section num and the following unless otherwise specified in the plans the contractor shall submit shop plans in accordance with the following prior to fabrication the contractor shall submit shop plans to the department for the departments review and approval .
the contractor shall send an email with the shop plans attached as a pdf to the project engineer and office of bridge design .
upon request the project engineer will provide the contractor the appropriate email addresses .
the contractor shall not begin fabrication prior to the departments review and final approval of shop plans .
within num calendar days of receiving the initial shop plans the office of bridge design will send a response to the contractor and submitter with the departments final approval or one reviewed copy of the shop plans with changes to the design marked .
the contractor will make the necessary changes if any to the shop plans .
the contractor will then send the project engineer and the office of bridge design an email with the final shop plans as a pdf for distribution .
railing shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown and the shop plans and shall be adjusted prior to bolting or welding the connections to ensure proper alignment at joints and throughout the railing length .
rail posts shall be built vertical .
shop and field welding and welding inspection shall conform to the requirements in the latest edition of ansiaws dnum or num whichever is applicable structural welding code .
welders shall be qualified in accordance with section num d. the painting of railing shall conform to section num .
num railing page num num method of measurement measurement for railing will not be made .
plans quantity will be used for payment .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of railing will be paid for as detailed on the plans and unless otherwise specified on the plans shall include the cost of structural steel anchor bolts painting galvanizing welding weld inspection labor equipment and all other items incidental to fabricating and installing the railing .
reinforcing steel num page num num description this work consists of furnishing and placing steel of the specified size and type as reinforcement in concrete .
num material reinforcement shall conform to section num .
reinforcement shall be furnished in the full lengths indicated on the plans .
num construction requirements a .
protection of material steel reinforcement shall be protected from damage and when placed in the work steel reinforcement shall be free from dirt detrimental scale paint oil and other foreign substance .
steel reinforcement shall be stored above ground on platforms skids or other supports .
when epoxy coated steel reinforcement is specified the following requirements also apply num .
in order to protect the coated reinforcement from damage the contractor shall use padded or nonmetallic slings or straps to load unload or move epoxy coated reinforcement .
num .
bundled bars shall be handled in a manner as to prevent excessive sagging of the bars so as not to damage the epoxy coating .
num .
to prevent damage to the epoxy coating care shall be taken during placement of epoxy coated reinforcement to ensure the bars are not dropped or dragged .
num .
damaged areas shall be repaired by removing all rust and contaminants from the damaged area and applying an epoxy coating to the damaged area .
the touch up epoxy coating material shall be inert in concrete and compatible with the original epoxy coating and the reinforcing steel .
this coating material shall be epoxy coating touch up material supplied by an epoxy coating manufacturer who supplies coating material for new epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
touch up epoxy coatings from spray cans will not be permitted .
the touch up epoxy coating shall be allowed to cure for a minimum of num hours or as per the manufacturers recommendations whichever is more stringent before concrete is placed .
num .
epoxy coated reinforcing steel shall be covered with a heavy duty waterproof opaque covering to protect the epoxy coating from dirt and debris and from the effects of ultraviolet rays if the reinforcing steel will be stored for more than num calendar days .
b. bending reinforcement shall be bent to the shapes specified .
bending and bundling shall conform to the standard practice currently specified by the concrete reinforcing steel institute .
num reinforcing steel page num c. placing and fastening reinforcing steel shall be accurately placed in accordance with the tolerances of aci num and firmly held in the positions specified using steel chairs or other approved methods .
bars shall be tied at all intersections num when spacing is num foot or more in all directions longitudinal vertical and horizontal otherwise a minimum of every other intersection num shall be tied .
num .
general distances from the forms shall be maintained by stays blocks ties chairs or hangers .
devices for holding reinforcement from contact with the forms shall be of approved shape and dimensions .
layers of bars shall be separated by approved metal devices .
the use of pebbles stone brick metal pipe and wooden blocks will not be permitted .
wire bar supports such as ferrous metal chairs and bolsters shall conform to industry practice as described in the manual of standard practice of the concrete reinforcing steel institute .
chairs or bolsters which bear against the forms for exposed surfaces shall be either class num maximum protection plastic protected or class num moderate protection type b stainless steel tipped for which the stainless steel conforms to astm anum type num .
chairs or bolsters which are earth bearing shall be class num no protection bright basic bar supports .
for epoxy coated reinforcement all wire bar supports and bar clips shall be plastic or epoxy coated .
chair spacing shall not exceed num feet num inches in either direction .
the engineer may require a closer chair spacing for mat rigidity .
plastic chairs shall not be used .
tie wires shall be blackannealed num num gauge or heavier .
ties shall be plastic coated when used in conjunction with epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
welding of reinforcing steel shall not be allowed without written approval of the bridge construction engineer .
the request for approval shall list the bars to be welded welding procedure type of electrode joint detail and mill certificate of the reinforcing steel to be welded .
reinforcement shall be inspected and approved before the placing of concrete begins .
the placing of any reinforcement except mesh during the process of placing the concrete will not be permitted .
concrete placed in violation of this provision may be rejected and ordered removed .
num .
structures when placing bridge deck and box culvert reinforcement either slab bolster sb or beam bolster bb bar supports shall be used between the mats or reinforcement and the form work .
either slab bolster upper sbu or beam bolster upper bbu bar supports shall be used between mats of reinforcing steel .
individual high chair hc bar supports shall not be used .
on girder bridges either slab bolster upper sbu or beam bolster upper bbu bar supports shall be used between mats of reinforcement and placed transverse to the girders .
slab bolsters sb or beam bolsters bb shall be used under the bottom mat placed parallel to the girders .
reinforcing steel num page num the top mat of bridge slab and box culvert reinforcement shall be tied down with num num gauge diameter minimum tie wires or other approved devices .
it will not be permissible to tack weld reinforcement .
on girder bridges ties shall be used along each line of beams at longitudinal intervals not to exceed num feet .
the ties shall be secured to the shear transfer devices protruding from the top of the beam .
where shear transfer devices are not available the ties may be secured to the bottom mat of slab reinforcing steel .
other types of bridges and box culverts the top mat of reinforcement shall be tied down at a maximum of num foot longitudinal and transverse intervals with the ties secured to either the forms or bottom mat of slab reinforcing steel .
num .
continuous reinforced concrete pavement on continuous reinforced concrete pavement the contractor shall use continuous high chair chcp and beam bolsters bbp with earthbearing bases or sand plates p or an approved alternate .
individual high chair hc bar supports shall not be used .
d. mechanical bar splices mechanical bar splices shall only be used when specified in the plans or approved by the engineer .
the model of mechanical bar splice to be used shall be submitted to the office of bridge design through the proper channels for approval .
the mechanical connection shall develop num of the specified yield strength of a grade num bar .
the contractor shall obtain from the manufacturer and submit to the engineer certification indicating the mechanical bar splice is capable of developing num of the specified yield strength of a grade num bar .
the bar lengths shown in the plans are the lengths of the bars neglecting the mechanical bar splice .
when mechanical bar splices are used to splice epoxy coated bars the mechanical bar splices shall be epoxy coated by the manufacturer or made of an approved corrosion resistant material .
coating the mechanical bar splice with epoxy touchup is not an approved method for this situation .
num method of measurement reinforcing steel will be measured by the pound based on the theoretical weight complete in place .
the weights calculated shall be based upon the following table num reinforcing steel page num bar designation size num num num num num num num num num num num weight poundsfoot num num num num num num num num num num num allowance will not be made for the clips wire or other fastening devices for holding the steel in place .
mechanical rebar splices will be measured on a per each basis .
num basis of payment reinforcing steel will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound .
all costs involved with supplying and installing mechanical bar splices shall be included in the contract unit price bid for the respective size of rebar splice as specified in the plans .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing materials labor equipment and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
bridge deck polymer chip seal num page num num description this work consists of preparation of the plans specified existing bridge deck surface and furnishing and placing two coats of a polymer chip seal on the prepared bridge deck surface .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections a .
concrete patching material concrete patching material shall be packaged dry rapid hardening cementitious mortar or concrete materials conforming to the requirements of astm c num type rnum and shall contain a bonding agent and shall not contain any chlorides magnesium or phosphates .
b .
water section num c. polymer section num d. cover aggregate section num num construction requirements a .
surface preparation num .
removal and replacement of loose and delaminated concrete a .
concrete removal classification concrete removal shall be divided into one of the following two classes num concrete removal class a concrete removal class a shall consist of the removal of delaminated and visibly loose concrete and any bituminous patches when present from the top of existing bridge deck down to a depth no deeper than the top of the top bar in the top mat of bridge deck reinforcing steel .
unintentional concrete removal below the top of the top bar in the top mat of bridge deck reinforcing steel during the concrete removal class a process will be considered a part of concrete removal class a .
when grinding is specified the concrete removal class a shall be done after the bridge deck has been ground .
num concrete removal class b concrete removal class b areas shall be determined by the engineer after completion of the concrete removal class a has been accomplished .
concrete removal class b shall consist of the removal of delaminated and visibly loose concrete that exists below the bottom limits of the concrete removal class a below the top of the top bar in the top mat of bridge deck reinforcing steel .
num bridge deck polymer chip seal page num b .
concrete removal concrete removal shall be accomplished by jackhammers and chipping hammers or other methods as approved by the engineer .
jackhammers and chipping hammers shall be used as follows num jackhammers heavier than num pounds will not be permitted .
num chipping hammers heavier than num pounds will not be permitted for removing concrete below the top of the top mat of reinforcing steel .
num jackhammers and chipping hammers shall not be operated at an angle in excess of num degrees measured from the surface of the concrete .
num extreme care shall be taken when using jackhammers and chipping hammers to assure that existing reinforcing steel is not damaged or debonded from the sound concrete .
removal shall begin near the center of the loose or delaminated concrete and shall progress outwardly until the loose or delaminated concrete is removed and sound concrete is encountered such that the amount of concrete removal is minimized .
the edges of removed concrete shall be defined with a num inch deep saw cut where practical as approved by the engineer .
if saw cutting is not practical the use of jackhammers or chipping hammers may be required around the edges of the removal area to attain satisfactory results .
care shall be taken during concrete removal to not nick gouge or in any other way damage the in place reinforcing steel .
any inadvertent damage to the in place reinforcing steel shall be brought to the attention of the departments bridge construction engineer and shall be repaired by the contractor as directed by the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
c. concrete replacement upon completion of the concrete removal and immediately prior to placing any concrete patching material into the concrete removal areas the removal areas shall be thoroughly cleaned of loose and foreign material by abrasive blasting .
the surface profile of the area to receive the concrete patching material shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the abrasive blasting shall be to the extent that all surface laitance is removed .
abrasive blast cleaning shall expose the coarse aggregate and remove rust from any exposed reinforcing steel .
after abrasive blasting the surface shall be cleaned by the use of compressed air to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the air compressor used for cleaning shall be equipped with trap devices capable of providing moisturefree and oilfree air at a pressure of num psi .
the existing surface at the time of placement of the concrete patching material shall be at least numf measured by a thermometer placed against the concrete surface and covered with an insulating blanket .
the concrete patching material shall be mixed and placed in accordance with the manufacturers technical data bridge deck polymer chip seal num page num sheet .
the contractor shall provide a manufacturers technical data sheet to the engineer prior to performing the work .
the concrete patching material shall be maintained at or above numf for at least num hours after placement .
immediately after finishing the concrete patching material the surface of the concrete patching material shall be covered with a double layer of wet curing blanket .
within one hour of covering with wet curing blanket polyethylene sheeting shall be placed on the wet curing blanket .
the surface shall be wet cured for a minimum of num hours or in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations whichever is more stringent .
following the wet cure the curing blanket and polyethylene sheeting shall be removed and the surface allowed to air dry for a minimum of num hours after removal of the curing blanket and polyethylene sheeting before application of the polymer chip seal is permitted .
num .
bridge deck grinding if specified in the plans the bridge deck surface shall be ground prior to placement of polymer chip seal .
the grinding shall remove the existing surface conditions as defined by the plan notes including but not limited to rubberized asphalt chip seal epoxy chip seal polymer chip seal pavement markings and tining and shall be to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the grinding shall be performed in the longitudinal direction and shall not damage bridge joints .
the grinding shall result in a parallel corduroy texture consisting of grooves between num and num inches wide .
the distance between the grooves shall be between num and num inches .
the peaks of the ridges shall not be greater than num inch higher than the bottom of the grooves .
the grinding shall be uniform and shall follow the existing profile of the bridge deck .
the grinding process shall not introduce dips and bumps that did not previously exist on the bridge deck surface or in any way decrease the existing ride quality of the bridge deck .
grinding of the bridge deck shall be accomplished utilizing diamond blades mounted on a selfpropelled machine designed for grinding and texturing pavement .
the equipment shall be operated in such a manner that it will not damage the underlying deck surface .
grinding equipment that causes ravels aggregate fractures or spalls shall not be permitted .
residue or excess water generated by the grinding operations shall be removed with vacuum equipment from the deck surface before the residue has time to set up .
vacuumed residue or excess water shall not be expelled on the approach roadway or shoulder surfaces .
num .
abrasive blasting of bridge deck after grinding the entire bridge deck surface shall be thoroughly shot blasted to international concrete repair institute icri concrete surface profile cspnum medium shot blast to remove all foreign materials which may interfere with the bonding or curing of the polymer chip seal .
the shot blasting shall remove all surface laitance and shall expose the coarse aggregate to the satisfaction of the engineer .
small areas where shot blasting is unable to be num bridge deck polymer chip seal page num performed curb lines etc .
shall be cleaned by abrasive blast cleaning to the satisfaction of the engineer .
upon completion of the shot blasting and abrasive blasting the entire bridge deck shall be blown clean with dry compressed air to remove all dust and debris .
cleaning by shot blasting abrasive blasting and compressed air shall be done no more than num hours prior to the placement of the polymer chip seal .
in the event that the polymer chip seal is not placed within num hours of shot blasting and abrasive blast cleaning or in the event of rain or other inclement weather contaminating the surface the surface shall be recleaned by abrasive blast cleaning and dry compressed air .
only equipment required for the application of the polymer chip seal will be allowed on any portion of the bridge deck which has been cleaned and prepared for application of the polymer chip seal .
if equipment is used on the cleaned and prepared bridge deck the area shall be protected from contamination with plastic .
b. bridge deck polymer chip seal num .
seasonal limitations polymer chip seals shall only be applied within the seasonal limitation of may num to october num inclusive .
num .
manufacturers representative a manufacturer approved representative shall be present on the jobsite during application of the polymer chip seal .
the representative shall provide technical expertise to the contractor and engineer regarding the safe handling correct placement and proper curing of the polymer chip seal .
the manufacturers representative shall provide the engineer and the contractor a copy of the written application recommendations technical data sheet and product safety data sheet .
in addition the contractor shall make a product safety data sheet available to anyone that will be exposed to the polymer materials .
num .
polymer application requirements the contractor shall store mix handle and apply the polymer in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations or as approved by the engineer unless otherwise specified by the following requirements a. polymer shall not be applied unless the ambient air temperature and the application area surface temperature is between numf and numf with the air temperature at least numf above the dew point temperature .
in addition the forecast for the duration of the application period plus four hours after the anticipated completion of the chip seal application shall be such that no rain is expected and temperatures are forecasted to be between numf and numf with the air temperature at least numf above the dew point temperature .
b .
the application of the polymer chip seal system shall not be made on a wet or damp surface .
in the event of rain the surface shall be dried for num hours prior to application .
in lieu of waiting the num hours astm d num standard test method bridge deck polymer chip seal num page num for indicating moisture in concrete by the plastic sheet method may be used to determine when all moisture is out of the concrete .
the use of a surface moisture meter to determine surface conditions will not be allowed .
c. the openings of any bridge deck drains shall be temporarily sealed during polymer placement as approved by the engineer .
d. the surfaces of existing bridge joints shall be masked with duct tape or other material as approved by the engineer .
the masking shall be completely removed before the polymer achieves initial set .
removal shall not damage the adjacent polymer or the surface of the underlying joint .
e. when phased construction of the polymer chip seal is required the contractor shall maintain a straight line between the phases of polymer placement for both layers by masking the line between phases with duct tape or other material approved by the engineer .
the masking shall be completely removed before the polymer achieves initial set and shall be removed in a manner that will not damage the adjacent polymer .
overlapping the new polymer chip seal onto existing polymer chip seal shall not be done .
f. prior to mixing the application area shall be marked in a grid to ensure proper spread rates are achieved .
g. a prime coat if required by manufacturer shall be applied according to manufacturers recommendations and will be applied in addition to the two coats of polymer chip seal .
h. a coat of polymer shall be distributed at the manufacturers recommended application rate .
the application rate shall be a minimum of num gallon per num square feet .
num .
cover aggregate application requirements a .
after the polymer is distributed on the application area a broadcast of cover aggregate shall be made to refusal such that num a uniform layer of cover aggregate is attained .
a nonuniform broadcast will result in an inconsistent polymer chip seal thickness and a poor ride .
num there are no visible shiny wet spots after application .
b .
broadcasting shall be done by handseeding or other methods approved by the manufacturers representative such that the following conditions are met num the aggregate falls vertically to the application area surface to prevent pushing of the polymer resin .
num aggregate coverage is uniform over the application area .
num bridge deck polymer chip seal page num num .
clean up of excess cover aggregate requirements the polymer shall be allowed to cure before excess cover aggregate is removed .
cure the polymer for num to num hours depending on temperature or based on the manufacturers recommendations before removing excess cover aggregate .
the polymer must have sufficient strength to retain aggregate .
excess aggregate will be removed by brooming high pressured dry air or vacuuming and shall be disposed of by the contractor as approved by the engineer .
num .
second coat application a second coat of polymer shall be distributed at the manufacturers recommended application rate .
the application rate shall be a minimum of num gallon per num square feet .
cover aggregate shall be broadcast as per section num b.num .
in the event of rain before second coat is applied the surface shall be dried prior to application .
if second coat is not applied within num hours or traffic is allowed on the first coat the application area must be abrasive blasted prior to application .
num .
testing pulloff tests shall be performed after the final coat of polymer chip seal is cured and excess aggregate is removed to verify adequate bond strength of the polymer to the cover aggregate and concrete substrate .
pulloff tests shall be performed by the contractor and shall be witnessed by the engineer .
placement of pulloff test shall be determined by the engineer and be performed prior to opening to traffic .
pulloff tests may not be performed when the surface temperature is at or above numf .
one pulloff test shall be performed for each num linear feet of polymer chip seal application width up to num feet wide for each structure .
a minimum of num pulloff tests will be required for each structure .
the testing shall be performed as follows a. pulloff tests shall be performed according to astm dnum .
b. pulloff tests with a resulting load of num psi or more shall be considered passing .
c. all pulloff tests with a resulting load of less than num psi shall be retested according to the type of failure .
there are four possibilities or combinations thereof as described below num failure in the concrete substrate concrete failure the contractor shall perform one additional test within num foot of the failing test to verify concrete failure .
num detaching assembly adhesive failure adhesive failure the contractor shall perform one additional test within num foot of the failing test .
the contractor shall repeat the test until the adhesive no longer fails .
num separation of the polymer chip seal from the concrete surface polymer failure the contractor shall perform two additional pulloff tests as described below .
bridge deck polymer chip seal num page num num pullout of the aggregate from the polymer polymer or aggregate failure the contractor shall perform two additional pulloff tests as described below .
for failure num or num the contractor shall perform two additional pulloff tests .
one test shall be performed between num feet and num feet back from the failing test and one test shall be performed between num feet and num feet ahead of the failing test .
if either of these two additional pulloff tests fails the polymer chip seal fails and the failing polymer chip seal shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
the limits of the failing polymer chip seal shall be defined as the polymer chip seal onehalf of the distance back and onehalf of the distance ahead to the adjacent passing tests .
when the detaching assembly has been separated from the surface the damage created by the test shall be repaired using a small amount of the polymer and aggregate used in the polymer chip seal .
num method of measurement a .
remove and replace deteriorated concrete removal of deteriorated concrete will be measured by the class of concrete removal .
replacement of deteriorated concrete will be measured by the concrete patching material bridge deck item .
num .
concrete removal class a concrete removal class a will be measured to the nearest num foot and the area computed to the nearest num square yard .
num .
concrete removal class b concrete removal class b will be measured to the nearest num foot and the area computed to the nearest num square yard .
num .
concrete patching material bridge deck concrete patching material bridge deck will be measured to nearest num cubic feet as determined from the theoretical yield per bag of concrete patching material .
b. bridge deck grinding measurement will not be made for bridge deck grinding .
the plan quantity will be the basis of payment .
c. abrasive blasting of bridge deck measurement will not be made for abrasive blasting of bridge deck .
the plan quantity will be the basis of payment .
d. two coat bridge deck polymer chip seal measurement will not be made for two coat bridge deck polymer chip seal .
the plan quantity will be the basis of payment .
e. pulloff test measurement will not be made for pulloff tests .
num basis of payment a .
remove and replace deteriorated concrete removal of deteriorated concrete will be paid for under the class of concrete removal .
replacement of deteriorated concrete will be paid for under the concrete patching material bridge deck item .
num bridge deck polymer chip seal page num num .
concrete removal class a concrete removal class a will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment materials and all incidental work required to remove the specified concrete concrete sawing and disposing of removed material .
num .
concrete removal class b concrete removal class b will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment materials and all incidental work required to remove the specified concrete concrete sawing and disposing of removed material .
num .
concrete patching material bridge deck concrete patching material bridge deck will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot .
payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment materials and all incidental work required to abrasive blast clean the removal areas and furnish place and cure the concrete patching material within the removal areas .
b. bridge deck grinding bridge deck grinding when specified in the plans will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment materials and all incidental work required to grind the bridge deck surface to the required profile and to remove and dispose of the grinding residue and water .
c. abrasive blasting of bridge deck abrasive blasting of bridge deck will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment materials and all incidental work required to shot blast and abrasive blast clean the bridge deck surface of all foreign materials and to remove and dispose of all residue .
d. remove and replace deteriorated concrete remove and replace deteriorated concrete when specified in the plans will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment shall be full compensation for equipment materials labor and incidentals necessary to remove loose deteriorated concrete or bituminous material cleaning removal areas disposal of removed materials and furnishing placing and curing new concrete place within the removal areas .
e. two coat bridge deck polymer chip seal two coat bridge deck polymer chip seal will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment materials and all incidental work required to furnish and install the two coat bridge deck polymer chip seal and to remove and dispose of the excess cover aggregate .
payment will also be full compensation for all manufacturer approved representative expenses .
f. pulloff test no payment will be made for pulloff tests .
all costs related to the testing for labor test equipment laboratory tools and all incidentals required to satisfactorily perform the required work shall be incidental to the contract unit price for two coat bridge deck polymer chip seal .
timber prestressed and steel piles num page num num description this work consists of furnishing driving and cutting off timber prestressed and steel piling and furnishing driving cutting off and fastening of sheet piling and steel sheeting designated to be left in place .
num materials materials shall conform to the following requirements a .
timber piles section num .
b .
steel piles astm anum grade num .
c. sheet piles section num .
d. steel sheeting section num .
e. prestressed piles section num .
num construction requirements a .
preparation for driving steel and timber pile num .
caps the heads of timber piles shall be protected by approved caps if driving is likely to damage the pile .
when the area of the head of any timber pile is greater than that of the face of the hammer a suitable cap shall be provided to distribute the hammer blow throughout the cross section of the pile .
the head shall be cut square and shaped or chamfered to prevent splitting at its periphery .
the heads of steel piles shall be cut squarely and a driving cap shall be provided to hold the axis of the pile in line with the axis of the hammer .
num .
collars collars bands or other devices to protect timber piles against splitting and brooming shall be provided where necessary .
num .
pointing when specified timber piles shall be shod with metal shoes in accordance with the plans .
the points of the piles shall be carefully shaped to secure an even and uniform bearing on the shoes .
after shaping exposed untreated wood shall be retreated in the field in accordance with section num g. num .
splicing piles splices shall be made in accordance with the details .
indiscriminate use and location of splices is prohibited .
the proposed location of splices used in conjunction with frame pile bents and integral type abutments will require prior approval .
all splices shall be welded by a certified welder in accordance with section num .
num timber prestressed and steel piles page num num .
preboring preboring shall be done when specified on the plans or directed by the engineer .
holes for timber piles shall be a minimum of num inches larger than the nominal diameter of the pile .
the nominal diameter shall be measured num feet from the butt of the pile .
holes for steel piles shall be not less than the following specified diameter num hp pilesnum num inches num hp pilesnum num inches num hp pilesnum num inches num hp pilesnum num inches num all weights after the piles are driven the prebored holes shall be backfilled with coarse dry sand .
the sand shall be compacted to prevent bridging .
num .
when specified steel piles shall be equipped with tip reinforcement in accordance with the plans .
b .
method of driving num .
general piles may be driven with a steam or air hammer a gravity hammer a diesel hammer or a combination of water jets and hammer unless otherwise noted in the plans .
num .
hammers for timber and steel piles gravity hammers shall weigh not less than num pounds and the weight of the hammer shall not be less than the combined weight of the driving head and pile .
the fall shall be regulated to avoid damage to the piles and shall not exceed num feet .
the total energy as per manufacturers rating developed by mechanically powered hammers shall not be less than that required to achieve design bearing using the equations of section num d.num assuming the following conditions .
penetration per blow s num inblow hammer operating efficiency num for diesel hammers num for airsteam hammers num .
additional equipment if the required penetration is not obtained with a hammer complying with the above requirements the contractor shall provide a heavier hammer or resort to jetting at no additional cost .
unless otherwise approved the penetration for any pile shall not be less than num feet .
timber prestressed and steel piles num page num num .
leads pile leads shall be constructed to afford freedom of movement of the hammer .
inclined leads shall be used in driving battered piles .
num .
water jets when water jets are used the number of jets and the volume and pressure of water at the jet nozzles shall be sufficient to freely erode the material adjacent to the pile .
the pumping plant shall have capacity to deliver and maintain at least num psi hydraulic pressure at two jet nozzles .
before the desired penetration is reached the jet shall be withdrawn and the piles shall be driven with the hammer to secure final penetration and bearing .
the final penetration by driving shall be a minimum of num feet or to refusal .
num .
accuracy of driving piles shall be driven with a variation of not more than num inch per foot from the vertical or from the batter specified .
foundation piles shall not be driven out of position by more than num inches .
c. defective piles the procedure for driving piles shall prevent injurious splitting splintering or brooming of the wood or deformation of the steel .
manipulation of piles to force them into proper position will not be permitted .
piles damaged by internal defects or improper driving or driven out of proper location or driven below the specified elevation shall be corrected by withdrawing the pile and replacing it with a new pile .
if withdrawing the pile can not be done or is impractical the bridge construction engineer shall be contacted for further direction .
d. determination of bearing value of piles num .
the bearing value of piles will be determined by static load tests when specified .
testing shall follow astm dnum .
the specific testing procedure shall be approved prior to driving .
num .
when load tests are not specified the bearing value of piles shall be computed from the following formulas a .
for gravity hammers qdrive numwh x w snum wm b .
for double action steam or air hammers and closed cylinder qdrive nume x w_ top diesel hammers snum wm c. for single action steam or air hammers and open cylinder qdrive numwh x w_ top diesel hammers snum wm the following applies to these formulas q the nominal pile bearing resistance in tons .
w the weight of a gravity hammer or the ram of an energy hammer in tons .
h the height of free fall of the hammer or ram in feet .
num timber prestressed and steel piles page num m the weight in tons of the driven mass and shall include the weight of the pile the weight of the driving cap and the weight of the anvil if used .
e the energy per blow in foottons .
s the average penetration in inches of the pile per blow for the last five blows for gravity hammers and the last num blows for energy hammers .
num .
the formulas shall be applied for compliance with the following conditions a .
unless the hammer has free fall the value substituted for w shall be less than the weight of the hammer by an amount sufficient to compensate for all friction and drag tending to retard its fall .
b .
the head of the pile shall be free from broomed or crushed fibers .
c. the penetration of the pile is at a reasonably quick and uniform rate .
d. there is no excessive bounce to the hammer after the blow .
e. the value of h shall be less than the height of fall of the hammer by twice the height of the bounce .
f. for the computation of the bearing value for battered piles the value obtained from the formulas shall be multiplied by the following factor cosine a minus f sine a .
where a equals the angle which the leads make with the vertical and f equals the coefficient of friction between the hammer or ram and the surface on which it slides .
for gravity hammers sliding on greased steel surfaced leads or energy hammers the value of f shall be assumed to be num .
num .
when the required bearing for a pile other than a test pile can not be obtained without splicing driving shall be stopped when the top of the pile is approximately num feet above cutoff elevation .
after a minimum delay of num hours the driving may be resumed and the bearing rechecked to determine the amount of settingup effect .
the amount of settingup effect may be considered in determining the bearing value for the remainder of the piles in the same bent or abutment that can not be driven to bearing without splicing provided they have an initial bearing equal to or greater than the pile checked .
e. test piles the contractor shall drive test pile of the lengths shown on the plans and at locations directed .
the contractor shall cooperate with the engineer in facilitating the keeping of accurate records of driving and shall drive test piles to the bearing ordered by the engineer .
test piles shall be driven to no more than num of the plans required bearing .
f. bearing piles bearing pile shall be furnished at the specified length and driven to the required bearing and location as shown on the plans .
bearing piles shall be driven to no more than num of the plans required bearing .
timber prestressed and steel piles num page num g. storage and handling of timber piles timber piles shall be handled and stored to prevent damage and avoid breaking the surface of treated piles .
cuts or breaks which expose untreated wood shall be given three brush coats of hot creosote .
h. cutting off piles the top of all piling shall be cut off to a true plane at the specified elevation .
the length of pile above the elevation of the cutoff shall be sufficient to permit the complete removal of all material damaged by driving .
timber piles driven to very nearly the cutoff elevation shall be carefully adzed or otherwise freed from broomed splintered or otherwise damaged material .
undamaged cutoff material with a length greater than num feet may be spliced to satisfy minimum pile length requirements .
unused pile cutoffs shall become the property of the contractor .
the cutoff ends of timber pile shall be retreated in the field in accordance with section num g. i .
sheet piling driving shall be accomplished so the piles or sheeting are firmly fixed in assembly to the line desired and all joints are watertight .
num method of measurement a .
test piles the length of test piles remaining in the completed structure will be measured to the nearest lineal foot .
b .
bearing piles the length of bearing piles remaining in the completed structure will be measured to the nearest lineal foot .
quantity for test pile will not be included in the measurement of pay footage for bearing piles .
c. splices splices ordered will be measured on a per each basis .
pile splices located within the pile length called for on the plans will not be measured .
the number of splices to be measured for payment will be those located at or beyond the length specified necessary to increase the length of a pile incorporated into the structure over the length specified .
d. pile shoes pile shoes will be measured by each unit complete in place .
e. load tests piling load tests will be measured on a per each basis .
f. preboring piling prebored holes for piling will be measured to the nearest foot of depth .
holes of different diameters will be measured under the same item .
g. pile tip reinforcement will be measured by each unit .
h. sheet piling the quantity of sheet piling furnished complete in place will be computed to the nearest square foot .
cutoff material will not be measured for payment .
the horizontal measurement used in computing the area will be taken along the alignment of num timber prestressed and steel piles page num the piling or sheeting to the nearest num foot without any allowance for the structure shape of the section .
the vertical measurement used in computing the area will be the final length to the nearest num foot .
num basis of payment a .
test piles test pile will be paid for at the contract unit price per lineal foot .
if the plans quantity is greater than the actual quantity driven the plans quantity will be used for payment .
this payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment and incidentals necessary for furnishing and driving the test pile .
b .
bearing piles the furnishing and driving of bearing pile will be paid for at the respective contract unit price per lineal foot .
this payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and satisfactorily drive the bearing pile .
when the final in place quantity of each size of bearing pile driven and accepted for payment varies from the plans quantity the contractor will be compensated for the difference as follows num .
when the final quantity of each size underruns the total contract quantity by more than five feet times the number of piles the contractor will receive num of the contract unit price for the entire difference in quantity .
num .
when the final quantity of each size overruns the plans quantity the contractor will receive the contract unit price plus num for the excess over plans quantity .
the provisions of section num shall not apply for overruns and underruns in bearing pile quantity .
c. cutoff payment will not be made for pile cutoffs .
d. splices splices will be paid for as specified in the special provision for price schedule for miscellaneous items .
e. pile shoes this item will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing pile shoes .
payment for pile shoes when a bid item does not exist will be made at the price specified in the special provision for price schedule for miscellaneous items .
f. load tests payment for load tests will be made at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for assisting the engineer in making load tests and for delays caused by tests .
delays shall not exceed num consecutive hours for each pile tested beginning when loading operations are started .
the apparatus transportation of the apparatus to and from the site of the work and personnel for conducting the tests will be furnished by the department .
payment for load tests when a bid item does not exist will be made at the price specified in the special provision for price schedule for miscellaneous items .
timber prestressed and steel piles num page num g. preboring piling this work will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for satisfactorily preboring and backfilling holes for piling .
when preboring is necessary and no bid item exists payment will be made as extra work .
h. pile tip reinforcement this item will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing pile tip reinforcement .
payment for pile tip reinforcement when a bid item does not exist will be made at the price specified in the special provision for price schedule for miscellaneous items .
i .
sheet piling this work will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot for the various kinds of sheet piling .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and placing the piling .
num timber prestressed and steel piles page num this page intentionally left blank bridge deck preparation and resurfacing num page num num description this work consists of preparation of the existing bridge deck and approaches and the furnishing handling placing curing and finishing of a latex concrete or low slump dense concrete overlay .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections a .
cement section num type i cement .
b .
fine aggregate section num .
c. coarse aggregate section num .
d. water section num .
e. admixtures sections num and num .
f. curing section num .
g. latex emulsion admixture the latex admixture shall be a nonhazardous film forming polymeric emulsion in water .
all stabilizers shall be added at the point of manufacture and shall be homogeneous and uniform in composition .
physical properties the latex admixture shall conform to the following requirements the latex admixture shall be styrenebutadiene polymeric emulsion containing num to num polymer .
the polymer shall contain num to num styrene and num to num butadiene .
the polymeric emulsion shall be stabilized with an anionic nonionic surfactant and have a ph between num and num .
the latex admixture shall be prequalified prior to use .
a list of qualified products is available on the departments approved products list .
the admixture selected or specified shall be certified to be of identical formulation to the admixture submitted for prequalification testing .
along with the certification the supplier shall furnish the polymer percent of the total emulsion and ph of the formulation .
tests of latex admixture furnished shall meet these formulation values within the following tolerances percent polymer of total emulsion num ph num the latex admixture shall be stored in enclosures which protect the material from freezing and exposure to direct sunlight during periods when temperatures are in excess of numf .
as a minimum insulating blanket material shall be placed over both num bridge deck preparation and resurfacing page num the top and sides of drums stored at the work site .
storage at the work site shall not exceed num calendar days .
h. grout admixtures grout admixtures shall be a one component acrylic bonding additive .
the additive shall be one of the grout admixtures from the departments approved products list or an approval equal as determined by the office of bridge design .
num construction requirements a .
quality and proportioning num .
latex modified concrete mixture design latex modified concrete shall conform to the following mixture requirements material or property mixture proportions or test limits cement content num bags cubic yard .
latex emulsion admixture num gallons bag waternum num gallons bag water cement rationum num max entrained air num num slump num num inches fine aggregatenum num num the water added shall be adjusted to control the slump within specified test limits and produce a water cement ratio not to exceed num by weight .
forms dotnum and dotnum provide methods which will be used to determine aggregate moisture and watercement ratio .
only the coarse aggregate quantity shall be adjusted to compensate for changes in water quantity .
num the initial aggregate weights shall be established by using specified mix proportions for cement latex emulsion and water assuming num entrained air to determine volume available for total aggregate .
using actual specific gravity for the materials determine the weights of coarse and fine aggregates by using num by weight fine aggregate .
num .
low slump dense concrete mixture design the low slump dense concrete mixture design shall conform to the following basic absolute volume per unit volume of concrete coarse aggregate num fine aggregate num air num water num cement num num bridge deck preparation and resurfacing num page num approximate quantities of dry materials per cubic yard of concrete coarse aggregate num pounds fine aggregate num pounds cement num pounds num bags these quantities are based on the following assumptions specific gravity of cement num specific gravity of aggregate num actual specific gravities shall be used for adjustments in mix proportions .
an approved water reducing admixture for improving workability shall be added in accordance with manufacturer recommendations .
the slump when measured according to sd num shall be num inch maximum .
the entrained air content of the freshly consolidated concrete as determined by sd num shall be num with a tolerance of num .
grout for bonding new concrete to old concrete shall consist of equal parts by weight of portland cement and sand mixed with sufficient water to form a thick slurry .
when backfilling extra depth holes in accordance with section num c.num.f.num an admixture shall be added to the grout mixture in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the consistency of the slurry shall be such that it can be applied with a stiff brush or broom to the old concrete in a thin even coating that will not run or puddle in low spots .
for sealing vertical joints between adjacent areas of placement grout shall be thinned to consistency of paint .
b .
equipment equipment for deck preparation mixing placing and finishing of latex modified concrete or low slump dense concrete shall be approved by the engineer prior to start of work .
num .
surface preparation equipment surface preparation equipment shall consist of the following a .
power operated mechanical scarifier or grinder capable of removing at least num inch from the existing concrete surface in one pass .
b .
concrete sawing equipment capable of sawing concrete to the specified depth .
c. power driven hand tools for concrete removal on the bridge deck will be limited by the following num jack hammers heavier than num pound will not be permitted .
num chipping hammers heavier than num pound will not be permitted to remove concrete beneath any reinforcing bar .
num bridge deck preparation and resurfacing page num d. abrasive blasting equipment capable of removing rust and old concrete from exposed reinforcement and removing surface laitance from new substrate concrete .
num .
proportioning and mixing equipment the proportioning and mixing equipment shall be a selfcontained mobile and continuous mixer meeting the following requirements a .
the mixer shall be capable of carrying sufficient unmixed dry bulk cement fine aggregate coarse aggregate admixtures and water in separate compartments to produce not less than num cubic yards of concrete .
for full depth bridge deck placements the production capacity shall be a minimum of num cubic yards per hour .
more than one mixer may be required to provide a satisfactory placement rate .
b .
the mixer shall be capable of positive measurement of cement being introduced into the mix .
a visible recording device equipped with a ticket printout shall indicate this quantity .
c. the mixer shall provide positive control of water introduced into the mixer .
water flow shall be coordinated with the cement and aggregate feeding mechanisms and shall be readily adjustable to provide for minor variations in aggregate moisture .
water flow shall be controlled by a calibrated metering device .
in addition to the metering device mixers shall be equipped with recording water meters recording the number of gallons introduced into the mixer to the nearest num gallon .
d. the mixer shall be capable of being calibrated to automatically proportion and blend all components on a continuous or intermittent basis .
e. the mixer shall provide positive control of admixtures introduced into the mix .
admixture flow shall be coordinated with the feeding mechanisms of the other ingredients and shall be readily adjustable .
the admixture injection system shall meet the mixer recommendations of the manufacturer regarding type and design .
f. when mixing latex modified concrete the mixer shall be equipped with recording meters capable of recording to the nearest num gallon the number of gallons of latex emulsion introduced into the mix .
g. equipment calibration num calibration and inspection by the department will be required for each mixer before the start of the first project on which the mixer will be used each year .
the calibration will establish the meter count e.g .
the number of revolutions and discharge time in seconds required to dispense num pounds of cement .
bridge deck preparation and resurfacing num page num gate openings and pointer adjustments for aggregates and general operating condition of the equipment will also be inspected .
the contractor shall have a representative to witness the calibration and a qualified mixer operator .
the contractor shall furnish all scales containers stop watches mixer operating manuals materials and equipment necessary for the calibration and inspection .
num a materials discharge verification check may be ordered whenever conditions warrant .
individual components may be ordered verified .
on latex modified mixtures cement and latex emulsion discharge shall be verified prior to the first placement on each project .
num .
consolidation equipment consolidation equipment shall be internal vibration spud vibrator equipment .
num .
placing and finishing equipment placing and finishing equipment shall include hand tools for placement and brushing in freshly mixed modified concrete or grout .
the hand tools shall be used to distribute the concrete to the correct level prior to striking off with the finishing machine .
the finishing machine shall be capable of forward and reverse motion under positive control and be capable of raising all screeds cylinders augers and vibratory pan or pans to clear the surface when traveling in reverse .
modifications of the factory product will require approval .
screed rails shall be capable of rigidly supporting the finishing machine without significant deflection and shall be securely fastened to their supports .
a portable lightweight or wheeled work bridge shall be required for use behind the finishing operation .
the finishing machine for latex modified concrete shall be a selfpropelled rotating cylinder type with one or more rotating steel cylinders augers and variable frequency vibratory pans .
the machine shall span the concrete placement width .
the cylinders augers and vibratory pans shall be capable of placing and consolidating the concrete to the established profile by traversing the placement width transverse to the roadway centerline .
the finishing machine for low slump dense concrete shall have a mechanical strike off to provide uniform thickness of concrete in front of an oscillating screed .
the finishing machine shall have at least one oscillating screed capable of consolidating the concrete to the specified density .
a sufficient number of identical vibrators shall be installed to provide at least one vibrator for each num foot of screed length .
the bottom face of the screed shall be at least num inches in width with a turned up or rounded leading edge to minimize surface tearing .
each screed shall have an effective weight of at least num pounds per square foot of bottom face area .
each num bridge deck preparation and resurfacing page num screed shall be provided with position control of vertical position tilt angle and crown shape .
the finishing machine and appurtenant equipment shall provide positive machine screeding of the concrete within num inch of the face of existing curbs .
the screed shall extend at least num inches beyond the line where a saw cut is intended to form the edge of a subsequently placed lane .
the screed shall overlap the sawn edge of a previously placed adjacent lane by at least num inches .
c. surface preparation num .
concrete removal a .
concrete removal type numa shall consist of removing the surface of the existing concrete deck by machine scarifying .
areas designated for concrete removal type numa shall be scarified at least num inch in depth by a power operated scarifier or grinder .
when specified scarifying deeper than the num inch will be required .
the area around existing deck floor drains shall be hand chipped in accordance with the details in the plans to provide clearance for placement of the overlay .
the overlay shall be tapered to meet the existing floor drain top in accordance with the details in the plans .
for projects where the bridge deck overlay is placed in phases it will not be permissible to accomplish concrete removal type numa over the entire deck surface and then allow traffic on the scarified surface .
the mechanical scarifying operation shall be immediately suspended if the scarifier contacts reinforcing steel until the limits of the high reinforcing steel have been determined by the engineer .
a minimum depth of num inch of concrete surface shall be removed from the area of high reinforcing steel by hand chipping .
hand chipping removal in these areas will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for concrete removal type numb .
b .
concrete removal type numa areas will be determined by the engineer after the concrete removal type numa has been accomplished .
concrete removal type numa shall be the removal of relatively large areas of unsound existing overlay below the concrete removal type numa using machine scarification equipment .
after completion of the concrete removal type numa the engineer will inspect the deck and mark remaining areas of unsound existing overlay .
remaining unsound existing overlay shall be removed using machine scarification equipment when the unsound area is relatively large as determined by the engineer .
the engineer will order the use of concrete removal type numa and will determine the required depth of pass or passes .
the total depth of concrete removal type numa will not exceed num inch or the depth to the top of the top bar in the top mat of reinforcing steel whichever is less .
bridge deck preparation and resurfacing num page num areas of unsound existing overlay that are not large enough to warrant the use of machine scarification equipment may be removed using concrete removal type numb at the engineers discretion .
extreme care shall be taken to avoid damaging the reinforcing steel with the scarification equipment during concrete removal type numa .
concrete removal type numa shall stop in any area where reinforcing steel is encountered until further direction by the engineer .
reinforcing steel that is damaged during concrete removal type numa shall be repaired by the contractor as directed by the engineer and will be paid for as per section num .
reinforcing steel that is damaged due to scarification below the depth specified by the engineer shall be repaired by the contractor as directed by the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
c. concrete removal type numb areas will be determined by the engineer after concrete removal type numa or concrete removal type numa if specified has been accomplished .
concrete removal type numb shall consist of removing delaminated or unsound concrete by chipping below the concrete removal type numa or concrete removal type numa if specified and extending down to the top of the top bar in the top mat of reinforcing steel .
unintentional concrete removal below the top of the top bar in the top mat of reinforcing steel during concrete removal type numb will be considered a part of the concrete removal type numb .
d. concrete removal type numc areas will be determined by the engineer after concrete removal type numb has been accomplished .
concrete removal type numc shall consist of removing unsound concrete below the concrete removal type numb and above the top of the top bar of the bottom mat of reinforcing steel .
if concrete removal type numc extends down to the top of the top bar of the bottom mat of reinforcing steel concrete removal type numd will be required regardless of the condition of the concrete remaining .
e. concrete removal type numd shall consist of removing concrete below concrete removal type numc to the full depth of slab .
the edges of the resulting hole in the deck shall be nearly vertical or tapered inward from the top down .
a reversed taper will not be permitted .
the underside of the deck shall have a neat appearance .
feather edging of the concrete fill will not be permitted .
saw cutting the underside of the slab may be required if satisfactory results can not be achieved by other means .
f. concrete removal type b shall consist of the removal of existing concrete from around the periphery of reinforcing bars .
when concrete removal type numa and concrete removal type numb has been accomplished in an area the engineer will determine the sections of reinforcing requiring concrete removal type b .
normally concrete removal type b will be ordered when an isolated bar has lost bond on more than onehalf of its circumference .
on those sections the concrete shall be removed from around the periphery of the bar using chipping hammers num bridge deck preparation and resurfacing page num and hand tools .
a minimum clearance of num inch around the bar shall be provided .
care shall be exercised to prevent cutting stretching and damaging all exposed reinforcing steel .
concrete removal type numc may be ordered in lieu of concrete removal type b if damage to sound concrete between bars is suspected or when deemed appropriate for other reasons .
num when the extent or location of concrete removal type numc and concrete removal type numd becomes critical to the structural integrity of the deck the office of bridge design will be requested to make a determination .
shoring when required shall be accomplished under the provisions of section num .
num backfill of extra depth holes when concrete removal type numd is necessary or when holes deeper than num inches below the top of the scarified surface are encountered they shall be backfilled as follows a class anum concrete shall be used to fill extra depth removal holes up to the level of the surrounding prepared deck area .
in lieu of using class anum concrete the extra depth removal holes may be filled with the same mix used for low slump dense concrete provided the following properties apply num .
the concrete shall attain a minimum compressive strength of num psi in num days .
num .
the concrete shall contain num to num entrained air .
num .
the concrete slump shall be from num to num inches .
num .
the watercement ratio shall not exceed num. b concrete used to backfill extra depth holes shall be cured with a double layer of wet curing blankets and polyethylene sheeting until a minimum compressive strength of num psi has been attained .
curing compound shall not be used .
num .
general a .
exposed reinforcing steel shall be thoroughly cleaned by abrasive blasting to the satisfaction of the engineer .
b .
concrete adjacent to or within num feet of fresh placed overlay concrete shall not be scarified or chipped until the fresh overlay concrete has cured for a minimum of num hours .
c. jack hammers and mechanical chipping tools shall not be operated at an angle in excess of num degrees measured from the surface of the concrete except in areas where concrete removal type numd is required .
bridge deck preparation and resurfacing num page num d. reinforcing steel damaged during the concrete removal shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the contractor .
e. within num hours prior to the placement of the overlay concrete the deck surface shall be thoroughly cleaned of all loose or foreign material by abrasive blasting .
the abrasive blasting shall be to an extent that all surface laitance is removed .
abrasive blasting of old decks being overlaid shall expose the coarse aggregate and remove rust from exposed reinforcing steel .
if precipitation or any other contamination occurs on the deck surface within the num hour requirement the deck surface shall be abrasive blasted again and thoroughly cleaned .
after abrasive blasting the surface shall be cleaned by air blast using a compressor equipped with a satisfactory operating filter .
if necessary to remove rust oil and other foreign materials detrimental to achieving bond detergent cleaning abrasive blasting and air blast or vacuum will be required .
the edges of previously placed overlay and bottom of curb faces shall be abrasive blasted .
immediately prior to placement of latex modified concrete the clean surface shall be thoroughly wetted for a minimum of one hour .
standing water in depressions or holes shall be blown out with compressed air or removed by other acceptable means .
f. the contractor shall prevent spilling fuel and oil or bringing asphalt or other foreign materials onto the prepared deck .
equipment for use on the deck shall not leak fuel oil or drag foreign material onto the prepared deck .
g. on low slump dense concrete overlays before an adjacent course is placed transverse and longitudinal joints of previously placed surface course shall be saw cut the full thickness of the overlay .
the material shall then be removed back a minimum of num inches to provide a straight and vertical edge .
at the abutment ends of the bridge the saw cut shall be made as shown on the plans so as to minimize reflective cracking of the overlay .
concrete breakout shall be done using chipping hammers no heavier than num pounds .
the previously placed surface course shall cure a minimum of num hours prior to sawing .
if this work is started before the end of the num hour curing period the work shall be restricted as follows num sawing or other operations which interfere with the curing shall be kept to a minimum time and in the immediate work area .
num curing shall be resumed promptly upon completion of the work .
num bridge deck preparation and resurfacing page num num the exposed area shall be kept damp until the curing media is replaced .
num power driven tools heavier than a num pound chipping hammer will not be permitted .
when bridge deck resurfacing is being performed on onehalf of the width and traffic is carried on the other onehalf of the deck only the portion the deck being resurfaced shall be scarified .
traffic is not allowed on the scarified surface of the deck before it is resurfaced .
d. resurfacing operation limitations num .
latex modified concrete limitations under normal working conditions placement and finishing shall proceed at a rate of not less than num lineal feet per hour measured parallel to the centerline of the bridge .
latex modified concrete shall be between numf and numf at the time of placement and shall be maintained in this temperature range for at least num hours after placement .
the concrete surface at the time of placement of the mixture shall be at least numf as measured by a thermometer placed under an insulating blanket and laid against the surface .
the latex modified concrete may not be placed after october num or before may num without written authorization .
the latex modified concrete shall not be placed when the air temperature in the shade exceeds numf .
it may be necessary to place concrete during evening or early morning hours to comply with this requirement .
traffic shall not be permitted on the latex modified concrete surface until num hours after placement .
a longer curing period may be required when temperatures fall below numf .
acceptable lighting shall be in place prior to surface preparation or concrete placement planned during hours of darkness .
a construction dam or bulkhead shall be installed when a delay in the placement operation exceeds one hour .
during minor delays of less than one hour the end of the concrete may be protected from drying with several layers of wet burlap .
adequate precautions shall be taken to protect freshly placed concrete from sudden or unexpected rain .
placing operations shall stop when it starts to rain .
fresh concrete damaged by rainfall shall be removed .
after the bridge deck overlay has cured it shall be tested for smoothness in accordance with num l.num .
num .
low slump dense concrete limitations placement and finishing shall proceed at a rate of not less than num lineal feet per hour measured parallel to the centerline of the bridge .
unless otherwise authorized by the departments bridge construction engineer pours shall not exceed num feet in width .
bridge deck preparation and resurfacing num page num overlay placement shall not be delayed for periods exceeding num minutes .
all exposed concrete shall be covered with wet burlap if placement operations are delayed .
placement operations shall cease if delay exceeds num minutes and placed concrete shall be removed to a point determined by the engineer .
the existing surface at the time of concrete placement shall be at least numf in the shade .
the concrete shall be at least numf and numf at the time of placement and shall be maintained at or above numf for at least num hours .
concrete placement will not be permitted after october num or before may num or when the air temperature is above numf in the shade .
it may be necessary to place concrete during evening or early morning hours and not during periods of low humidity and high wind to comply with this requirement .
during periods of extreme and sustained hot weather it may become extremely difficult to maintain the numf maximum concrete temperature for low slump dense concrete .
when such conditions exist the engineer may authorize the maximum concrete temperature to be increased to numf provided that the concrete is placed when the ambient air temperature is below numf and the following conditions are met .
a .
the coarse aggregate piles shall be flushed with cool water .
b .
the wet burlap shall be placed as soon as the concrete surface will support it without deformation .
c. in an effort to keep the temperature of the water as cool as possible and minimize heating of the water due to warm weather the water tank on the mobile mixer shall not be filled until immediately prior to the concrete placement at which time the tank shall be filled with cold water .
the addition of ice to the water will be allowed .
the placement of low slump dense concrete will not be allowed to begin when it is anticipated that the ambient temperature will exceed numf at any time during the duration of the concrete placement unless the contractor has approved fogging equipment on the project and ready for use .
fogging equipment shall be capable of applying a fine fog water droplets no larger than num microns not a spray under pressure through an atomizing nozzle over the entire exposed concrete surface until such time that the wet burlap can be applied .
the manufacturers literature equipment specifications and operating instructions for the fogging equipment shall be submitted to the office of bridge design for approval prior to use .
the fogging option will not be allowed when the wind conditions are such that the fog can not be maintained over the exposed concrete surface .
traffic will not be permitted on the completed surface for num hours after placement .
a longer period of no traffic may be required when temperatures are below numf .
num bridge deck preparation and resurfacing page num acceptable lighting shall be in place prior to surface preparation or concrete placement planned during hours of darkness .
the contractor shall avoid placing longitudinal joints in the traffic wheel paths .
the location of longitudinal joints shall be subject to approval .
concrete shall not be placed adjacent to a surface course less than num hours old .
continuation in the same lane from a transverse joint will be permitted after the concrete is num hours old .
e. proportioning and mixing concrete materials proportioning and mixing shall conform to the following num .
proportioning tolerances proportioning of individual components shall be within the following tolerances cement weight percent num to num fine aggregate weight percent num coarse aggregate weight percent num water weight or volume percent num latex emulsion weight percent num yield volume percent num the discharge time interval for components other than aggregates shall be the time established for the discharge of num pounds of cement .
a lesser discharge time may be used for aggregates .
individual components used during discharge checks shall be from the sources to be used on the project .
when performing materials discharge checks manufacturer recommendations relative to minimum quantities of materials in the bins shall be adhered to .
if the cement discharge is not within tolerance a new meter count and discharge time shall be established using calibration form dotnum .
num .
proportioning and mixing the operations of proportioning and mixing concrete shall comply with the following requirements a .
the proportioning and mixing equipment operator shall be thoroughly familiar with the equipment and its operation .
b. mixers shall be clean and ingredients accurately proportioned .
c. concrete shall be mixed at the site in accordance with the specific requirements for the equipment used .
d. concrete discharged from the mixer shall be uniform in composition and consistency .
mixing capability shall be such that finishing operations can proceed at a steady pace and the final finishing is completed before the formation of a plastic surface film .
bridge deck preparation and resurfacing num page num num .
termination of use permission for continued use of a mixer may be rescinded for failure to maintain acceptable production or inability to meet the specifications .
f. placing finishing and curing surfaces shall be completely cleaned and approved prior to placing concrete .
if the mixing unit or any other piece of equipment is allowed on the prepared deck the portion of the deck which may come in contact with or be directly under the equipment shall be protected with clean polyethylene or other suitable material .
polyethylene sheeting or other suitable material is required on all areas in which concrete buggies or other equipment will be operated .
any concrete buggy or other equipment that has picked up dirt debris or other contaminants on the tires shall not be allowed on the bridge deck until properly cleaned .
screed rails shall be placed and fastened in position to ensure finishing the new surface to the required profile .
the mixture shall be placed and struck off to approximately num inch above final grade .
the mixture shall then be consolidated and finished to final grade with the finishing machine .
the finished surface shall meet the surface smoothness requirements for bridge deck surfaces specified in section num l.num .
hand finishing with a wood float may be required along the edge of the pour or on small repair areas .
edge tooling is required at joints except next to metal expansion dams curbs and previously placed lanes .
the overlay material shall be consolidated with suitable spud vibrators in all areas where concrete has been removed below existing reinforcement .
the following additional requirements shall apply for each specific type of overlay .
num .
latex modified concrete overlay longitudinal construction joints in the overlay shall be located on the lane lines with no pour to be less than num feet wide .
the latex modified mixture shall be brushed onto the wetted prepared surface .
all vertical and horizontal surfaces shall receive an even thorough coating .
the rate of progress shall be limited so that the brushed material does not become dry before it is overlayed .
all remaining latex modified brushing material after the brushing process is complete shall be disposed of as directed .
when a tight uniform surface has been achieved and before the plastic film forms the surface shall be given a transverse metaltine finish .
the metaltine finish shall provide a groove width of num inch and a groove depth of num inch num inch .
the spacing between the individual tines shall meet the following num bridge deck preparation and resurfacing page num inches ten foot tining rake num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num successive passes of the tining shall not overlap .
the screed rails and construction bulkheads shall be separated from the newly placed material by passing a pointing trowel along their inside face .
metal expansion dams shall not be separated from the overlay .
care shall be exercised to ensure that this trowel cut is made for the entire depth and length of rails or bulkheads after the mixture has stiffened sufficiently .
in lieu of separation by pointing trowel bulkheads with inside surfaces covered with a material that prevents bonding to the concrete may be utilized when approved .
the surface shall be covered with a double layer of clean wet burlap as soon as the surface can support the burlap without deformation .
within one hour of covering with wet burlap a layer of num mil minimum thick polyethylene film shall be placed on the wet burlap and the surface cured for num hours .
the curing material shall then be removed for an additional num hour air cure .
combination burlappolyethylene sheets may be substituted for one layer of burlap and the polyethylene film with the engineers approval .
num .
low slump dense concrete overlay the grout shall be applied on a dry surface immediately before concrete placement .
the thin coating of grout shall be scrubbed into the surface abutting curb faces and the vertical surface of previously placed lanes .
the area to receive the overlay shall receive an even thorough grout coating .
care shall be taken to ensure that excess grout does not collect in pockets and that the rate of application is limited to an amount that will be covered with concrete before it dries .
the low slump dense concrete overlay shall be mechanically consolidated to a minimum of num of the rodded unit weight determined in accordance with sd num and finished to final grade .
hand finishing with a float may be required to provide a tight uniform surface .
internal vibration spud vibrators shall be used to consolidate the concrete along the abutment ends of the bridge longitudinal edges curb lines and for any areas in which the overlay thickness is greater than num inches .
as soon as finishing has been completed all vertical joints with adjacent concrete shall be sealed by painting with thinned grout and the deck surface given a broomed bridge deck preparation and resurfacing num page num and transverse metaltine finish .
the metaltine finish shall provide a groove width of num inch and a groove depth of num inch num inch .
the spacing between the individual tines shall conform to section num f.num .
successive passes of the tining shall not overlap .
after the joint painting brooming and grooving is completed the surface shall be promptly covered with a double layer of clean wet curing blanket .
care shall be taken to ensure that the curing blanket is well drained and that it is placed as soon as the surface will support it without deformation .
the surface shall receive a wet curing blanket cure for at least num hours .
for the first num hours the curing blanket shall be kept continuously wet by means of an automatic sprinkling or wetting system .
care shall be taken to ensure free water does not migrate into fresh concrete .
after num hours the contractor may cover the wet curing blanket with a layer of polyethylene film for a minimum of num hours in lieu of using a sprinkling or wetting system .
the concrete shall be screeded and finished within num minutes of being placed on the deck .
the contractor will have an additional num minutes after the concrete has been finished to apply wet curing blanket .
failure to comply with these requirements shall be cause for rejecting the work .
surface concrete in all rejected areas shall be removed and replaced .
combination burlappolyethylene sheets may be substituted for one layer of curing blanket and the polyethylene film with the engineers approval .
after the bridge deck overlay has cured it shall be tested for smoothness in accordance with section num l.num .
g. after the curing period the engineer will chain drag the entire surface of the new bridge deck overlay to check for any areas that are not bonded to the substrate .
any areas that are not bonded to the substrate shall be repaired in accordance with the following num .
the entire perimeter of the unbonded area shall be sawcut the full depth of the overlay .
num .
concrete breakout shall be done using chipping hammers no heavier than num pounds .
num .
the exposed surfaces including the vertical faces of the breakout area shall be thoroughly cleaned by abrasive blast cleaning .
num .
the exposed surfaces including the vertical faces of the breakout area shall be coated with an approved bonding agent in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations immediately prior to concrete placement .
num bridge deck preparation and resurfacing page num num .
low slump dense concrete shall be placed in the breakout areas within num hours of abrasive blast cleaning .
in the event that the breakout area is contaminated with rain dirt debris or other contaminants before concrete is placed the area shall be recleaned prior to concrete placement .
num .
the concrete shall be cured with wet curing blanket and polyethylene sheeting for at least num hours .
bridge deck overlay repair including traffic control measures shall be accomplished at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement a .
concrete removal type numa concrete removal type numa will be measured to the nearest num foot and the area computed to the nearest num square yard .
b .
concrete removal type numa concrete removal type numa will be measured to the nearest num foot and the area computed to the nearest num square yard irrespective of the areas measured as concrete removal type numa .
c. concrete removal type numb concrete removal type numb will be measured to the nearest num foot and the area computed to the nearest num square yard irrespective of the areas measured as concrete removal type numa .
d. concrete removal type numc concrete removal type numc will be measured to the nearest num foot and the area computed to the nearest num square yard irrespective of the areas measured for concrete removal type numa and concrete removal type numb .
e. concrete removal type numd concrete removal type numd will be measured to the nearest num foot and the area computed to the nearest num square yard irrespective of the areas measured for concrete removal type numa concrete removal type numb and concrete removal type numc .
f. concrete removal type b concrete removal type b will be measured to the nearest num foot irrespective of measurement for other types of removal .
g. class anum concrete fill class anum concrete fill will be measured to the nearest num cubic yard as determined from the theoretical yield of the design mix and documented by the ticket batch printouts .
if ticket printouts are not used the engineer may use cross section measure or net truck weight to determine theoretical volume based upon num pounds per cubic foot .
when cross section measure is used the methods of survey and computations shall be agreed to prior to the pour .
h. latex modified bridge deck overlay latex modified bridge deck overlay will be measured to the nearest cubic yard as determined from the theoretical yield of the design mix and documented by the batch ticket printouts of the cement used and the yield tests performed .
deductions will not be made for aggregate thrown out due to brushing operations or material wasted in finishing operations unless such waste bridge deck preparation and resurfacing num page num becomes excessive .
material wasted or rejected due to other causes will not be included for payment .
i .
low slump dense concrete bridge deck overlay low slump dense concrete bridge deck overlay will be measured to the nearest cubic yard of concrete placed .
measurement of concrete produced will be determined from the documented amount of cement used as shown by the mixer cement meter readings and supported by yield tests .
deductions will not be made for material wasted in the finishing operations and removed to form longitudinal joints unless the waste becomes excessive .
concrete wasted or rejected for other causes will not be included for payment .
j. finishing and curing finishing and curing will be computed to the nearest num square yard .
the actual area finished and cured will be measured to the nearest num foot exclusive of areas of metal expansion dams exposed in the finished surface .
num basis of payment a .
concrete removal type numa concrete removal type numa will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for removal to the depth specified required sawing cleaning hand removal around deck floor drains disposal of removed material labor equipment materials and all incidental work required .
b .
concrete removal type numa concrete removal type numa will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for the removal performed with each pass of the scarification equipment to the depth directed by the engineer .
payment will also include full compensation for any required cleaning hand removal around deck drains disposal of removed material labor equipment and all incidental work required .
c. concrete removal type numb concrete removal type numb will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for removal of the specified concrete required sawing cleaning disposal of removed material labor equipment materials and all incidental work required .
d. concrete removal type numc concrete removal type numc will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for the specified concrete removal sandblasting cleaning disposal of removed material labor equipment materials and all incidental work required .
if the actual ordered quantity exceeds plans quantity the department will advise the contractor prior to the accomplishment of this additional concrete removal type numc whether payment will be made under the contract item by negotiated prices or under the provisions of section num .
e. concrete removal type numd concrete removal type numd will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for the specified concrete removal sawing sandblasting cleaning forming disposal of removed material labor equipment materials and all incidental work required .
if the actual ordered quantity exceeds plans quantity the department will advise the contractor prior to the accomplishment of this additional concrete removal type numd whether payment will be num bridge deck preparation and resurfacing page num made under the contract item by negotiated prices or under the provisions of section num .
f. concrete removal type b concrete removal type b will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for the specified concrete removal sandblasting disposal of removed material labor equipment materials and all incidental work required .
if the actual ordered quantity exceeds plans quantity by more than num the department will advise the contractor prior to the accomplishment of this additional concrete removal type b whether payment will be made under the contract item by negotiated prices or under the provisions of section num .
g. class anum concrete fill class anum concrete fill will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for materials labor equipment and all incidental work required .
h. latex modified bridge deck overlay latex modified bridge deck overlay will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment materials and all incidental work required .
i .
low slump dense concrete bridge deck overlay low slump dense concrete bridge deck overlay will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment materials and all incidental work required .
j. finishing and curing finishing and curing will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment materials and all incidental work required .
precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete num page num num description this work consists of furnishing and installing precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete items .
precast concrete drop inlets shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num materials a .
concrete num .
fine aggregate section num .
num .
coarse aggregate section num .
num .
water section num .
num .
admixtures section num and num .
num .
fly ash section num .
num .
cement section num .
type ii cement shall be used unless otherwise specified .
for pretensioned prestressed concrete beams type i ii or iii cement may be used .
b. pretensioning reinforcement section num .
c. reinforcing steel section num .
d. drainage fabric section num type a .
num construction requirements a .
general requirements the contractor shall satisfy the following for all precastprestressed concrete items .
num .
fabrication the fabricator shall notify the area engineer prior to the fabrication of precast and prestressed concrete items .
num .
concrete mix requirements the contractor shall submit a concrete job mix design to the departments concrete engineer for approval num calendar days prior to fabrication .
the mix design shall include all aggregate sources and admixtures proposed for use .
when a plant has been in operation and satisfactorily producing material the contractor will only be required to submit a concrete mix design annually for precast concrete unless changes have been made to the preapproved mix design or the material used in the mix design .
concrete mix designs shall be submitted for each project on all prestressed concrete products .
num precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete page num a .
wet cast concrete mix requirements the concrete shall attain a num day compressive strength equal to or greater than the minimum compressive strength specified .
the watercementitious material ratio shall not exceed that specified in the concrete mix design .
the absolute volume of the mix design proportions shall yield num to num cubic feet .
the mix design for box culverts and prestressed products shall contain a minimum of num coarse aggregate by weight .
all other precast products shall contain a minimum of num coarse aggregate by weight .
the entrained air content shall be num plus or minus num .
for pretensioned prestressed beams the entrained air content shall be num plus or minus num .
concrete without high range water reducing admixtures hrwra shall have a maximum slump of num inches .
when hrwra are used the slump at the time of placement shall be from num to num inches . .
the hrwra shall be compatible with the concrete mix .
the hrwra shall not be used in amounts that cause segregation or rapid slump loss that would hinder concrete placement .
the minimum fresh concrete temperature at time of placement shall be numf .
equipment and methods used for batching mixing and transporting of concrete shall be approved by the engineer .
b .
dry cast concrete mix requirements the concrete shall attain a num day compressive strength equal to or greater than the minimum compressive strength specified .
the absolute volume of the mix design proportions shall yield num to num cubic feet .
the minimum fresh concrete temperature at time of placement shall be numf .
equipment and methods used for batching mixing and transporting of concrete shall be approved by the engineer .
num .
shop plans prior to fabrication the contractor shall submit shop plans to the department for the departments review and approval .
the contractor shall send an precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete num page num email with the shop plans attached as a pdf to the project engineer and office of bridge design .
upon request the project engineer will provide the contractor the appropriate email addresses .
the contractor shall not begin fabrication prior to the departments review and final approval of shop plans .
within num calendar days of receiving the initial shop plans the office of bridge design will send a response to the contractor and submitter with the departments final approval or one reviewed copy of the shop plans with changes to the design marked .
the contractor will make the necessary changes if any to the shop plans .
the contractor will then send the project engineer and the office of bridge design an email with the final shop plans as a pdf for distribution .
the shop plans shall consist of fabrication details including reinforcing steel and spacer placement and configurations total quantities for the complete structure and all information necessary for fabrication and erection .
shop plans for prestressed concrete items shall also include the method and sequence of stressing .
num .
forms forms shall comply with section num and the following the forms shall be designed to withstand the fluid pressure of the concrete and the added forces due to vibration and impact without distortion .
the forms shall be mortar tight and free from warp .
joints in sectional forms shall have a tight fit without excessive offset .
the form surface area in contact with the concrete shall be treated with an approved form oil or wax before the form is set in position .
the forms shall be thoroughly cleaned of all other substances .
num .
fabrication welding of mild reinforcing steel will not be permitted .
steel wire bar supports shall be used to maintain proper reinforcement location and concrete cover .
cutting of reinforcement and bending to the form surface for support will not be permitted .
steel wire bar supports in contact with the casting forms shall be stainless steel hot dipped galvanized or plastic tipped extending at least num inch from the form surface .
the surface temperature of the forms and reinforcing steel which come into contact with the concrete being placed shall be raised to a temperature above freezing prior to concrete placement .
all deleterious material shall be removed from the forms prior to concrete placement .
for cold weather placements concrete surfaces shall be protected from freezing throughout the pour and until covered for the waiting period before application of live steam or radiant heat .
the dry casting method of fabrication for precast concrete box culverts will not be allowed except single barrel precast concrete box culverts with dimensions of num foot by num foot and smaller .
the precast units shall have sufficient strength to prevent damage to the units during removal of the forms and yarding .
precast units shall have a minimum concrete num precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete page num compressive strength of num psi prior to form removal .
precast units shall have a minimum concrete compressive strength of num psi prior to yarding .
the engineer may approve a different minimum concrete strength for form removal and yarding based upon fabricator demonstrated results or as shown on design details submitted and approved with the shop plans .
the fabricator shall make a minimum of one group of test cylinders for each class of concrete for each days production not to exceed num cubic yards per group of cylinders .
at a minimum a group of test cylinders shall consist of the following a .
two test cylinders are required for the num day compression test .
b .
two additional cylinders will be required for determining concrete strength when the contractor desires to make delivery and obtain acceptance by the department prior to the num day compression test .
for low pressure steam or radiant heat curing the test cylinders shall be cured with the unit or in a similar manner similar curing method and concrete curing temperature as approved by the concrete engineer as the unit until minimum compressive strength has been obtained .
acceptance of the precast units shall be in accordance with section num b except that the fabricator shall be responsible for the sampling preparing and properly curing of all concrete cylinders for concrete compressive strength in accordance with the departments materials manual and the fabricator shall be responsible for all costs .
the precast units will be accepted when the minimum design concrete compressive strength requirements have been met .
accepted precast units represented by that test group of cylinders may be delivered to the project and will not require the num day cylinder test .
num .
concrete cure the concrete shall be cured by low pressure steam radiant heat or as specified in section num m. when curing in accordance with section num m. the concrete temperature requirements of section num n. shall apply .
low pressure steam or radiant heat curing shall be done under an enclosure to contain the live steam or the heat and prevent heat and moisture loss .
the initial application of the steam or heat shall be three hours after the final placement of concrete to allow the initial set to occur .
when retarders are used the waiting period before application of the steam or radiant heat shall be five hours .
when the time of initial set is determined by astm c num the time limits described above may be waived .
during the waiting period the minimum temperature within the curing chamber shall not be less than numf and live steam or radiant heat may be used to maintain the curing chamber between numf and numf .
during the waiting period the concrete shall be kept moist .
precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete num page num application of live steam shall not be directed on the concrete forms causing localized high temperatures .
radiant heat may be applied by pipes circulating steam hot oil hot water or by electric heating elements .
moisture loss shall be minimized by covering exposed concrete surfaces with plastic sheeting or by applying an approved liquid membrane curing compound to exposed concrete surfaces .
the top surface of concrete members for use in composite construction shall be free of membrane curing compound residue unless suitable mechanical means for full bond development are provided .
during the initial application of live steam or radiant heat the concrete temperature shall increase at an average rate not exceeding numf per hour until the curing temperature is reached .
the maximum concrete temperature shall not exceed numf .
the maximum temperature shall be held until the concrete has reached the specified strength .
after discontinuing the steam or radiant heat application the temperature of the concrete shall decrease at a rate not to exceed numf per hour until the concrete temperature is within numf of the ambient air temperature .
num .
surface finish and patching if a precast item shows stone pockets honeycomb delamination or other defects which may be detrimental to the structural capacity of the item it will be subject to rejection at the discretion of the engineer .
minor surface irregularities or cavities which do not impair the service of the item and which are satisfactorily repaired will not constitute cause for rejection .
repairs shall not be made until the engineer has inspected the extent of the irregularities and has determined whether the item can be satisfactorily repaired .
if the item is deemed to be repairable the repair method and procedures shall be agreed upon by the department and fabricator prior to the work commencing .
if a finishing aid is used the finishing aid can not be used for finishing of the concrete surface immediate after application of the finishing aid and the finishing aid must be applied uniformly to the surface of the concrete with a sprayer .
depressions resulting from the removal of metal ties or other causes shall be carefully pointed with a mortar of sand and cement in the proportions which are similar to the specific class of concrete in the unit .
a sack rub finish is required on prestressed beams except for the bottom of the bottom flange and the top of the top flange .
a sack rub finish is also required on sloped surfaces of box culvert end sections .
b. precast box culverts the following shall apply to box culverts num .
design precast concrete box culverts shall conform to astm cnum and astm cnum .
configurations in variance with those provided by astm will be accepted provided the materials design fabrication specification and the requirements of this section are met .
num precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete page num box culvert end sections inlet or outlet materials design and fabrication shall conform to the current edition of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges and materials specifications .
precast box culverts shall be designed to specified load conditions .
the design shall conform to the aashto design requirements for the depth of fill including surfacing etc .
as well as live load or specified loading .
the specified live load shall apply to all barrel sections .
minimum reinforcing steel clear cover shall be num inch for all member faces except box culverts covered by a fill of less than num feet including surfacing shall have a minimum reinforcing steel clear cover of num inches in the top of the top slab .
the contractor shall furnish a checked design with the shop plans .
a checked design includes the design calculations and check design calculations performed by an independent professional engineer registered in the state of south dakota .
a checked design for barrel sections will not be required to be submitted if the proposed fabrication dimensions and reinforcement conform to astm cnum and astm cnum .
a checked design for the end sections and special sections will be required .
num .
fabrication the contractor shall notify the engineer seven days prior to fabrication .
the minimum length of precast section shall be num feet .
joint ties shall be provided with all sections .
num .
installation box culvert installation shall conform to the approved shop plans and the following a .
foundation foundation preparation shall be in accordance with sections num num and num .
the foundation shall be shaped to provide a satisfactory template section and density .
b. transverse joints the floor joint between adjacent sections shall be sealed with a preformed mastic along the floor to the top of the haunches .
fabric shall be placed along the top and walls to provide a minimum of num feet of fabric centered on the joint .
transverse joints in the fabric shall be overlapped at least num feet .
sufficient adhesive shall be required along the edge of the fabric to hold it in place while backfilling .
the lift holes shall be plugged with an approved non shrink grout conforming to section num or as shown on the approved shop plans .
the maximum allowable gap at any point between adjacent sections of box culvert shall be num inch .
precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete num page num c. joint ties each section shall be tied to adjacent sections with joint ties as shown on the approved shop plans .
d. backfilling backfilling shall conform to section num g. hand compaction methods may be required for satisfactory compaction under and adjacent to corners with radius and between culverts on multiple installations .
c. prestressed concrete the following shall apply to all prestressed concrete products num .
general the contractor shall notify the engineer at least seven days prior to fabrication to permit inspection of the forms and reinforcement by department personnel .
the contractor shall have a precastprestressed concrete institute level ii certified technician skilled in the prestressing method used available to provide assistance and instruction in the use of the prestressing equipment and installation of materials .
prestressing shall be by the pretensioning method .
all common or similar elements shall be prestressed using the same method .
the contractor shall prevent damage to prestressing steel that weakens the prestressing steel or may cause failure under stress .
nicking kinking or twisting of the prestressing steel will not be permitted .
sparks or pieces of molten metal from welding or burning equipment shall not contact any prestressing steel .
the use of prestressing steel as a ground for welding equipment will not be permitted .
the cutting of surplus tendons by burning will be permitted providing the burning is done rapidly and neatly .
the term prestressing steel shall be that portion of the prestressing tendons which will be incorporated in the work .
num .
forms forms shall be set on a rigid foundation and the soffit form shall be a plane surface at right angles to the vertical axis of the beam .
the beams shall be accurately cast to the dimensions shown in the plans or in the shop plans .
requests for minor shape changes to accommodate the available forms shall be accompanied by design calculations .
num .
reinforcement reinforcement and tendons shall be placed in the position specified and securely held during the placing and setting of the concrete .
the distances between the forms and steel shall be maintained by metal bar chairs spacers hangers and precast mortar or concrete blocks of approved shape and dimensions .
metal devices in contact with the forms shall be galvanized .
distances between layers of reinforcement shall be maintained by metal spacers precast mortar or concrete blocks .
welding of reinforcement or tendons will not be allowed .
loose rust dirt oil or other foreign substances shall be removed from the prestressing tendons before the side forms are erected .
num precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete page num the hold down devices for harped strands shall provide for the removal of the device for a distance of num inch or more from the exposed face of the concrete and the resulting hole patched with mortar .
as an alternative the device shall rest on the bottom form and remain in place after concrete placement .
when the hold down devices are to remain in place the portion of the devices in contact with the forms shall be galvanized for a minimum distance of num inch .
num .
tensioning a .
equipment equipment tools and machinery used in the work shall be adequate for the purpose for which they are to be used and shall be appropriately maintained .
in all methods of tensioning the stress induced in the prestressing elements shall be measured both by jacking gauges and by elongation of the elements .
the results shall check as specified in paragraph two below .
means shall be provided for measuring the elongation of reinforcement to the nearest num inch .
stressing devices whether hydraulic jacks or screw jacks shall be equipped with accurate calibrated pressure gauges rings or other devices applicable to the type of jack being used .
jacks gauges and pumps shall be calibrated as a unit by a competent laboratory under conditions similar to operating conditions .
a dated certified calibration curve shall be furnished for each combination used .
calibration of jacks gauges and load cells shall be repeated annually or after an overhaul .
recalibration will be required for all equipment that produces erratic results during tensioning operations .
the sensitivity and accuracy of the gauges shall be such that at final elongation the total load on the jacks can be accurately determined within a tolerance of five percent of the total indicated stress at that time .
b .
general procedures the tensioning procedure shall be conducted so the indicated stress on the tendons based on gauge pressures and the indicated stress based on the corresponding elongation of the tendons may be measured and compared at any time .
when the two indicated stresses corrected for friction loss differ by num or less the tendons shall be stressed so the lower of the two indicated stresses is equal to the required tension in the tendon .
if the difference exceeds five percent tensioning operations shall cease until the source of the discrepancy has been determined and corrected .
alternate stressing procedures shall be approved by the engineer prior to fabrication .
tendons shall be tensioned to produce the forces shown in the plans or on the approved working drawings with appropriate allowances for all losses .
losses to be provided for shall be as specified in section num of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
the maximum temporary stress jacking stress and the stress in the steel before loss due to creep and shrinkage shall not exceed the values allowed in section num of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete num page num each strand shall be given an initial tension of such magnitude and shall be supported at such intervals that the strand is straightened and the slack removed before jacking is started .
strands tensioned as a group shall have the same initial tension and all strands in the group shall be from the same manufacturer .
the tensioning of harped strands shall be done so that the final tension in all parts of the strand is uniform and means shall be provided to reduce frictional forces at the bend points to a minimum .
hold down devices shall contain rollers to aid in minimizing the effects of friction .
tension elongation measurements shall be corrected for losses as determined in the field due to slippage of wedges or anchorages and friction to obtain the required prestress force in the strands after anchorages are set .
appreciable changes in elongation of the strands due to a temperature differential in the strands between the tensioning and time of concrete placement shall be considered in the final elongation measurements to obtain the required prestress force at the time of casting .
the change in elongation due to temperature shall be based on num inch per num feet of strand length for each numf variation in temperature .
temperature corrections shall be performed as per precastprestressed concrete institute standards and details of temperature corrections shall be submitted prior to fabrication .
num .
placement of concrete beams shall be cast in an upright position and the concrete shall be placed in continuous lifts not exceeding one half the depth of the beam .
a continuous flow of concrete from end to end of the beam may be permitted provided segregation of the concrete is not taking place .
cold joints or initial set between lifts will not be allowed .
the rate of placement shall be maintained at a minimum rate such that no cold joints exist in the beam .
the concrete in each beam shall be vibrated internally externally or both to produce uniformly dense concrete and to avoid displacement of enclosures or steel units .
the top surface of the beam shall be float finished to seal the surface and depress the coarse aggregate .
after finishing and prior to initial set the top surface shall be given a transverse grooving .
the grooves shall be approximately num inch deep by num inch wide at num inch spaces .
the top surface of the outside edges of the top flange shall be finished with a concrete edging tool for the full length of the beam .
the edging tool shall be of sufficient size to produce a smooth finish for approximately the outside num inches of flange top width .
in addition a smooth spot shall be left at the span tenth points .
num .
form removal forms shall not be removed until detension strength is attained .
when side forms are removed from the curing chamber before the curing cycle including temperature cooling process is complete only the minimum area of the curing chamber enclosure shall be removed and remain uncovered at any one time .
the open area in the enclosure shall be immediately closed as each form section is removed .
the enclosure shall not remain open for more than num minutes .
num precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete page num when the contractor elects to remove the beams from the casting bed during the cooling process appropriate measures shall be taken to keep the beams warm during moving operations and shall immediately resume the cooling process at the storage area .
num .
curing the contractor shall provide all approved continuous recording thermometers located in each enclosure and curing chamber .
two recording thermometers shall be provided for each casting chamber having a casting bed length of num feet or less .
for each additional num feet or less in the length of the casting bed within each chamber an additional thermometer shall be provided .
the thermometers shall record temperatures at intervals not to exceed num minutes and have an accuracy of plus or minus numf .
complete temperature recording charts for all cures shall be submitted to the engineer prior to acceptance of the beams .
if the records indicate that the specified temperature and time element pertaining to the curing are not being complied with the affected beams will be subject to rejection .
curing shall be maintained until the concrete has gained sufficient strength for prestress transfer .
num .
prestress transfer for pretensioned beams the prestress transfer shall not be made until the control cylinders cured with the beams indicate that the concrete has reached the compressive strength specified in the plans or as amended by the approved shop plans .
detensioning shall be accomplished after the steam or radiant heat curing has been discontinued and before the concrete temperature drops below numf .
the prestress transfer sequence shall keep the lateral eccentricity of the prestress to a minimum and shall prevent cracking in the top flange of the beams .
in addition the prestress transfer shall be made in accordance with the following when steam or other added heat is used for cure the prestress transfer shall be made while the concrete in the beams is still warm and moist .
the prestress transfer may be made by the gradual release of hydraulic jacks by heating exposed portions of individual strands to failure or shall be completed as detailed in approved production procedures .
when heating of individual strands is employed it shall be subject to the following heating of each individual strand shall be done simultaneously on the strand at a minimum of two locations along the casting bed .
the sequence of heating each strand along the bed the sequence of prestress transfer between individual strands and the sequence of release of the hold downs precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete num page num for deflected strands for the prestress transfer shall be such that no deleterious effect will result .
a schedule of the proposed prestress transfer operations shall be submitted with the shop plans .
heating shall be done with a large low oxygen flame along the strand for a minimum distance of num inches .
the application of heat shall be controlled so that failure of the first wire in the strand does not occur for at least five seconds after heat is applied followed by gradual elongation and failure of the remaining wires .
if the release is not gradual and damages the beam this method of release shall be discontinued .
num .
tolerances dimensional tolerances of the completed beams shall not exceed the dimensional tolerances specified in the current edition of prestressed concrete institute manual for quality control for plants and production of precast prestressed concrete products .
num .
handling storage transportation and installation pretensioned beams may be moved from the casting bed to the storage yard after the prestress transfer strength has been reached but shall not be removed from the casting yard or installed until they have reached the specified minimum design compressive strength as indicated by the test cylinders cured with the beams .
prestressed beams shall remain in an upright position at all times .
the beams shall be supported during storage lifting and transportation at only two points .
during lifting and transporting each point shall be not farther from the end of the beam than the depth of the beam .
during storage the points shall not be farther from the end of the beam than one third the depth of the beam .
the prestressed concrete beams shall be installed in accordance with the plans .
num method of measurement a. prestressed concrete beam measurement of prestressed concrete beams will not be made .
plans quantity will be used for payment .
b .
furnishing precast box culvert measurement for furnishing precast box culverts will not be made .
plans quantity shall be used for payment .
c. installing precast box culvert measurement for installing precast box culverts will not be made .
plans quantity shall be used for payment .
d. furnishing precast box culvert end sections furnishing precast box culvert end sections will be measured per each .
one end section will be considered to be all of the individual pieces required to construct one end of the box culvert .
e. installing precast box culvert end sections installing precast box culvert end sections will be measured per each .
one end section will be considered to be all of the individual pieces required to construct one end of the box culvert .
num precast and pretensioned prestressed concrete page num num basis of payment a. prestressed concrete beam prestressed concrete beams will be paid at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing the prestressed concrete beam and all other incidentals .
b .
furnishing precast box culvert furnishing precast box culvert will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing the box culvert joint seal mastic drainage fabric and joint ties .
c. installing precast box culvert installing precast box culvert will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for precast box culvert installation and will include compensation for foundation preparation backfilling and all other incidentals .
d. furnishing precast box culvert end sections furnishing precast box culvert end sections will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
e. installing precast box culvert end sections installing precast box culvert end sections will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
part f incidental construction num field laboratory page num num description this work consists of furnishing placing and maintaining field laboratories .
num materials field laboratories shall be type i type ii or type iii as specified .
all field laboratories shall conform to the following general requirements and to the specific requirements for each laboratory type which are defined below .
the engineer may permit minor deviations provided the deviations do not impair the usefulness of the laboratory .
a .
general requirements the field laboratory shall consist of a weatherproof and thermal resistant structure which has been modified or originally constructed to meet these specifications .
the field laboratory shall be neat clean in good repair and shall be placed at a location satisfactory to the engineer .
the field laboratory shall be adequately anchored to the ground leveled and rigidly supported to eliminate floor and workbench vibrations to allow for accurate weighing on a bench supported scale .
the contractor shall provide a set of steps and hand railings at each of the exterior doors .
if the floor of the laboratory is num inches or more above the ground the contractor shall construct a landing at all exterior doors .
the minimum dimensions for the landing shall be num feet by num feet .
the top of the landing shall be level with the threshold of the doorway .
the contractor shall furnish continuous electrical power and fuel supply for the heating and cooling systems range and lighting .
the electrical power supply shall be protected from power surges that may damage electrical equipment in the field laboratory .
the contractor will be responsible for damage to electrical equipment due to power surges caused by the contractors operations .
the electrical system shall include one exterior wall outlet with protective cover and one fuse or circuit breaker box .
each laboratory shall have an outside power disconnect .
each laboratory shall contain at least one opening type clear glass window with screen in each sidewall of each room and one in each exterior end wall to provide equal and adequate light and ventilation for each room .
if a door is located on the end wall of the lab a window is not required on that wall .
there shall be one exterior door in each room except for the office room one of which shall be at least num inches wide .
exterior doors and windows shall be provided with locks .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with keys for the doors .
the lab shall be a no smoking facility .
the contractor shall post no smoking signs on each lab door .
each laboratory shall contain the following equipment num field laboratory page num num .
a heating and cooling system capable of maintaining numf numf in the testing rooms and office room .
num .
a pressure water system or gravity fed water system with at least a num gallon capacity capable of maintaining a minimum pressure at the faucet of num psi .
num .
a sink and faucet with a hose bib connector .
the faucet shall be a minimum of num inches above the sink .
the sink shall drain to the exterior of the lab .
the sink shall be located in testing room ii for the type i type iii laboratories and in testing room i for the type ii laboratory .
num .
artificial lighting system with fixtures providing adequate illumination over all work areas and each desk .
num .
a minimum of two fourgang outlets per each sidewall per each room .
there shall be a minimum of one fourgang outlet per each exterior end wall of each room .
there shall be one fourgang outlet under each desk area .
all electrical outlets shall be ground fault protected .
num .
one storage closet num inches deep and num feet high with a minimum door width of num inches .
the cabinet shall include shelves and garment storage space .
num .
an exhaust fan capable of circulating and exhausting the air in rooms containing rangeoven and sieve equipment with a minimum air exchange rate of num cubic feet per minute .
num .
one num inch electric range with four burners and a thermostatically controlled oven in testing room i for the type i and ii laboratories and testing room ii for the type iii laboratory .
num .
a one cubic foot numwatt microwave oven in testing room ii .
num .
an activated hardwired touchtone telephone with integrated answering machine and plain paper faxcopier machine in testing room ii for the type i and ii laboratories and office room for the type iii laboratory .
num .
one numanumbc minimum rated fire extinguisher .
the fire extinguisher shall be mounted in a prominent location and shall be current with all required inspections as evidenced by an inspection tag .
num .
a num unit first aid and eyewash kit .
the kits shall be mounted in a readily available location .
num .
broom dustpan garbage can and garbage bags .
num .
two chairs and two stools .
num .
a portable sanitary facility shall be set up adjacent to the field laboratory .
field laboratory num page num num .
on projects requiring concrete test specimens a metal or polyethylene tank num feet long num inches wide and num feet deep shall be installed beneath the worktable .
the surface of the worktable above the tank shall be hinged to allow the tabletop and support to be lifted out of the way to provide access to the tank .
a gate valve shall be installed to drain the tank .
when heating is required the tank shall be equipped with a thermostatically controlled water heater to maintain the water temperature between numf and numf .
num .
if the laboratory is to be used as a qa laboratory the contractor shall furnish two mechanical convection ovens in the laboratory in addition to the oven required .
the ovens shall have a minimum chamber volume of num cubic feet and be equipped with thermometer readout through the top .
the ovens shall be capable of heating to a temperature of numf .
the oven shall have a thermostatic controller and be able to maintain a uniform material temperature numf .
b .
type i field laboratory num .
size the floor area based on exterior dimensions shall not be less than num square feet .
the exterior width shall be a minimum of num feet and maximum of num feet .
the interior floor to ceiling height shall not be less than num feet high .
the laboratory shall be floored and shall have a transverse center partition with a num inch width door .
the partition shall divide the laboratory into two sections with approximately equal floor space .
num .
testing room i the testing room shall contain the following a .
one movable worktable num inches high with surface dimensions of num inches by num inches .
b .
one movable worktable num inches high with surface dimensions of num inches by num inches .
c. a minimum of num feet of open shelving not less than num inches wide mounted at convenient locations .
num .
testing room ii the testing room shall contain the following a .
one worktable num inches high num feet long and num inches wide attached to the wall opposite the exterior door with one end adjacent to the exterior end wall .
b .
one movable desk with one center drawer and file drawers .
c. a minimum of num feet of open shelving not less than num inches wide mounted at convenient locations .
num field laboratory page num c. type ii field laboratory num .
size the floor area based on exterior dimensions shall not be less than num square feet .
the exterior width shall be a minimum of num feet and a maximum of num feet .
the interior floor to ceiling height shall not be less than num feet high .
the laboratory shall be floored and shall have a transverse center partition with a num inch width door .
the partition shall divide the laboratory into two sections with approximately equal floor space .
num .
testing room i the testing room shall contain the following a .
one worktable num inches high num feet long and num inches wide attached to the wall opposite the exterior door with one end adjacent to the partition wall .
b .
one movable worktable num inches high with surface dimensions of num inches by num inches .
c. one movable worktable num inches high with surface dimensions of num inches by num inches .
d. a minimum of num foot of open shelving not less than num inches wide mounted at convenient locations .
num .
testing room ii the testing room shall contain the following a .
one worktable num inches high full length of the room and num inches wide attached to the wall opposite the exterior door .
b. cupboards one num inches long num inches deep and num inches high .
the cupboards shall be a minimum of num inches above the top of the worktable .
c. a minimum of num foot of open shelving not less than num inches wide mounted at convenient locations .
d. two movable desks with one center drawer and file drawers .
e. one moveable filing cabinet with at least two drawers .
d. type iii field laboratory num .
size the floor area based on exterior dimensions shall not be less than num square feet .
the exterior width shall be a minimum of num feet and a maximum of num feet .
the interior floor to ceiling height shall not be less than num feet high .
the laboratory shall be floored .
the lab will be separated into three rooms .
the office room shall have approximately num square feet testing room i shall have approximately num square feet and testing room ii shall have approximately num square feet .
the transverse partitions shall have a num inch width door .
field laboratory num page num num .
testing room i testing room i shall contain the following a .
one worktable num inches high num foot long and num inches wide attached to the wall opposite the exterior door with one end adjacent to the partition wall .
b .
one worktable num inches high with surface dimensions of num inches by num feet .
c. cupboards one num inches long num inches deep and num inches high .
the cupboards shall be a minimum of num inches above the top of the worktable .
d. a minimum of num feet of open shelving not less than num inches wide mounted at convenient locations .
num .
testing room ii testing room ii shall have the following a .
one worktable num inches high num feet long and num inches wide .
b .
one worktable num inches high with surface dimensions of num inches long by num inches wide and one shelf num inches above the table .
place the stove oven with cooktop adjacent to this worktable and a fixed worktable num inches high with surface dimension num feet long and num inches wide .
c. cupboards one num inches long num inches deep and num inches high .
the cupboards shall be a minimum of num inches above the top of the worktable .
d. a minimum of num feet of open shelving not less than num inches wide mounted at convenient locations .
num .
office room the office room shall contain the following a .
a solid mounted desk in an lshaped pattern num inches wide .
two seating areas each with a center drawer and file drawers .
the seating areas shall be situated such that both workspaces can be occupied at the same time .
b. cupboards one num inches long num inches deep and num inches high .
the cupboards shall be a minimum of num inches above the top of the worktable .
c. one moveable filing cabinet with at least two drawers .
num construction requirements the laboratory shall be for the exclusive use of the engineer .
the location of the laboratory will be as directed by the engineer and shall be relocated by the contractor at the contractors expense as required by the engineer .
the laboratory will be required to be furnished when requested by the engineer .
on projects that a type iii lab is required the engineer may allow a type i or ii lab to be supplied until such a time the engineer determines the type iii lab is required .
if the engineer allows a temporary type i or ii lab to be furnished num field laboratory page num no additional payment for that lab will be made .
the laboratory shall not be removed from the project until released by the engineer .
num method of measurement field laboratories will be measured on a per each basis .
num basis of payment the accepted quantity of field laboratories will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the contract unit price will be full compensation for furnishing the laboratory and specified equipment and for necessary services until the building is released by the engineer .
the field laboratory will remain the property of the contractor .
the item of field laboratory will not be subject to unit price negotiation regardless of any underrun or overrun of the contract quantity nor will the provisions of section num relative to reimbursement apply in the event the entire item is eliminated .
this item will not be subject to the provisions of section num .
upon placement of an acceptable field laboratory on the project num of the contract unit price will be paid .
upon release by the engineer the remaining num of the contract unit price will be paid .
haul roads num page num num description this work consists of maintaining and restoring designated or approved haul roads .
num materials materials shall conform to the following requirements or as approved by the local government agency and the engineer a. granular material granular material shall be an acceptable material being used on the project .
b. asphalt concrete aggregate asphalt concrete aggregate shall conform to one of the classes specified in section num .
c. cover aggregate cover aggregate shall conform to type num as specified in section num .
d. asphalt material asphalt material shall be specified by the engineer and shall conform to section num .
if any of the above materials are specified in the contract the materials may be furnished for haul road maintenance and restoration under the same specification .
num construction requirements the related costs for the maintenance and restoration of bridges box culverts pipe culverts and roads that are not approved haul roads shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
when haul roads are designated in the contract an agreement dotnum with the governmental agency or political subdivision charged with the control and maintenance of the designated roads will be included in the contract .
if the contractor elects to use a haul road not designated in the contract or if no haul road is designated in the contract the contractor shall secure written approval from the engineer or the maintenance and repair of the haul road used by the contractor will not be eligible for num payment .
approval will be given only if the road is a practical route for hauling materials .
allowance will not be made for hauling material from commercial sources on normal haul routes .
the contractor the governmental agency or political subdivision charged with the maintenance of the road and the engineer will conduct a joint inspection of all approved haul roads .
following this inspection an agreement shall be prepared on form dotnuma stating existing conditions and setting forth any special conditions of restoration of the haul road .
the form dotnuma must be signed by the contractor and the governmental agency or political subdivision and approved by the engineer prior to hauling over the route .
during hauling operations the contractor shall maintain the haul road in a condition satisfactory to the engineer .
num haul roads page num when hauling operations are completed the contractor shall restore the haul road to a condition which satisfies the conditions stipulated in the agreement dotnuma .
the engineer will determine the kind and amount of restoration work required .
the fact that other traffic has used the haul road concurrently with the hauling operations shall not relieve the contractor of any obligation to maintain and restore the haul road .
if other contractors under a contract with the department concurrently haul materials over the same route the engineer will determine the amount of maintenance and restoration obligation to be assessed to each contractor .
upon completion of the restoration work on a haul road the contractor the governmental agency or political subdivision charged with the control and maintenance of such route and the engineer will conduct a joint inspection of the haul route .
two copies of the haul road release part of form dotnum or dotnuma shall be submitted to the engineer .
num method of measurement materials for maintenance and restoration of haul roads will be measured as set forth in the applicable sections of these specifications .
num basis of payment the contractor shall perform all required repairs at the contract unit prices contained in the most recent copy of the special provision for price schedule for miscellaneous items .
the department and the contractor shall equally share in the cost of the haul road maintenance and restoration for all routes other than state routes .
on all state routes the department will reimburse the contractor for num of the actual quantities of the materials required to perform the necessary maintenance repairs .
for all other approved routes the department will reimburse the contractor for num of the actual quantities for furnishing and placing the materials required to perform the necessary maintenance and repairs .
when materials other than those listed in the special provision for price schedule for miscellaneous items exclusive of materials required for maintenance and restoration of bridges box culverts and pipe culverts are ordered by the engineer the materials will be paid for as per section num .
all cost for maintenance and restoration of bridges box culverts and pipe culverts shall be paid by the contractor .
separate payment will not be made for the blading and shaping costs necessary for maintenance and restoration of haul roads .
the department will reimburse the contractor for num of the actual quantities for furnishing and installing dust control on approved haul roads .
payment shall be according to the above provisions .
fly ash num page num num description this specification allows the substitution of fly ash for a portion of portland cement in concrete .
num materials fly ash shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements a .
limitations fly ash will not be permitted when type iii cement is used .
b .
storage fly ash shall be stored at the concrete plant site in clearly marked separate containers .
use of divided bins in the same silo will be permitted if the silo is commercially manufactured with divided bins or if the contractorconcrete supplier has a certification by a registered professional engineer that the divided bins will structurally handle the load associated with the use of the silo .
c. design mix fly ash may be substituted for cement in concrete .
the addition or deletion of fly ash from the mix will be at no cost to the department .
if fly ash is used the minimum amount of cement to be replaced is num and the maximum amount is num at a num ratio by weight .
changes in fly ash source or mill plant coal supply will require a new mix design approval .
d. batching fly ash may be weighed on a separate scale or on the same scale as the cement .
if the cement scale is used the cement must be weighed first .
num method of measurement no measurement will be made for fly ash .
num basis of payment payment for the use of fly ash will not be made .
all costs for sampling testing and using fly ash shall be incidental to the respective concrete bid item .
num fly ash page num this page intentionally left blank cattle guards num page num num description this work consists of furnishing and constructing cattle guards .
num materials the materials shall conform to the kind type grade and size specified in the plans and the proposal .
num construction requirements the cattle guards inclusive of foundations approaches and grating shall be accurately placed and constructed after completion of the grading work .
num method of measurement cattle guards will be measured per each cattle guard furnished and installed .
num basis of payment cattle guards will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for materials equipment labor excavating backfilling and incidentals necessary .
num cattle guards page num this page intentionally left blank rightofway fencing num page num num description this work consists of furnishing and installing fence brace panels and gates salvaging of existing fence installation of temporary fence and incidental work .
num materials rightofway fence materials shall conform to section num except materials for type i and type ia temporary fence may consist of any approved new or used fencing material .
num construction requirements a. rightofway fence wood posts may be either handset or power driven .
if hand set the posts shall be placed in the centers of the post holes and the backfill shall be thoroughly tamped around the posts .
the post holes shall be a minimum of num inches larger in diameter than the nominal diameter of the post .
if posts are sharpened the posts shall be sharpened on the small end to a blunt point approximately num inch wide prior to treatment .
the fencing shall be fastened to the sides of the posts facing the private property adjacent to the highway rightofway .
fence on curves shall be fastened to the side of the post which will allow the wire to be pulled tight against the post .
woven wire fence fabric shall be placed by securing or fastening one end and applying sufficient tension to remove all slack before making permanent attachments elsewhere .
the fabric shall be stretched until the tension curves in the line wires are approximately one half their original depths keeping stay wires vertical .
the bottom of the woven wire fabric shall be placed a normal distance of num inches above the ground line .
over irregular ground a minimum clearance of num inch and a maximum clearance of num inches will be permitted for a distance of not to exceed num feet .
the contractor shall remove debris and perform necessary excavation and backfilling prior to installing the fence .
woven and barbed wire shall be cut and wrapped at each panel encountered .
in two post and three post brace panels each line wire shall be wrapped once around the last post and twisted back on itself with a minimum of four twists .
if a three post panel has any angle to it each line wire shall be wrapped once around the middle post and twisted back on itself .
barbed wire shall be fastened to brace panels by wrapping it twice around the last post and twisting it back on itself .
woven wire fabric splices shall be made by the wrap splice method consisting of placing the two end vertical stay wires next to each other and twisting all of the free line wires four times around the line wires beyond these vertical stays .
barbed wire splice shall be made by interlocking three barbs and twisting the loose ends four times around the main strands beyond these interlocked barbs .
splices securely made with num rightofway fencing page num commercial splicing devices acceptable to the engineer may be used in lieu of the above splice methods .
diagonal brace wires shall be fabricated with four strands of num gauge galvanized wire one strand of which shall completely encircle each post be twisted back on itself and firmly stapled to the posts .
the brace wires shall be tightened by twisting until the entire assembly is rigid .
brace wires shall be installed in accordance with the direction of pull two being installed on a panel that will pull in both directions .
staples shall be used to fasten woven wire and barbed wire to the wooden line posts .
the top and bottom wires of the woven wire fabric shall always be stapled to each post .
the remaining line wires shall be alternately stapled .
staples shall be set diagonally and shall be sloped downward on level ground and over knolls and upward in depressions .
the staples shall be driven only deep enough to hold the wire close to the posts .
the staple shall not cause a deformation of the surface of the wood or kink the wire .
wire ties or clips shall be used to fasten woven wire and barbed wire to steel posts .
the wire ties or clips shall prevent the fence from slipping either up or down the post .
when ordered by the engineer where stresses tending to pull the posts from the ground are created at grade depressions the fencing shall be snubbed or guyed at the critical points by means of double strands of num gauge diameter galvanized wire connected to each horizontal line of barbed wire and to the top and bottom horizontal lines of the woven wire fabric .
the ends of the combined strands shall be firmly attached to a deadman located at the point which will resist the pull of the wire fence .
a deadman shall weigh at least num pounds and shall be buried with a ground cover of at least num feet .
the deadman may be a single rock a concrete block or other object acceptable to the engineer .
b .
temporary fence temporary fence shall not be attached to rightofway fence .
type i temporary fence shall be constructed in a manner to ensure that livestock will be confined but in no case shall less than num wires be used or shall the post spacing exceed num feet .
additional wires may be necessary due to weather conditions and type of livestock confined .
electric fence shall not be used for temporary fence .
following completion of grading operations and construction of rightofway fence the contractor shall remove type i temporary fence .
type i temporary fence shall remain the property of the contractor .
type ia temporary fence shall meet all the requirements of type i temporary fence .
type ia temporary fence shall remain in place and become the property of the landowner .
type ii and type iii temporary fence shall be constructed in accordance with section num a .
type ii and type iii temporary fence shall remain in place and become the property of the landowner .
type ii temporary fence shall consist of num strands of barbed wire fastened to steel posts spaced num feet center to center .
type iii temporary fence rightofway fencing num page num shall consist of a num inch width of woven wire with num strands of barbed wire fastened to steel posts spaced num feet center to center .
c. salvaging or removing fence when a bid item for salvaging fence is provided the fence shall be removed from the locations designated .
salvaged fence shall be placed adjacent to the rightofway and shall remain the property of the original owner .
the wire shall be carefully removed from the posts and placed in rolls of at least num feet in length .
care shall be taken not to tangle the wire .
posts shall be carefully pulled to minimize damage .
posts shall be placed in neat piles .
gates shall be carefully removed and stockpiled .
when a bid item for remove fence is provided in the contract fence removed shall become the property of the contractor .
since landowners are permitted to salvage and keep fence they remove no guarantee can be made that all fence shown on the plans will require removal by the contractor .
num method of measurement a. rightofway fence rightofway fence will be measured by the linear foot parallel to the ground including lengths of brace panels and wire gates .
b. brace panels quantities of brace panels will be determined from count of each type .
c. tubularframe gates quantities of tubular frame gates will be determined from a count of each size .
d. temporary fence num .
type num type i temporary fence will be measured by the linear foot complete in place parallel to the ground including any necessary brace panel and gate construction .
num .
type numa type ia temporary fence will be measured by the linear foot complete in place parallel to the ground including any necessary brace panel and gate construction .
num .
type ii and iii type ii and iii temporary fence will be measured as specified in section num a. e. salvaging fence and remove fence salvaging fence and remove fence will be measured by the linear foot parallel to the ground including brace panels and gates .
num basis of payment a. rightofway fence rightofway fence will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot for the respective types and classes inclusive of anchors .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing materials labor equipment and incidentals except brace panels and tubular frame gates .
separate payment will not be made for clearing the num rightofway fencing page num fence line disposal of debris smoothing the irregularities of the ground necessary excavation or backfill or filling in holes from wood posts .
deadmen ordered by the engineer described in section num a will be paid for as extra work .
b. brace panels brace panels will be paid for at the contract unit price per panel for the respective types .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing labor materials equipment and incidentals required .
c. tubular frame gates the tubular frame gates will be paid for at the contract unit price per gate for the respective size .
payment for this item will be full compensation for furnishing labor materials equipment and incidentals except brace panels required to install the tubular frame gate .
d. temporary fence num .
type num temporary fence type i temporary fence will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
upon installation num of the contract unit price will be paid .
upon removal the remaining num of the contract unit price will be paid .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing necessary materials labor equipment and incidentals required to construct remove and salvage the temporary fence .
separate payment will not be made for clearing the fence line disposal of debris smoothing the irregularities of the ground necessary excavation or backfill or filling in holes from wood posts .
separate payment will not be made for this work under the items of salvaging fence or remove fence .
num .
type numa temporary fence type ia temporary fence will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing materials labor equipment and incidentals required to construct the fence .
separate payment will not be made for clearing the fence line disposal of debris smoothing the irregularities of the ground excavation or backfill .
num .
type ii and iii temporary fence type ii and iii temporary fence will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per foot .
payment will be full compensation for material labor equipment and incidentals except brace panels and tubular frame gates .
separate payment will not be made for clearing the fence line disposal of debris smoothing the irregularities of the ground excavation or backfill .
e. salvaging fence salvaging fence will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment and incidentals required .
f. remove fence remove fence will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment and incidentals required .
g. remove and reset fence if the contractor is required to remove and reset brace panels temporary fence or rightofway fence as the result of changes ordered on construction payment for the work involved in removing and resetting will be made at the contract unit price for the type of fence or panel involved .
separate payment will not be made under the items salvaging or remove fence .
chain link fencing num page num num description this work consists of furnishing and installing chain link wire mesh fence .
num materials chain link fence materials shall conform to section num .
concrete shall conform to class mnum section num .
num construction requirements posts shall be set in concrete footings .
to eliminate danger of frost heaving the post concrete in the crown top shall not be larger than the concrete in the lower portion of the footing .
posts shall be spaced at not more than num foot intervals .
in determining post spacing measurements will be made parallel to the slope of the natural ground .
posts shall be set vertically except at locations where the engineer determines the posts should be placed perpendicular to the slope of the ground .
corner posts and adjacent brace panels shall be constructed at angle points of num degrees or more in the fence alignment .
pull posts and adjacent panels shall be constructed at sharp breaks in the vertical grades and at intervals of not more than num feet on straight runs of fence .
the contractor shall remove all debris and perform necessary excavation and backfilling prior to installing the fence .
tension wires shall be placed stretched tight and secured to all posts before fence fabric is placed .
sufficient tension shall be applied to the tension wires to allow a maximum sag of num inch between posts after the fence fabric has been attached .
temporary bracing on posts shall be provided to prevent undue stresses in the posts when tension is applied to one tension wire at a time .
on curves the fence fabric shall be placed so that tensioning the fabric will pull the fabric against the post .
on tangent sections the engineer will designate the side of the post to which the fence fabric shall be attached .
the bottom of the fabric shall be placed num inches above the ground line .
over irregular ground a minimum clearance of num inch and a maximum clearance of num inches will be permitted for a distance not to exceed num feet .
the fence fabric shall be cut and each span attached independently to all corner and pull posts .
rolls of wire fabric shall be joined by weaving a single strand into each of the rolls to form a continuous mesh .
num chain link fencing page num num method of measurement a .
chain link fence chain link fence will be measured by the foot parallel to the ground inclusive of the end corner and pull post panels .
b .
chain link fence gates quantities of chain link fence gates will be determined from a count of each type .
num basis of payment a .
chain link fence chain link fence will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot inclusive of end corner and pull post panels .
b .
chain link fence gates chain link fence gates will be paid for at the contract unit price per each type .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing materials labor tools miscellaneous hardware fittings and equipment necessary excavation backfilling concrete footings smoothing the irregularities of the ground at the fence site clearing the line for the fence and disposing of debris .
cable guardrail num page num num description this work consists of constructing num cable guardrail .
num materials a .
cable cable shall be num inch type i class a coating conforming to aashto m num .
b .
cable splices ends fittings and anchor assembly when galvanizing is specified these materials shall be galvanized after fabrication to meet the requirements of astm anum .
the top num inches of the anchor bolts and the nuts and washers shall be galvanized in accordance with astm fnum .
c. compensating device design for alternate combination or single unit compensating device and turnbuckle assembly may be submitted for approval .
d. hook bolts hook bolts shall develop an ultimate pull open strength applied in a direction normal to the longitudinal axis of the post from num to num pounds .
the bolts shall be galvanized in accordance with astm fnum .
e. steel posts num .
structural steel posts structural steel posts and anchor plates shall conform to the requirements of astm anum grade num .
the posts shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with astm anum .
num .
flanged channel posts flanged channel posts shall be fabricated from rerolled rail steel bars conforming to astm anum grade num .
the post shall meet the chemical properties of astm anum for rails num pounds per foot and heavier .
post lengths shall be as specified plus or minus num inch and shall weigh a minimum of num pounds per foot plus or minus num .
posts shall be painted with a baked on high quality dark green enamel .
all punching boring cutting shearing and welding shall be done prior to painting .
holes num inch in diameter shall be punched or bored on num inch centers beginning at the top of the post and extending to the bottom .
f. concrete concrete shall be class mnum as specified in section num .
num construction requirements a. guardrail alignment posts and rail shall be set to the plans shown alignment using a string line or other approved methods .
b .
posts posts shall be set plumb .
regardless of the method of setting posts the posts shall be firm and at the locations spacing and height shown on the plans .
when guardrail posts are installed through asphalt concrete shoulders the contractor shall take care to minimize damage to the asphalt concrete .
if during post installation num cable guardrail page num the asphalt concrete shoulder is raised more than num inches lowered more than num inch or otherwise damaged the contractor shall repair the damaged shoulders .
the method of repair may require patching recompaction or removal and replacement of the affected asphalt concrete .
the method of repair is subject to the approval of the engineer depending on the type and extent of the shoulder damage .
all repair costs shall be at the contractors expense .
drilling postholes in pavement shall be done without damage to the surrounding pavement .
the engineer must approve the proposed drilling method and equipment before the work begins .
upon completion of the installation of the guardrail posts the contractor shall place and compact asphalt concrete or asphalt concrete cold mix material around the posts to fill and level any voids created by the driving of the posts through the asphalt concrete .
the material shall be placed num inch to num inch high around the posts to force water to flow away from the posthole .
cost for this work shall be incidental to the contract unit prices for the various guardrail items .
c. pretension of three cable guardrail the contractor shall pretension the three cable guardrail in accordance with the following num .
properly seat the spring in the compensator device and permanently mark the unloaded spring position on the compensator rod .
num .
install spring end assemblies at one end of the barrier and secure to the anchor .
num .
with cable strung through the hook bolts introduce tension in the cable at the opposite end of the barrier to compress the installed springs approximately num inches .
num .
clamp this tension in the cable while the end assemblies are installed at the second anchor .
num .
remove the slack between the clamp point and the second anchor by taking up the turnbuckle .
if springs are also used at this end compress them approximately num inches .
num .
after two weeks at this setting reset the spring compression as indicated in the standard sheet table on the plans .
ample turnbuckle take up must be left at both ends to permit future adjustments .
d. remove cable guardrail cable guardrail removed including cable posts and hardware shall become the property of the contractor unless otherwise noted on the plans .
cable guardrail num page num any holes left after removal of the cable guardrail shall be backfilled with material furnished by the contractor .
wherever posts were set through asphalt the top num inches of the hole shall be backfilled with bituminous mix .
e. completion requirements on projects where existing cable or steel beam guardrail is to be removed and replaced or reinstalled and the roadway will be open to traffic during construction the guardrail installation shall be completed within num calendar days from the day the controlling item of work is sufficiently complete to allow guardrail installation .
a guardrail installation is defined as each individual run of guardrail i.e .
a typical bridge would have num guardrail installations .
controlling items for guardrail include but are not limited to structure structure end block and surfacing work .
typically there will be a sequence of controlling items for guardrail .
prior to any guardrail removal the contractor shall submit and the engineer must approve a written construction schedule for work in the guardrail area .
in no case shall work cease between controlling items of work for more than num working days .
once the existing guardrail is removed from a bridge end box culvert bridge column etc .
the contractor shall place drums or type ii barricades at num foot intervals at each location where existing guardrail is removed .
these devices shall extend num feet beyond the item of concern for each direction of traffic .
drums and barricades shall remain in place until new guardrail has been installed .
cost for furnishing installing and maintaining drums and barricades shall be incidental to the contract lump sum price for traffic control miscellaneous .
post end beam and end terminal sections shall be erected in a continuous operation within each individual run of guardrail .
incomplete guardrail installations shall be marked by delineation as noted in the previous paragraph .
if the contractor does not complete the required work within the time allowed the contractor shall install an approved safety treatment that complies with crashworthy requirements for test level num of national cooperative highway research program nchrp report num or the aashto manual for assessing safety hardware mash to protect the site at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement a .
cable guardrail cable guardrail will be measured by the foot along the axis of the cable for the type specified .
measurement of cable guardrail will include the length of the anchorage sections .
if the guardrail is anchored to a concrete bridge end anchor measurement of cable guardrail shall be up to the anchor block .
b. anchor assembly anchor assembly will be measured by the each .
c. remove cable guardrail remove cable guardrail will be measured to the nearest foot along the centerline of the cable for the type specified .
num cable guardrail page num d. remove anchor assembly removal of anchor assembly will be measured by the each .
num basis of payment a .
cable guardrail cable guardrail will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot for the type specified .
payment will be full compensation for the cost of furnishing labor materials and equipment necessary except anchorage units .
b. anchor assembly anchor assembly will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for end posts with base plates anchor assemblies turnbuckles and compensating devices appurtenant hardware dead man and necessary excavation and backfill .
if the cable guardrail is anchored to a concrete bridge end anchor compensation devices turnbuckles and appurtenant hardware shall be incidental to the contract unit price for cable guardrail .
c. remove cable guardrail remove cable guardrail will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot for the type specified .
payment will be full compensation for the backfill of holes and the removal of the cable posts and hardware from the project limits .
d. remove anchor assembly remove anchor assembly will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for removal of end posts with base plates anchor assemblies turnbuckles and compensating devices appurtenant hardware dead man and necessary excavation and backfill .
steel beam guardrail num page num num description this work consists of furnishing and installing steel beam guardrail .
num materials a .
wood posts and offset blocks wood posts and offset blocks shall be made of a timber with a stress grade of at least num psi .
stress grading shall be in accordance with the rules of the west coast lumber inspection bureau southern pine inspection bureau or other appropriate timber association .
timber for posts shall either be rough sawn or sawn num sides snums with nominal dimensions indicated .
the size tolerance of the posts in the direction parallel to the axis of the bolt holes shall not be more than num inch .
posts and blocks with checks or cracks more than num inch wide and deeper than num inches will not be acceptable .
post and blocks shall be treated as set forth in section num after all end cuts are made and holes are drilled .
b. beam guardrail beam guardrail shall conform to aashto m num type i unless the plans specify another type .
c. bolts nuts and washers bolts nuts and washers shall be as specified in aashto m num .
d. concrete concrete shall conform to class mnum as specified in section num .
num construction requirements a. guardrail alignment posts and rail shall be set to the plans shown alignment using a string line or other approved methods .
b .
posts posts shall be set plumb .
when posts are installed in augured or dug holes the holes shall be backfilled with material approved by the engineer .
the backfill shall be placed and compacted in num inch lifts using a mechanical tamper with an appropriate sized tamping head without displacing the post alignment .
surplus excavated material will be disposed of at locations approved by the engineer .
in lieu of the above requirements post may be set by driving .
driving shall be accomplished by mechanical means which will give the necessary accuracy of placement without any damage .
damaged posts shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
regardless of the method of setting posts the posts shall be firm and at the locations spacing and height shown on the plans .
when guardrail posts are installed through asphalt concrete shoulders the contractor shall take care to minimize damage to the asphalt concrete .
if during post installation num steel beam guardrail page num the asphalt concrete shoulder is raised more than num inches lowered more than num inch or otherwise damaged the contractor shall repair the damaged shoulders .
the method of repair may require patching recompaction or removal and replacement of the affected asphalt concrete .
the method of repair is subject to the approval of the engineer depending on the type and extent of the shoulder damage .
all repair costs shall be at the contractors expense .
drilling postholes in pavement shall be done without damage to the surrounding pavement .
the engineer must approve the proposed drilling method and equipment before the work begins .
upon completion of the installation of the guardrail posts the contractor shall place and compact asphalt concrete or asphalt concrete cold mix material around the posts to fill and level any voids created by the driving of the posts through the asphalt concrete .
the material shall be placed num inch to num inch high around the posts to force water to flow away from the posthole .
cost for this work shall be incidental to the contract unit prices for the various guardrail items .
field cuts in treated wood shall be given two applications of a compatible preservative material meeting awpa standard mnum with a minimum time lapse of num hours between applications .
field bored holes may be left untreated .
c. rails the rail elements shall be ready for assembly when delivered to the project site .
welding of rail elements will not be allowed .
field cutting of rail elements shall be accomplished with a plasma cutter or other method approved by the engineer .
all field made cuts or holes shall be a neat line .
rail elements that have been altered in the field or have been damaged in transporting handling or installing shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
the altered or damaged surface area of rail element shall be thoroughly cleaned and painted with two coats of matching zincrich paint .
when nested rail is specified rail elements shall not be staggered .
d. w beam end terminal the w beam end terminal to be used shall be the contractors choice selected from the departments approved products list unless otherwise specified on the plans .
the w beam end terminal is to be installed according to the manufacturers installation instructions .
a copy of the installation instructions and drawings for the w beam end terminal being installed shall be furnished to the engineer prior to installation .
the drawings shall contain all components of the w beam end terminal .
surfacing and embankment shall be placed as detailed on the standard plates .
e. remove beam guardrail beam guardrail removed including end terminals steel beam rail posts blocks and hardware shall become the property of the contractor unless otherwise noted on the plans .
any holes left after removal of the guardrail shall be backfilled with material furnished by the contractor .
wherever posts were set through asphalt the top num inches of the hole shall be backfilled with bituminous mix .
steel beam guardrail num page num f. completion requirements on projects where existing cable or steel beam guardrail is to be removed and replaced or reinstalled and the roadway will be open to traffic during construction the guardrail installation shall be completed within num calendar days from the day the controlling item of work is sufficiently complete to allow guardrail installation .
a guardrail installation is defined as each individual run of guardrail i.e .
a typical bridge would have num guardrail installations .
controlling items for guardrail include but are not limited to structure structure end block and surfacing work .
typically there will be a sequence of controlling items for guardrail .
prior to any guardrail removal the contractor shall submit and the engineer must approve a written construction schedule for work in the guardrail area .
in no case shall work cease between controlling items of work for more than num working days .
once the existing guardrail is removed from a bridge end box culvert bridge column etc .
the contractor shall place drums or type ii barricades at num foot intervals at each location where existing guardrail is removed .
these devices shall extend num feet beyond the item of concern for each direction of traffic .
drums and barricades shall remain in place until new guardrail has been installed .
cost for furnishing installing and maintaining drums and barricades shall be incidental to the contract lump sum price for traffic control miscellaneous .
post end beam and end terminal sections shall be installed in a continuous operation within each individual run of guardrail .
incomplete guardrail installations shall be marked by delineation as noted in the previous paragraph .
if the contractor does not complete the required work within the time allowed the contractor shall install an approved safety treatment that complies with crashworthy requirements for test level num of national cooperative highway research program nchrp report num or the aashto manual for assessing safety hardware mash to protect the site at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement a. beam guardrail each class and type will be measured to the nearest num foot along the centerline of the rail .
the length in feet shall be the overall length center to center of end posts or to connections with bridges .
b. w beam end terminal the quantity will be the actual number installed .
c. remove beam guardrail remove beam guardrail will be measured to the nearest num foot along the centerline of the rail .
num steel beam guardrail page num num basis of payment a. beam guardrail beam guardrail will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot for each class and type installed .
payment will be full compensation for labor materials equipment and incidentals required .
b. w beam end terminal w beam end terminals will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for labor materials equipment and incidentals required .
c. remove beam guardrail remove beam guardrail will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for the backfill of holes and the removal of the guardrail including end terminals beam guardrail posts blocks and hardware from the project limits .
highway signs and delineators num page num num description this work consists of furnishing materials making and preparing signs and delineators erection and installation of signs and delineators and performing incidental work .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections a .
highway signs and delineators section num .
b .
reinforcing steel section num .
c. concrete section num .
d. bolts section num .
num construction requirements highway signs delineators and object markers shall comply with the current edition of the mutcd and standard highway signs issued by the u.s. department of transportation fhwa .
a .
signs num .
location and position the location of each sign shall be established by a stake bearing the sign number as determined from the plans .
posts shall be in a plumb position and the flanges of structural shape posts or other supports shall lie in the same plane .
the post shall not extend above the top of the sign .
extruded panels shall be flat and straight and shall be erected on the posts in a leveled position with the face of each extrusion flush with adjoining extrusions .
bolted connections between adjoining panels shall be straight .
offsets or gaps exceeding num inch will not be permitted .
num .
post size post size will be as specified in the contract for each sign .
sign post lengths shown in the contract are estimates for bidding purposes only .
the contractor shall field verify the post length prior to ordering .
num .
date decal the contractor shall affix a date decal to each new sign installed .
the date decal is a selfadhesive sticker with removable paper backing .
the date decal displays the last two digits of the year the sign was manufactured .
one decal shall be placed in the extreme lower left corner of the back of the flat aluminum signs .
sign supports and other obstructions shall not block the view of the date decal upon completion of the sign installation .
num highway signs and delineators page num b .
object markers object markers of the type specified shall be erected at the locations shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
c. delineators delineators shall be mounted as shown in the plans .
d. perforated tube posts perforated tube posts shall be installed in accordance with the contract or as directed by the engineer .
e. steel posts steel posts longer than the required length shall be cut off or spliced in a satisfactory manner .
areas where the galvanizing has been damaged shall be coated with an approved zinc rich paint .
structural properties of steel posts to be reused shall not be modified without the approval of the engineer .
f. wood posts wood posts shall be embedded a minimum of num feet .
wood posts longer than the required length shall be cut off or set deeper .
holes for setting wood posts shall be a minimum diameter of num inches larger than the greatest side dimension of the post .
the posts shall be set backfilled and compacted with material placed in layers not to exceed num inches .
g. sign bridges and overhead cantilever sign supports sign bridges and overhead cantilever sign supports shall be constructed in accordance with the details in the plans and at the locations shown .
anchor boltsrods shall be tightened in accordance with section num e. h. bridge mounted sign support assemblies bridge mounted sign support assemblies shall be constructed in accordance with the details and at the location shown in the plans .
i .
fixed base assemblies fixed base assemblies shall be assembled in accordance with details in the plans .
high strength bolted connections shall be tightened as specified using load indicator washers .
j .
slip base assemblies slip base assemblies shall be assembled in accordance with the details in the plans .
the top of the concrete footinggrout pad shall be placed flush with the finished grade .
the mounding of soil around the footing will not be permitted .
k. reflective sheeting reflective sheeting shall be of the type specified .
l. concrete footings num .
construction concrete footings shall be constructed as shown in the plans .
when the sign post footings extend into rock the portions of the plan specified depths in solid rock should be reduced by one half .
reduction from the plans shown quantities of concrete for footings will be made for any changes in footings depths .
posts shall highway signs and delineators num page num be anchored to footings as shown on the plans .
dirt excavated for the footings shall be disposed of as directed by the engineer .
num .
protection and cure concrete footings shall be protected and cured in accordance with section num except the minimum curing time shall be num hours .
the finished surface of the concrete footings shall be flush with the existing ground and shall present a neat and smooth appearance .
m. remove salvage relocate and reset sign the contractor shall remove signs post and bases for reset as shown in the plans .
the contractor shall reuse existing extruded aluminum panels posts footings and hardware where specified .
all existing posts bases and signs listed in the plans that are scheduled for removal shall be dismantled .
all bolts nuts and washers shall be placed in containers to keep the hardware separated .
backing materials shall be separated from the signs and may be reused at the contractors discretion .
nonthreaded connections rivets shall be cut when necessary to reduce sign sections to a num foot x num foot maximum size .
wooden posts shall be carefully removed to avoid damage and cleaned of excess dirt and neatly stockpiled separate from the steel posts .
the resultant holes in the ground from removal of wooded posts shall be backfilled to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num method of measurement a .
signs signs will be measured to the nearest num foot and the area computed to the nearest num square foot of the sign face .
deduction will not be made for rounded corners .
b .
object markers object marker quantities will be determined by count of each type regardless of size .
c. delineators delineator quantities will be determined by count of each type .
d. perforated tube posts post quantities for perforated tube posts will be measured to the nearest num foot .
the measured length shall be from the top of the base to the top of the post .
measurement of the post beyond the required length will not be made .
e. steel posts structural and pipe post quantities for steel posts will be measured to the nearest num foot for the various sizes and types .
the measured length shall be from the top of the base to the top of the post .
measurement of the post beyond the required length will not be made .
f. wood posts post quantities for wood posts will be measured to the nearest num foot for the various sizes .
the measured length of wood posts shall be from the ground to the top of the post .
the embedded num foot length will not be measured for payment .
g. sign bridges and overhead cantilever supports sign bridges and overhead cantilever supports will be measured on a per each basis .
num highway signs and delineators page num h. bridge mounted sign support assemblies bridge mounted sign support assemblies will be measured on a per each basis .
i .
fixed base assemblies field measurement will not be made .
j .
slip base assemblies field measurement will not be made .
k. reflective sheeting field measurements will not be made .
l. concrete footings concrete footings of the various diameters will be the depth of concrete to the nearest num foot .
m. remove salvage relocate and reset sign measurement will be the actual count of signs on a per each assembly basis regardless of the number of signs or posts at each assembly .
num basis of payment a .
signs sheet aluminum and extruded aluminum signs will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing materials including borders legend and edge trim .
b .
object markers object markers will be paid for at the contract unit price per each regardless of size .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing materials including posts reflective panels and hardware .
c. delineators delineators will be paid for at the contract unit price per each regardless of size .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing materials including posts reflectors and hardware .
d. perforated tube posts perforated tube posts will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing materials including post anchors anchor sleeves mounting hardware telescoped inner post sections and anchor plates .
e. steel posts structural and pipe steel posts of the various sizes and types will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing materials including sign posts connections splices cutoffs base assemblies frame assemblies and stiffeners .
f. wood posts wood posts of the various sizes and types will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing materials including sign post connections frame assemblies and stiffeners .
g. sign bridges and overhead cantilever supports sign bridges and overhead cantilever supports will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing labor equipment and materials .
extruded aluminum signs will be paid for separately at the contract unit price per square foot .
highway signs and delineators num page num h. bridge mounted sign support assemblies bridge mounted sign support assemblies will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment and materials .
extruded aluminum signs will be paid for separately at the contract unit price per square foot .
i .
fixed base assemblies separate payment will not be made for fixed base assemblies .
the fixed base assemblies will be considered incidental to the sign post furnished .
j .
slip base assemblies separate payment will not be made for slip base assemblies .
the slip base assemblies will be considered incidental to the sign post furnished .
k. reflective sheeting separate payment will not be made for reflective sheeting .
the reflective sheeting will be considered incidental to the sign furnished .
l. concrete footings concrete footings of the various diameters will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment shall be full compensation for excavation and backfilling and for furnishing and installing materials including stub posts bolts castings reinforcing steel and other hardware .
m. remove salvage relocate and reset sign payment shall be full compensation to remove and reset existing signs and shall include all costs for labor and equipment necessary to remove dismantle backfill holes and deliver salvaged material to the appropriate department shop at the contract unit price per each assembly .
num highway signs and delineators page num this page intentionally left blank pavement marking num page num num description this work consists of furnishing and applying pavement marking materials and surface grooving of portland cement concrete pavement or asphalt concrete pavement .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections a .
cold applied plastic pavement markings and legends section num .
b .
paint section num .
c. glass beads section num .
num construction requirements a .
cold applied plastic pavement marking and legends num .
prefabrication prefabricated legends and symbols shall conform to the applicable shapes and sizes as outlined in the current edition of the mutcd .
num .
width tolerance width shall be as specified with a tolerance of num inch .
num .
surface and air temperature the surface shall be numf minimum and ambient air temperature of numf minimum and rising at a season when daily highs are above numf and lows are above numf .
if the manufacturers recommendations allows for installation at temperature below the minimum required by this section the contractor may install the material in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations including any additional adhesives .
num .
pavement condition pavement must be dry and free of dirt dust and oily substances .
num .
application instructions the manufacturer shall supply proper application instructions and shall identify activators and adhesives which are to be used .
an adhesive activator supplied by the manufacturer shall be utilized on applications of this material except on newly installed asphalt when the surface temperature is numf or above .
a copy of the application instructions shall be provided to the engineer prior to use .
the plastic markings shall be manufactured and packaged in a manner which will permit storage at normal temperatures for up to one year after purchase .
num .
lane lines lane lines shall not be placed over a longitudinal pavement joint and shall not be installed closer than num inches from the joint .
lane lines shall not deviate more than num inch per num feet nor shall any deviations be abrupt .
num pavement marking page num num .
bonding to insure a uniform bond of material to asphalt or concrete surfaces after initial laydown rolling of the material with a truck wheel car wheel or heavy hand roller in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations is required .
num .
molding and sealing the material shall mold to the pavement contours breaks and faults by the action of traffic .
the material shall have resealing characteristics which enable the material to fuse with itself and with previously applied marking materials of the same composition without externally applied tackifiers or adhesives .
num .
waste disposal it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to provide for disposal of empty material cartons liner papers and other waste .
b. pavement marking paint and beads pavement marking paint shall be applied by machine .
on special areas and markings that are not adaptable to machine application hand application will be permitted .
the paint shall be used as furnished by the manufacturer .
thinner or diluent shall not be added .
the paint shall be thoroughly mixed in the original container before it is transferred to the tank of the spraying equipment .
filling tanks pouring paint or cleaning of equipment shall not be allowed on the pavement .
the pavement marking shall be applied during daylight hours when the ambient air temperature is above numf and the road surface is dry .
the pavement shall be cleaned of dirt loose stones and other foreign material before the paint is applied .
the paint applicator shall be a selfpropelled spraying machine .
the paint applicator shall be capable of applying marking materials in a solid and intermittent line pattern according to the details in the plans .
the equipment shall be capable of placing lines on the left and right sides .
the left carriage shall be capable of placing three lines simultaneously with each line in a solid or intermittent pattern in yellow or white each gun applying num to num inches wide .
the paint shall be applied at a maximum speed as recommended by the paint applicator manufacturer and shall not exceed num miles per hour .
the paint applicator shall be capable of applying glass beads in a pressurized system synchronized with the spray guns uniformly across the entire painted line .
all guns on the spray carriages shall be in full view of the operator during operation .
the equipment in the striping train shall be capable of displaying a left or right type c sequential chevron .
the type c sequential chevrons shall meet current mutcd standard for minimum size legible distance number of elements and other specifications .
all traffic control items that are mounted on the equipment shall be incidental to the other contract items .
no separate payment will be made .
during pavement marking operations on sections of roadway open to traffic the contractor shall protect the markings from tracking either by placing suitable traffic control devices or by utilizing a shadow vehicle .
the work shall be arranged such that half of the traveled roadway will be open to traffic at all times .
pavement marking num page num the contractor shall take the steps necessary to ensure that the permanent pavement markings will match the markings on the existing surface .
tolerances num .
the length of the painted line shall not vary more than plus or minus num inches from the plans requirement .
num .
the width of the painted line shall not vary more than plus or minus num inch from the plans requirement .
num .
the length of a num foot cycle length consisting of a num foot dashed line and a num foot gap shall not vary more than num inches .
num .
the alignment from the plans requirement or existing markings shall not vary more than plus or minus num inches .
num .
the maximum longitudinal deviation from the existing markings at either end of the painted roadway segment shall not vary more than plus or minus num inches .
num .
lane lines shall not deviate more than num inch per num feet nor shall any deviations be abrupt .
the contractor may be required to remove and replace pavement markings not meeting the specifications and tolerances at no additional expense to the department .
removal methods shall minimize damage to the surface and shall be approved by the engineer the pavement marking paint shall be applied at a minimum wet thickness of num mils equivalent to a dry thickness of num to num mils .
on asphalt surface treatment projects the applied minimum wet thickness shall be num mils .
glass beads shall be applied uniformly across the wet paint line at a minimum of num pounds of glass beads per gallon of paint .
restriping of pavement markings to meet this requirement and to provide a quality retroreflective line shall be at the expense of the contractor with no additional cost to the department .
sections to be restriped shall be determined by the engineer .
the paint shall be capable of being applied at a paint temperature up to numf .
when applied with glass beads at pavement temperatures above numf and at a relative humidity of up to num the paint shall dry to a notrack condition within num minutes .
c. grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking the equipment shall be capable of performing uniform grinding for alignment and depth .
the grooving shall be performed by a selfpropelled machine equipped with gang mounted specially prepared circular diamond blades on a turning head .
the equipment shall be capable of grooving the total width of the groove in one pass or be capable of grooving uniform depths with multiple passes .
the equipment shall be capable of grooving double lines simultaneously or parallel lines to a uniform depth with two passes .
num pavement marking page num if damage to joints joint sealant material backer rod etc .
occurs the grooving operation shall be stopped and modifications shall be made to the grooving operation to prevent further damage .
damage caused to joints the joint sealant material backer rod etc .
shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor as directed by the engineer .
no additional payment will be made for the repair work or any reapplication of the pavement marking in the area of the repair .
the bottom of the groove shall be uniform and free of loose material .
the groove shall be flat and of uniform depth for the entire width of the groove .
the grooving shall be performed within the following specifications and tolerances description specification tolerance depth of groove marking thickness num mils num mils width of num inch groove num inches num inch width of num inch groove num inches num inch width of num inch groove num inches num inch width of num inch groove num inches num inch width of num inch groove num inches num inch length of skip lines num foot num inches num inch tapers at ends of lines num to num inches between double lines num inches num inch the grooving alignment and straightness tolerances shall be the same as required for the cold applied plastic pavement marking as specified in section num a.num .
if the groove is exposed to traffic or adverse weather conditions overnight the contractor shall sand blast the groove prior to priming and applying tape .
existing grooves not meeting the required depth shall be regrooved to the required depth .
in areas where the existing groove meets the required depth and existing markings are still in place the contractor shall remove the existing marking by light grinding or sand blasting or both .
the grooving light grinding and sand blasting operations shall provide the surface preparation required for the application of the new cold applied plastic pavement markings .
num method of measurement a .
cold applied plastic pavement marking cold applied plastic pavement marking of the width and color specified will be measured by the foot .
b .
cold applied plastic pavement marking arrow cold applied plastic pavement marking arrow will be measured by count of each type specified .
c. cold applied plastic pavement marking message cold applied plastic pavement marking message will be measured by count of each complete word specified .
pavement marking num page num d. cold applied plastic pavement marking area cold applied plastic pavement marking area of the color specified will be measured to the nearest square foot .
e. pavement marking paint and beads paint and beads will be measured to the nearest gallon of paint .
f. grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking will be measured to the nearest footalong the length of the groove for the width of grooving specified in the plans .
g. grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking arrow grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking arrow will be measured by the count of each arrow type specified .
h. grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking message grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking message will be measured by the count of each complete word specified .
i. grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking area grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking area will be measured to the nearest square foot .
num basis of payment a .
cold applied plastic pavement marking cold applied plastic pavement marking of each width specified will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for equipment labor materials and all incidentals required .
b .
cold applied plastic pavement marking arrow cold applied plastic pavement marking arrow of the type specified will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for equipment labor materials and all incidentals required .
c. cold applied plastic pavement marking message cold applied plastic pavement marking message will be paid for at the contract unit price per each word .
payment will be full compensation for equipment labor materials and all incidentals required .
d. cold applied plastic pavement marking area cold applied plastic pavement marking area will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
payment will be full compensation for equipment labor materials and all incidentals required .
e. pavement marking paint and beads paint and beads will be paid for at the contract unit price per gallon for each color of pavement marking paint .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing paint and beads and for labor equipment and incidentals necessary .
f. grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot for the width num pavement marking page num of groove specified .
payment will be full compensation for equipment labor materials and all incidentals required .
g. grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking arrow grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking arrow will be paid for at the contract unit price per arrow type specified .
payment will be full compensation for equipment labor materials and all incidentals required .
h. grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking message grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking message will be paid for at the contract unit price per each word specified .
payment will be full compensation for equipment labor materials and all incidentals required .
i. grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking area grooving for cold applied plastic pavement marking area will be paid for at the contract unit price per each square foot .
payment will be full compensation for equipment labor materials and all incidentals required .
temporary traffic control num page num num description this work consists of furnishing installing and maintaining required temporary traffic control devices in accordance with the current edition of the federal manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd .
num materials traffic and traffic control devices shall conform to and be maintained in accordance with the requirements of section num and part num of the mutcd .
traffic control devices are categorized by their intended use and certification requirements .
category i traffic control devices are lightweight devices which may be selfcertified by the manufacturer including but not limited to cones drums and delineators .
category ii traffic control devices are other lightweight devices which must be certified by individual crash testing including but not limited to portable signs and barricades .
category iii traffic control devices are fixed or other massive devices which must be certified by individual crash testing including but not limited to breakaway sign supports concrete barriers concrete barrier end protection crash cushions truck mounted attenuators and longitudinal barriers .
category iv traffic control devices are trailer mounted devices which are not required to be individually crash tested including but not limited to portable changeable message signs arrow boards portable temporary traffic signals and work area lighting .
category i ii and iii traffic control devices shall meet the crashworthy requirements of test level num of national cooperative highway research program nchrp report num or aashto manual for assessing safety hardware mash .
category iv traffic control devices shall be delineated with retroreflective traffic control devices .
prior to use the contractor shall provide documentation for all traffic control devices used .
the documentation shall show the traffic control devices used meet the applicable nchrp num or mash requirements .
retroreflective sheeting material used on traffic control devices shall conform to section num .
paint used for temporary pavement marking shall meet the same specification for permanent pavement marking in section num .
glass beads shall be used to reflectorize the temporary traffic paint .
the glass beads shall conform to the requirements of section num .
pilot cars shall conform to section num .
temporary pavement marking tape shall conform to section num .
num temporary traffic control page num signal heads shall meet the requirements of section num .
warning lights shall meet the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements a .
general the contractor shall furnish install and maintain required traffic control devices and pavement marking material .
num .
all traffic control devices shall be kept in proper position clean and legible at all times .
damaged devices shall be replaced within num hours or as directed by the engineer .
num .
nonapplicable traffic control devices shall be completely covered or removed during periods of inactivity .
num .
traffic control devices shall be immediately removed or covered when the need for such devices no longer exists .
when devices are no longer needed they should be stored off the project or as close to the rightofway line as possible .
num .
vehicles and equipment shall be stored outside the clear zone and as near as possible to the rightofway line .
contractors employees should mobilize at a location off the rightofway and arrive at the work site in a minimum number of vehicles necessary to perform the work .
num .
traffic approaching the project from intersecting roadways streets and approaches must be adequately accommodated .
major intersections and large commercial entrances may require additional signing flaggers and channelizing devices on a temporary basis until work activities pass these areas .
num .
unless otherwise stated hours of darkness are defined as num hour after sunset until num hour before sunrise .
b .
apparel all workers within the right of way who are exposed either to traffic vehicles using the highway for purposes of travel or to construction equipment within the work area shall wear highvisibility safety apparel intended to provide conspicuity during both daytime and nighttime usage and meeting the performance class num or num requirements of the ansiisea num publication entitled american national standard for high visibility safety apparel and headwear or equivalent revisions .
workers shall wear a vest shirt or jacket as an outer garment with a background color of fluorescent yellowgreen fluorescent orangered or fluorescent red .
the retroreflectorized portion of the material shall be orange yellow white yellowgreen or silver .
temporary traffic control num page num c. flagging the contractor shall provide each flagger with a copy of the flagger manual .
these manuals are available from the department .
standards for flaggers and flagging practices shall conform to part num of the mutcd and the flagger manual .
the contractor shall furnish certified flaggers to perform project traffic control .
the minimum age for flaggers shall be num years old .
flagger training and certification is available at some department area offices and from the associated general contractors agc .
all flaggers shall complete a flagger training course and pass a written test to become certified .
flagger certification is valid for a period of num years .
all flaggers shall be certified in south dakota prior to flagging on the project .
flaggers shall carry proof of certification while flagging on department projects .
flagger workstations shall be illuminated during hours of darkness .
flagger workstations shall be illuminated with a minimum of num lux num foot candles of illumination .
the contractor shall perform a drivethrough after dark to check for glare from the drivers perspective and make adjustments necessary to eliminate or reduce the glare to the satisfaction of the engineer .
flaggers shall be equipped with a stopslow sign for the control of traffic .
the sign should be mounted on a staff from num to num feet long from the bottom of the sign to the ground .
all flagging devices and the use of such devices shall comply with part num of the mutcd unless otherwise specified .
d. pilot car pilot cars and pilot car practices shall conform to part num of the mutcd .
e. traffic control miscellaneous num .
channelizing devices channelizing devices shall be reasonably plumb to the pavement safely and neatly ballasted as needed clearly visible and legible .
additional requirements for the use of specific channelizing devices are as follows a. cones no additional requirements .
b. barricades num type num barricades type num barricades are for use on roads with normal posted speeds of num mph or less .
type num barricades may also be used on higher speed roads provided the reflective area of the upper rail is at least num square feet .
num type num barricades no additional requirements .
c. tubular markers tubular markers shall not be used in lane closure tapers .
d. vertical panels no additional requirements .
e. direction indicator barricades no additional requirements .
num temporary traffic control page num f. drums no additional requirements .
num .
delineators delineators shall conform to section num .
num .
warning lights when used in conjunction with signs barriers and channelizing devices the warning light shall conform to part num of the mutcd .
vehicles and equipment working in traffic or alongside traffic shall be equipped with a flashing amber light visible from all directions at a minimum distance of num mile the amber light shall be mounted on the uppermost part of the contractors vehicle .
lights must flash at num num flashes per minute .
vehicle flasherhazard lights are not acceptable .
num .
shadow vehicles shadow vehicles shall conform to part num of the mutcd .
shadow vehicles shall be used as specified in the plans and for brooming operations unless otherwise directed .
shadow vehicles shall be a fourwheel motor vehicle with a flashing amber light .
no separate payment will be made for shadow vehicles and any signs warning lights or other items associated with the shadow vehicles .
num .
inspection the contractor shall constantly monitor and maintain all traffic control items .
the contractor is responsible for adjustments of traffic control items when traffic conditions change .
the contractor shall make weekly inspections after dark to verify the overall traffic control system is adequate and all devices are legible at night .
this includes detour route signing .
the weekly inspections shall begin when the first traffic control sign or device is put into operation and end when the last traffic control sign or device is removed from operation .
the contractor shall designate an employee whose primary responsibility is the maintenance of traffic and traffic control devices num hours a day num days a week .
the person so designated must have training and experience in the field of construction traffic control and be knowledgeable about the mutcd .
the employee selected must be approved by the engineer .
the name phone number and location of the persons shall be provided to the department sd highway patrol county sheriffs office and the local city police department .
the person so designated shall submit a written report weekly to the engineer .
the reports shall document the daytime and weekly night time inspections .
f. type num barricades type num barricades shall conform to part num of the mutcd .
g. flexible delineators flexible delineators shall be used for delineation required within the outside edge of the finished shoulder .
flexible delineators shall match the color of the edge line .
flexible delineators shall be num inches long .
temporary traffic control num page num h. traffic control signs traffic control signs shall conform to part num of the mutcd and as specified in the plans .
i .
temporary traffic control signal temporary traffic control signals shall generally consist of all necessary materials and appurtenances needed to control road user movements at an intersection bridge or other site .
num .
general the contractor shall furnish operate and maintain the temporary traffic control signal .
the temporary traffic control signal shall reliably and continuously control traffic for all approaches at the specified location .
the temporary traffic control signal system shall meet the requirements of the mutcd national and local electrical codes and these specifications .
existing signal equipment at the site may be salvaged for use in the temporary traffic control signal .
existing traffic signal equipment used on the project shall be salvaged or returned to original use as indicated in the plans .
all materials furnished by the contractor shall remain the property of the contractor upon completion of the project .
the temporary traffic control signal shall display pedestrian indications if the pedestrian indications previously existed or if it is anticipated pedestrians will utilize the temporary traffic control signalized intersection .
in the event of system failure the contractor shall furnish necessary flaggers to safely control traffic until the temporary traffic control signal is operable .
the cost of flaggers signing and lighting shall be incidental to the contract price for temporary traffic control signal .
the contractor shall have a qualified individual responsible for setup and maintenance of the temporary traffic control signal .
this person shall have received training on installation setup and maintenance of the system .
traffic signal operation or maintenance work is required to be performed by the contractor when project conditions dictate lane closures change traffic flow is impeded a potential risk to the public exists or when equipment breaks down or malfunctions .
equipment break downs or malfunctions require a high priority response and are to be reacted to within one hour of notification of the event .
num .
temporary traffic control signal equipment a .
short term temporary traffic control signal the short term temporary traffic control signal system shall consist of signal heads mounted on span wire supports .
b .
portable temporary traffic control signal the portable temporary traffic control signal system shall consist of signal heads controller and power supply all mounted on a heavy duty trailer .
num temporary traffic control page num one of the signal heads shall be mounted a minimum of num feet and a maximum of num feet above the roadway surface on the mast arm .
the other signal head shall be mounted at least num feet but not more than num feet above the roadway surface .
the signal heads shall have the ability to be rotated num degrees to face in either direction .
the signal heads shall also have the ability to be rotated in the vertical or horizontal plane so as to have the optimum visibility to the motorist .
signals shall be located so as to meet the visibility requirements of the mutcd .
the portable temporary traffic control signal shall be equipped with work zone safety lights located on the back side of the signal heads to alert construction workers of the status of the traffic signal .
num .
temporary traffic control signal support the support system with traffic signal heads shall be designed in accordance with the current edition of the aashto standard specifications for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
the design wind velocity shall be num mph .
a .
short term temporary traffic control signal the contractor shall furnish and install span wire supports .
guy wire anchors shall be used as design requires .
the contractor shall determine the size of span support wire span tether wire pole type and guy wire required .
design and check design calculations for the span wire and support system span wire tether wire poles arms connections guy wires and anchors footings anchor bolts etc .
shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state of south dakota and shall be submitted with shop drawings in accordance with section num i.num .
the contractor shall complete tree trimming as necessary .
b .
portable temporary traffic control signal the temporary traffic control signal shall be designed to support the signal heads required .
signal supports should be located as far as practical from the edge of the traveled way without adversely affecting the visibility of signal indications .
temporary signal trailers are not to be parked in areas or lanes open to traffic .
the contractor shall adjust the traffic signals as necessary for the various phases of the work and traffic conditions to meet mutcd criteria for sight distances and sight triangles .
this includes the relocation or realignment of traffic signal indications as project conditions require .
the contractor shall complete tree trimming as necessary .
temporary traffic control num page num num .
power a .
short term temporary traffic control signal the contractor shall provide power to the temporary traffic control signal system .
the monthly fee for power used by the short term temporary traffic control signal system shall be paid for by the contractor .
b .
portable temporary traffic control signal the power source for the unit shall be one of the following an engine generator unit a solar powered unit or a num volt ac power source .
solar powered units shall have a solar array charging system capable of operating without external charge for a minimum of num days during all seasons .
the system shall monitor alternator or charging system and battery voltage .
the master trailer controller shall monitor all functions of remote trailers and display all conditions .
the remote trailers shall also provide the status of all functions for that particular remote trailer .
if a low power condition occurs the controller software shall automatically switch the trailer to a minimum power mode to preserve battery power .
the contractor shall be responsible for providing backup power if the main power source fails .
the backup power supply shall be able to operate the traffic signals for a minimum of num hours .
num .
controller the controller shall be capable of operating pretimed actuated and by manual control .
a .
short term temporary traffic control signal the short term temporary traffic control signal shall operate from a controller at the site .
the controller and the controller cabinet shall meet the requirements of section num with the following deviations num battery backup is not required .
num the controller cabinet shall be a nema type m enclosure capable of pole mounting with cable conduit openings in the center bottom .
b .
portable temporary traffic control signal the portable temporary traffic control signal units shall operate from one master controller at a given site .
the second controller or additional slave units shall be controlled by the master unit .
the controller shall have an operating temperature range from num to numf .
num .
vehicle detection the system shall be capable of video loop microwave or radar detection .
num .
traffic signal programming the contractor shall program the controllers with the traffic signal programming that is provided in the project plans .
should the project plans not specify a traffic signal program the state shall provide the traffic signal programming in writing .
as project conditions and traffic needs change the contractor will adjust the traffic signal splits and offsets as directed by the engineer .
num temporary traffic control page num j. arrow boards on roads with normal posted speeds of num mph and above type c units shall be used for all operations num hours or more in duration and type b units may be used for operations less than num hours in duration .
on roads with normal posted speeds less than num mph type a b or c units may be used for all operations .
type a num inches x num inches visible for a minimum of num mile type b num inches x num inches visible for a minimum of num mile type c num inches x num inches visible for a minimum of num mile k. portable changeable message signs portable changeable message signs shall conform to part num of the mutcd except the minimum mounting height may be lowered as approved by the region traffic engineer .
the contractor shall furnish place operate and maintain the portable changeable message signs pcms at the locations shown on the plans .
the contractor shall maintain possession of the pcms upon completion of the project .
l. temporary pavement marking num .
general temporary pavement markings shall be maintained in good condition until the permanent pavement marking is in place or until the area office issues the letter of acceptance of field work .
all roadways open to traffic including but not limited to newly paved surfaces cold milled surfaces asphalt surface treatments flush seals fog seals and tack coats shall have temporary dashed centerline markings no passing zone markings and applicable lane lines placed prior to nightfall .
for prime coats the existing signing shall remain in place until the prime coat has cured for num hours and temporary pavement marking is installed .
following the num hour cure period for prime coats the contractor shall install temporary dashed centerline markings no passing zone markings and applicable lane lines prior to nightfall .
interstate highways shall also be marked with edge lines prior to nightfall .
unless otherwise shown on the plans centerline and the applicable lane lines may be temporarily marked by temporary pavement marking tape temporary raised pavement markers temporary flexible vertical markers tabs or temporary pavement marking paint .
the material used to mark the no passing zones shall be the same type of material used to mark the temporary dashed centerline unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
for num lane roadways with average daily traffic volumes of num or less no passing zones may be identified using do not pass and pass with care signs rather than pavement markings .
the do not pass signs shall be used to mark the beginning of each no passing zone and the pass with care signs to mark the end of each zone .
these may be utilized in place of the pavement markings normally used to identify no passing zones for no longer than num calendar days .
the temporary traffic control num page num placement of the dashed centerline marking and these signs shall be required prior to nightfall .
the contractor shall take the steps necessary to ensure the temporary markings on the final surface will match the markings on the existing surface .
the engineer will determine locations and limits of no passing zones in accordance with part num of the mutcd .
num .
materials for temporary pavement marking temporary pavement marking tape temporary raised pavement markers temporary flexible vertical markers tabs and temporary pavement marking paint shall be of the type specified and shall meet the following requirements .
a .
temporary pavement marking tape temporary pavement marking tape shall be applied according to the manufacturers recommendations .
tape used for dashed centerline marking shall be applied in num inch widths num feet long with a cycle length of num feet .
a num foot stripe with a cycle length of num feet may be used for roadways with severe curvature .
solid stripes shall consist of tape applied in num inch widths for the length specified .
b .
temporary raised pavement markers temporary raised pavement markers shall be applied according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num inch wide reflectorized markers may be used in place of tape or paint .
if temporary raised pavement markers are used to substitute for dashed centerlines the dashed centerline shall be a num foot long line with a cycle length of num feet .
a num foot long line with a cycle length of num feet shall be used for roadways with severe curvature .
two temporary raised pavement markers shall represent the dashed centerline one at each end of the line .
a solid line shall be represented by a num foot spacing .
c. temporary flexible vertical markers tabs temporary flexible vertical markers tabs shall be applied according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num inch wide reflectorized markers may be used in place of tape or paint .
if temporary flexible vertical markers tabs are used to substitute for dashed centerlines the dashed centerline shall be a num foot long line with a cycle length of num feet .
a num foot long line with a cycle length of num feet shall be used for roadways with severe curvature .
two temporary flexible vertical markers shall represent the dashed centerline one at each end of the line .
a solid line shall be represented by a num foot spacing .
when an asphalt surface treatment fog seal or flush seal are to be applied temporary flexible vertical markers tabs shall not be placed more than num hours prior to covering the in place markings on the surface .
the protective marker num temporary traffic control page num covers shall not be removed until after all oil within num feet of the markers has been applied and rolling has been completed .
d. temporary pavement marking paint temporary pavement marking paint shall be applied in accordance with section num except as modified by the following dashed centerlines shall be applied in num inch widths num feet long at cycle lengths of num feet .
a num foot long line at cycle lengths of num feet may be used for roadways with severe curvature .
solid lines shall be num inches wide for the length specified or required .
the paint applicator shall be a selfpropelled pneumatic spraying machine with atomizing nozzles capable of applying a minimum of two lines at one time from num to num inches wide .
when only one lane of a twolane roadway is complete at the end of a day the temporary marking shall be placed near centerline on the unsurfaced portion of the roadway .
m. removal of pavement markings pavement markings to be removed shall be designated by the engineer .
pavement markings shall be removed from the pavement by methods that do not damage the surface or texture of the pavement .
pavement markings shall be removed before the traffic pattern is changed .
covering the markings is not acceptable removal .
sand or other material used for removal shall be disposed of as the work progresses .
accumulations of sand or other material which interferes with drainage or constitutes a hazard to traffic will not be permitted .
when sand blasting is used for removal of pavement markings or objectionable material and the removal operation is performed within num feet of a lane occupied by the traveling public the residue including dust shall be removed immediately by a vacuum attachment operating concurrently with the sand blasting operation .
damage to the pavement surface caused by pavement marking removal shall be repaired at the expense of the contractor .
num method of measurement a .
flagging flagging will be measured to the nearest num hour a flagger is performing flagging work .
a record of the number of flagger hours used will be submitted to the engineer .
temporary traffic control num page num b .
pilot car pilot car will be measured to the nearest num hour a pilot car is performing pilot car work .
a record of the number of pilot car hours used will be submitted to the engineer .
c. traffic control miscellaneous measurement for traffic control miscellaneous will not be made .
d. type num barricades type num barricades of the type and length specified will be measured per each used on the project .
measurement for type num barricades will be made one time even if the type num barricades are moved or replaced .
the number of type num barricades measured will be the greatest number of installations in place at any one time regardless of the number of setups throughout the duration of the project .
e. flexible delineators flexible delineators will be measure per each used on the project .
f. traffic control signs traffic control signs will be measured to the nearest square foot .
measurement for traffic control signs will be made one time even if the traffic control signs are moved or replaced .
the amount of traffic control signs measured will be the greatest number of installations in place at any one time regardless of the number of setups throughout the duration of the project .
g. temporary traffic control signal num .
short term temporary traffic control signal measurement for a short term temporary traffic control signal will be made on a per site basis .
one site will be considered to be all signals overhead span wires support poles and other equipment in use at an intersection .
num .
portable temporary traffic control signal measurement for a portable temporary traffic control signal will be made on a per each basis .
one unit will be considered to be a portable traffic control signal mounted on a trailer .
h. arrow board arrow boards will be measured on a per each basis of the total number of arrow boards used on the project .
measurement for arrow boards will be made one time even if the arrow boards are moved or replaced .
the amount of arrow boards measured will be the greatest number of arrow boards on the project at any one time regardless of the number of setups throughout the duration of the project .
i .
portable changeable message sign portable changeable message signs will be measured on a per each basis of the total number of portable changeable message signs used on the project .
measurement for portable changeable message signs will be made one time even if the portable changeable message signs are moved or replaced .
the amount of portable changeable message signs will be the greatest number of portable changeable message signs on the project at any one time regardless of the number of setups throughout the duration of the project .
num temporary traffic control page num j .
temporary pavement marking measurement for tape paint tabs and raised pavement markers will be made either by the foot or by the mile depending on the unit designated by the contract quantity .
a single measurement will be made longitudinally along the centerline of the roadway .
the resulting single measured distance will be the quantity used for payment for all temporary pavement markings including but not limited to temporary dashed centerline lane lines edge lines gore lines no passing zone lines and do not pass and pass with care signing if utilized .
separate measurement and determination of quantity for each individual temporary pavement marking line will not be made .
each surface course or surface treatment receiving temporary pavement marking will be measured to the nearest num mile increment for payment .
if a single set of temporary roadway markers is utilized on multiple surface courses or surface treatments payment will be made as though each surface course or surface treatment was marked separately .
temporary pavement markings applied to sections of the roadway due to the application of tack will not be measured for payment .
the temporary pavement markings placed near the centerline on the unsurfaced portion of the roadway when only one lane of the final surface course or surface treatment is complete will not be measured for payment .
k. remove pavement marking measurement for removal of pavement markings will not be made .
the plan quantity will be used for payment unless additional pavement marking removal is ordered by the engineer .
num basis of payment a .
flagging payment for flagging will include all costs for provided certified flagger stopslow paddle flag and any nighttime illumination required .
the accepted number of flagging hours will be paid for at the rate specified in the special provision for price schedule for miscellaneous items .
b .
pilot car pilot car will be paid for at the contract unit price per hour .
the accepted number of pilot car hours will be paid for at the rate specified in the special provision for price schedule for miscellaneous items .
c. traffic control miscellaneous payment for traffic control miscellaneous will include all costs for installation maintenance and removal of all cones type num and type num barricades tubular markers vertical panels direction indicator barricades drums flashing warning lights and flags on signs .
payment will include all costs for removing and covering nonapplicable traffic control devices shadow vehicles traffic control inspections reporting for traffic control inspections and the designated traffic control contact person .
d. type num barricades payment for type num barricades will include all cost for installation maintenance and removal .
temporary traffic control num page num e. flexible delineators payment for flexible delineators will include all cost for installation maintenance and removal .
f. traffic control signs traffic control signs will be paid for by the square foot .
payment for traffic control signs will be made following satisfactory installation .
payment will be full compensation for installing maintaining relocating and removing traffic control signs and supports .
hinged signs and signs with tabs such as right and left signs will be paid for as one sign .
costs for posts and supports shall be included in the contract unit price of the sign .
additional payment will not be made for any traffic control sign turned away covered or temporarily taken out of service and returned to service .
if a fixed location traffic control sign is relocated due to an error in the plans or by the engineer an additional num of the designated sign rate will be paid .
the contractors failure to maintain relocate or remove traffic control signs and supports as required will result in a price adjustment assessed to the contract .
g. temporary traffic control signal num .
short term temporary traffic control signal short term temporary traffic control signals will be paid for at the contract unit price per each site .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing maintaining tree trimming and all other incidentals for the short term temporary traffic control signal which may include using existing controller and signal heads or providing new controller and signal heads as designated in the plans .
num .
portable temporary traffic control signal portable temporary traffic control signals will be paid for at the contract unit price per each unit .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing maintaining relocating tree trimming and all other incidentals for the portable temporary traffic control signal .
h. arrow board arrow boards will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment materials delivery installation maintenance relocation and removal .
i .
portable changeable message sign portable changeable message signs will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment materials delivery installation maintenance relocation and removal .
j .
temporary pavement marking payment for temporary pavement marking will be by the mile or foot .
payment will be considered total payment for all required temporary pavement markings including but not limited to temporary dashed centerline lane lines edge lines gore lines no passing zone lines and do not pass and pass with care signing if utilized .
payment will be full compensation for all costs to furnish install and remove when required temporary pavement markings including costs to num temporary traffic control page num remove and properly dispose of temporary road marker covers temporary road markers and temporary pavement marking tape .
k. remove pavement marking payment for removal of pavement markings will be by the foot each word or square foot depending on the bid item unit description .
payment will be full compensation for all costs to remove and properly dispose of the pavement markings .
traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num num description this work consists of furnishing and installing all material and equipment necessary for the operation of traffic signals and roadway lighting .
num materials materials for traffic signals and roadway lighting shall conform to section num .
equipment and materials furnished shall be new .
num construction requirements a .
general installations shall comply with applicable sections of the national electrical code nec state regulations and local ordinances .
licenses or permits required shall be obtained by and at the expense of the contractor .
the contractor shall arrange for necessary electrical services at locations specified as agreed to by the department and the utility company .
upon completion of a roadway lighting project an operating test shall be conducted .
the equipment shall be demonstrated to operate in a safe and proper manner .
the contractor shall pay all costs associated with the testing of the luminaires .
the contractor shall provide required equipment to make the following tests num .
resistance to ground on nongrounded conductors shall be at least num megohm at numf measured with a num volt megger .
the ground resistance shall not be more than num ohms .
num .
voltage readings shall be made at each service pole in the load contactor with load and without load and at each fixture with load .
num .
current readings shall be made on the load side of each load contactor phase and neutral .
readings shall be made at nighttime with lighting systems in normal operation .
num .
data obtained from the tests shall be furnished in writing .
after the traffic signals and the lighting system have been turned on and found to be operating satisfactorily and all installation of the system is complete the engineer shall notify the contractor of acceptance .
upon acceptance the contractor shall be relieved of routine maintenance responsibility .
the contractor shall remain responsible for failures due to character of work materials or equipment that occur during a one year period following the date of acceptance .
the contractor shall warrant and guarantee materials electrical and mechanical equipment furnished and installed to be free from defects in materials and character of work in accordance with the following num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num warranties and guarantees offered by electrical and mechanical equipment manufacturers shall be turned over to the maintaining authority at the time of acceptance of the project .
the maintaining authority shall be named as the obligee on all manufacturer warranties and guarantees .
the contractor shall warrant and guarantee satisfactory inservice operations of electrical and mechanical equipment and related components and shall replace or correct parts found to be defective within a one year period .
compensation will not be made for replacements or corrections .
the warranty and guarantee requirements shall not apply to parts of electrical and mechanical equipment which have been subjected to misuse negligence or accident by other parties .
b .
electrical grounding and bonding grounding and bonding shall be in compliance with the nec local ordinances and local utility company rules .
c. conduit use and installation shall conform to nec and the following requirements num .
the size of the conduits installed shall not be less than the electrical trade size specified .
num .
the location and direction of conduit runs is diagrammatic and may be shifted to meet field conditions .
num .
underground conduit shall be placed by trenching jacking or drilling methods .
the use of the trenching method for placement under existing roadway pavements will be permitted only after jacking or drilling attempts have failed .
the contractor shall not use equipment requiring flowing water for installation of conduit under streets or roadways unless approved by the engineer .
trenches shall be backfilled and compacted to the same density as the adjoining ground .
roadway surfaces sidewalks curb and gutters sod etc .
which are removed by trenching operations shall be replaced .
the cost of removing and replacing these materials shall be incidental to the bid price for the conduit .
num .
where trenching operations require the removal of concrete pavement or sidewalk the concrete shall be sawed full depth along the removal lines or the concrete shall be removed to existing joints .
num .
conduit entering through junction or pull box walls shall terminate approximately num inches in from the inside wall and not less than num inches above the bottom .
the diameter of the holes in the junction or pull box walls shall be no more than num inch larger than the diameter of the conduit .
the area around the conduit shall be sealed with a waterproof silicone sealant .
num .
conduit entering the traffic signal cabinet shall be sealed with paraffin or other approved sealing compounds to prevent the entrance of gases .
the height of the conduit shall not exceed num inches above the cabinet base .
traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num num .
metal conduit open ends in junction boxes or above concrete foundations shall be provided with an approved threaded conduit grounding bushing .
nonmetallic conduit open ends shall have an approved bell end or bushing installed to prevent damage to cable or conductors .
num .
metal conduit ends shall be reamed to remove sharp edges and burrs .
threads on threaded conduit shall be painted with a good quality lead or rust preventive paint as the couplings are made up .
couplings shall be tightened until the ends of the conduit are brought together .
d. concrete footings the bottom of concrete footings shall rest on firm ground .
the sides of the footings shall be formed by using an auger and then placing the concrete against the natural soil .
a suitable form shall be used above existing ground line and all exposed portions shall be formed to present a neat appearance .
the above ground portion of the footing shall be formed of sufficient size and shape so no part of the pole base including transformer type bases shall overhang or protrude beyond the footing .
an acceptable form shall be used if the excavation is larger than the standard footing dimensions .
backfill must be replaced to a density equal to or greater than the adjacent undisturbed natural soil .
the top of the concrete footing shall be finished smooth and shall be level after anchor boltrod installation .
a num inch conduit for grounding wire raceway shall be installed through the footing .
ground rods shall be a minimum of num feet from the footing .
e. anchor boltsrods anchor boltsrods shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements num .
general anchor boltsrods shall be provided with all hardware required for attaching and leveling in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
anchor boltrod installation a steel template shall be used to accurately locate and hold the anchor boltsrods plumb and in proper alignment .
this template shall be in place during placement of the concrete base and shall remain in place a minimum of num hours after the concrete placement has been completed .
out of position anchor boltsrods and anchor boltsrods greater than num outofplumb are cause for rejection of the base .
bending of the anchor boltsrods to straighten or move into position or alterations of the pole base plate will not be permitted .
num .
anchor boltrod tightening breakaway transformer bases shall be tightened in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
all others shall be tightened in accordance with the following a .
all leveling nuts bottom nuts shall be brought to full bearing on the bottom of the base plate .
the bottom of the leveling nuts must be kept as close to the concrete base as practical and shall not be more than one anchor boltrod diameter above the top of the concrete base .
leveling nuts must be threaded onto the anchor num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num bolt to provide at least num inch projection of the anchor boltrod above the top nut or jam nut if required when in its tightened position .
b .
a softened beeswax or equivalent shall be applied to the top nut bearing face and top nut internal threads prior to placement on the anchor boltrod .
all top nuts shall be tightened to a snug tight condition .
snug tight is defined as the tightness attained by the full effort of a person using a wrench with a length equal to num times the diameter of the anchor boltrod except the minimum length shall be num inches .
the use of adjustable wrenches will not be allowed .
the full effort required to achieve a snug tight condition shall be applied as close to the end of the wrench as possible .
pull firmly by leaning back and using full body weight brace feet to prevent slipping on the end of the wrench until the nut stops rotating .
this snug tightening shall be accomplished in a minimum of two separate passes of tightening .
the sequence of tightening in each pass shall be such that the opposite side nut to the extent possible shall be subsequently tightened until all the nuts in that pass have been snugged .
snug tightness of both the top and leveling nuts shall be checked in the presence of department personnel after the contractor has completed nut snugging as described above but prior to final tightening .
snug tightness of the nuts top and leveling shall be checked by applying a torque in a range from num to num of the verification torque .
see table num for verification and snug tight torque values .
table num anchor boltrod tightening anchor boltrod diameter in anchor boltrod stress area sq in yield strength ksi minimum tensile strength ksi verification torque ftlbs num snug tight torque ftlbs num snug tight torque ftlbs num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num c. at this point the top nut and leveling nut must be in full bearing on the base plate .
if any gap exists between either nut top or leveling and the base plate a beveled washer shall be added between the nut washer and the base plate to eliminate the gap .
the beveled washer shall be stainless steel type num or type num the same diameter as the hardened washer and beveled as required to eliminate the gap between the nut and the base plate .
all nuts shall be retightened according to steps a and b above if beveled washers are added .
all costs required to remove and reerect the structure to install beveled stainless steel washers shall be at the contractors expense .
d. using a hydraulic wrench rotate all top nuts as indicated in table num .
the additional turn of the nuts shall be accomplished by tightening all the nuts in two separate passes of equal incremental turns i.e .
for num turn use num turn each pass .
the sequence of nut tightening in each pass shall be such that the opposite side nut to the extent possible shall be subsequently tightened until all the nuts in that pass have been turned .
there shall be no rotation of the leveling nut during top nut tightening .
in lieu of a hydraulic wrench torque wrenches and multipliers may be used to achieve the desired nut rotations and tightness .
e. tightness of the nuts shall be checked in the presence of department personnel .
tightness of the nuts shall be checked within a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours after the nuts have been rotated as indicated in section num e.num.d above .
tightness of the top nuts shall be checked by applying the verification torque to the nut .
see table num for verification torque .
num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num table num nut rotation for turnofnut pretensioning anchor boltrod diameter inches nut rotation from snugtight condition num fnum grade num fnum grade num and num num num turn num turn num num turn num turn num nut rotation is relative to anchor boltrod .
the tolerance is plus num degrees .
num applicable only to doublenutmovement joints .
bottom leveling nuts shall be in contact with the base prior to applying the torque .
an inability to achieve the verification torque indicates that the threads have stripped and the anchor bolt must be replaced .
all costs for replacing anchor boltsrods shall be at the contractors expense .
f. install jam nut after verification torque has been applied to top nut .
lubricate threads of jam nut with beeswax or equivalent and tighten to a torque of num foot pound approximated without the use of a torque wrench .
f. electrical power cables cables shall be installed using methods that will not damage or deform the jacket insulation or conductors .
all cables within a single conduit shall be installed at the same time .
when powder or compound is required to ease pulling the powder or compound shall be used according to manufacturers recommendations and the use shall not damage or deform the cable .
the contractor may substitute a multiple conductor cable having more conductors than specified if conduit fill requirements are not exceeded subject to approval by the engineer .
the contractor may provide cables with conductor awg size larger than specified where conduit fill requirements are not exceeded subject to approval by the engineer .
when larger cables are substituted the cables must extend from terminal to terminal for circuits used .
splicing to a conductor of a different size is not permitted .
num .
direct burial cable cables shall be installed using the trenching or plowing method at a num inch depth .
at locations where a conflict exists the depth may be altered as approved by the engineer .
splices or connections will not be allowed in the earth .
splices and connections shall be made in hand holes junction boxes or pole bases .
backfill shall be kept free of stones boulders and other materials which might damage the cables .
num .
pole and bracket cable a strain relief shall be utilized to support the weight of the cable on the j hook or other strain relief device in the pole .
traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num g. traffic signal control cables traffic signal conductors shall be continuous from the controller cabinets to the pole bases .
splicing of conductors will not be allowed in the junction boxes .
traffic signal control cables shall be identified in hand holes junction boxes pedestal bases electrical service cabinets and controller cabinets as indicated on the wiring diagram .
labels shall be wrapped around the traffic signal cable to indicate the signal pole and signal head the cable is connected to .
labels shall be selfadhesive vinyl cloth with a preprinted legend .
traffic signal control cables from the controller to the poles shall be marked with a legend and shall be color coded as follows northwest blue northeast red southeast green and southwest orange .
cables shall be installed using methods that will not damage or deform the jacket insulation or conductors .
all cables within a single conduit shall be placed at the same time .
when powder or compound is required to ease pulling the powder or compound shall be used according to manufacturers recommendations and the use shall not damage or deform the cable .
the contractor may substitute a multiple conductor cable having more conductors than specified if conduit fill requirements are not exceeded subject to approval by the engineer .
the contractor shall leave no more than num feet of excess cable in the cabinet .
h. electrical service cabinet electrical service cabinets shall be installed in accordance with the plans and the manufacturers recommendations .
a lock and two keys shall be provided to the maintaining authority .
breakers within the electrical service cabinet shall be sized according to the plans .
i .
traffic signal poles the following shall apply to traffic signal poles num .
poles shall be plumb after the bracket arms signal heads fittings and fixtures have been installed and connections have been made .
nuts shall be firmly tightened as per manufacturers recommendations .
num .
field repair of damaged galvanizing shall be done in accordance with astm anum .
num .
mast arms shall be installed perpendicular to the roadway and vertical clearance shall be checked after all hardware and signing is installed .
j. roadway luminaire poles the following shall apply to roadway luminaire poles num .
poles shall be plumb when the installation is complete .
nuts shall be firmly tightened as per manufacturers recommendations .
num .
the luminaire arm shall be set perpendicular to the project centerline .
num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num num .
field repair of damaged galvanizing shall be done in accordance with astm anum .
k. luminaires luminaires shall be adjusted on the support so the luminaire sits level as indicated by a small bubble level .
bolts shall be firmly tightened .
l. light towers the following shall apply to light tower poles num .
poles shall be plumb when the installation is complete .
num .
field repair of damaged galvanizing shall be done in accordance with astm anum .
m. photoelectric control units the photoelectric cell shall normally be positioned so the light sensor is to the north .
if light sources other than sunlight interfere with normal operation of the control the photoelectric cell shall be adjusted in an attempt to obtain proper operation .
n. controller cabinet num .
the controller cabinet shall be installed according to the directions supplied by the manufacturer .
num .
wiring and connections in the controller cabinet shall be neat firm and in accordance with industry standards and section num n. num .
three sets of wiring diagrams and three maintenance and operation manuals shall be supplied for each controller that is required .
the contractor shall place one set in a weather resistant container in the controller cabinet give one set to the maintaining authority and give one set to the region traffic engineer .
num .
a weather resistant diagram showing phase movements detector locations and labels shall be affixed to the inside of the signal cabinet door .
if color coding is used to identify control cables a legend key shall be included with the above schematic .
num .
controller cabinets equipped with a thermostat shall be set to numf .
num .
the controller cabinets shall be pad mounted .
o .
traffic signal controller the installation of the controller and location in the cabinet shall be accordance with directions supplied by the manufacturer .
p. detector unit induction loop vehicle detectors shall be installed in accordance with the directions supplied by the manufacturer .
q .
detector loops num .
clearance between loops and metallic objects the contractor shall provide sufficient clearance between detector loops and metallic objects such as manhole covers drop inlets etc .
to avoid interference with the operation of the loop .
traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num num .
sawedin loops a. leadin saw cuts shall clear each other by num foot .
b .
backer rod material shall be cut into num inch by num inch lengths and spaced not farther apart than num feet .
c. saw slots in the pavement shall be blown out with compressed air and shall be clean and free of loose grit and moisture when wires are placed and sealer is applied .
d. the loop wires shall be pushed into the sawed slots with a blunt wood stick not with a screwdriver .
the wires shall be laid in the slots so there are no kinks or curls and without straining or stretching the insulation .
e. the flexible embedding sealer shall completely surround the num inch tube displace all the air within the sawed slot and fill the area of the sawed slot except for that area which is taken up by the backer rod and the wires .
num .
preformed loops each set of loop wires shall be tagged to identify loop .
if installation of the loop is for future use the loop wires in the same lane shall be taped together .
if installation is on a signal project tagging shall be done and wires connected in series .
in new roadways the preformed loops and leadin conduits shall be placed in the base course or gravel cushion with the top of the conduit flush with the top of the base and then covered with hot mix asphalt or portland cement concrete pavement .
preformed loops and leadin conduits shall be protected from damage prior to and during pavement placement .
in new reinforced concrete structure decks the preformed loops shall be secured to the top of the uppermost layer of reinforcing steel using nylon wire ties .
the loop shall be held parallel to the structure deck by using pvc or polypropylene spacers where necessary .
conduit for leadin conductors shall be placed below the upper mat of reinforcing steel .
in existing pavement the preformed loops shall be placed in a saw slot num inches minimum width cut into the existing pavement .
the top of the conduit shall be num inches minimum below the top of existing surface .
sawed slots shall be filled with an approved loop sealant .
on asphalt or concrete resurfacing projects the preformed loops shall be placed in a saw slot num inches minimum width cut into the existing pavement .
the top of the conduit shall be num inches minimum below the top of existing surface after any required surface removal is completed and prior to the placing of the new surface .
sawed slots shall be filled with an approved loop sealant .
num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num num .
leadins leadins shall be twisted at least one turn per foot .
splices shall not be made in the loop or leadin conductors except in the junction box .
num .
connections in the controller terminal board screws shall be turned down tightly on the lug .
shielding shall be grounded at the controller only .
num .
loop testing after installation each loop shall be tested by the contractor .
necessary equipment shall be furnished by the contractor and test results recorded and furnished to the engineer .
each detector loop shall conform to the following continuity num ohms maximum resistance loop to ground num megohms minimum inductance num microhenries r. signal heads num .
signal heads are to be rigidly attached to signal poles and shall appear vertical from the street approach they control .
num .
signals heads which are mounted in place but are not in operation shall be hooded or positioned so the lenses are not visible to any approach .
num .
all mounting hardware shall be bare aluminum .
num .
signals shall be aimed and trees shall be trimmed such that all the signals for each approach shall be continuously visible for the minimum distance listed in the mutcd .
s. pedestrian push button placement and mounting height shall be in conformance with the mutcd .
t. flashing beacons flashing beacons shall be mounted in conformance with the mutcd and installed in accordance with the directions supplied by the manufacturer .
num method of measurement a .
electrical grounding and bonding no field measurement will be made .
b. conduit the plan shown quantity of each type and size specified will be the measured quantity unless changes are ordered by the engineer .
c. junction boxes measurement will be by actual count of the various types and sizes of junction boxes furnished and installed .
d. concrete footings concrete footings of the various diameters will be measured to the nearest num foot .
e. anchor boltsrods no field measurement will be made .
traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num f. electrical power cable the plan shown quantity of each type number of conductors and size specified will be the measured quantity unless changes are ordered by the engineer .
g. traffic signal control cable the plan shown quantity of each type number of conductors and size specified will be the measured quantity unless changes are ordered by the engineer .
h. electrical service cabinets measurement will be by actual count of cabinets furnished and installed .
i .
traffic signal poles measurement will be by actual count of the various types and sizes furnished and installed .
j. roadway luminaire poles measurement will be by actual count of the various types and sizes furnished and installed .
k. luminaires measurement will be by actual count of the various types and sizes of luminaires furnished and installed .
l. light tower measurement will be by actual count of the various types and sizes furnished and installed .
m. photoelectric control units no field measurement will be made .
n. controller cabinet no field measurement will be made .
o .
traffic signal controller measurement will be by actual count of controllers furnished and installed .
p. detector units measurement will be by actual count of detector units furnished and installed .
q .
detector loops measurement will be actual count of the various types of detector loops installed .
r. signal heads measurement will be by actual count of the various types and sizes of signal heads furnished and installed .
s. pedestrian push button measurement will be by the actual count of pedestrian push buttons furnished and installed .
t. flashing beacons measurement will be by the actual count of the various types of flashing beacons furnished and installed .
num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num num basis of payment a .
electrical grounding and bonding the cost of furnishing and installing conduits for grounding will be incidental to the cost of footing electrical service cabinet or controller cabinet to be grounded .
b. conduit conduit of each type and size specified will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for required materials labor equipment and incidentals .
c. junction boxes payment for this item will be at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for required materials labor equipment and incidentals .
d. concrete footings payment for concrete footings of the various diameters will be at their respective contract unit prices per foot .
payment will be full compensation for materials and labor necessary to satisfactorily install the footings .
e. anchor boltsrods cost for anchor boltsrods shall be included in the contract unit price for the concrete for which they are incorporated with .
f. electrical power cable electrical power cable of each type number of conductors and size specified will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for required materials labor equipment and incidentals .
g. traffic signal control cable traffic signal control cable of each type number of conductors and size specified will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for required materials labor equipment and incidentals .
h. electrical service cabinet payment for this item will be at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing electrical service cabinets including circuit breakers fuses contactor photoelectric control manual onoff switch mounting pole pad and other materials and fixtures required .
payment shall also include any fees associated with hookup .
i .
traffic signal poles payment for traffic signal poles of the various types will be at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for required materials labor equipment and incidentals .
j. roadway luminaire poles payment for roadway luminaire poles will be at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing roadway luminaire poles .
k. luminaires payment for luminaires of the various types and sizes will be at their respective contract unit prices per each .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing luminaires .
traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num l. light towers payment for light towers will be at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing light towers with lowering devices .
m. photoelectric control units cost of photoelectric controls shall be included in the contract unit price for other related contract items .
n. controller cabinet the cost of controller cabinets is to be included in the contract unit price for traffic signal controllers .
o .
traffic signal controller payment for this item will be at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing the controller cabinet and all required items included in the cabinet .
p. detector unit payment for this item will be at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing detector units .
q .
detector loop payment for this item will be at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing detector loops .
r. signal heads payment for this item for the various types and sizes will be at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing signal heads including mounting hardware required bracketing and backplates .
s. pedestrian push buttons payment for this item will be at the contract unit price per each .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing the pedestrian push buttons .
t. flashing beacons payment for this item will be at the contract unit price per each for the various types of flashing beacons .
payment will be full compensation for required materials labor equipment and incidentals .
num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num this page intentionally left blank concrete curb and gutter num page num num description this work consists of constructing concrete curb and gutter .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections .
a .
concrete class mnum section num .
b. preformed expansion joint filler section num .
c. curing compound section num .
d. reinforcing steel section num .
num construction requirements the foundation shall be excavated shaped and compacted to a firm uniform bearing surface .
unsuitable foundation material shall be removed and replaced as directed .
the foundation shall be thoroughly moistened immediately prior to placing concrete .
moisture shall be applied without forming pools of water .
granular material shall be furnished placed and compacted to the required depth .
the forms shall be full depth rigid unyielding and mortar tight .
the forms shall be securely staked braced and tied to the required line and grade .
in lieu of construction using fixed side forms concrete may be placed and formed to the required shape by using an approved extrusion machine .
when machine placement is used the engineer may permit modification of consistency requirements .
the exposed surfaces of the curb and gutter shall be finished smooth and even .
edges of gutter and the top face edges of the curb shall be finished with an approved finishing tool .
the top surface of the curb and gutter shall be brushed or broomed to slightly roughen the surface and remove the finishing tool marks .
all honeycombed surfaces shall be corrected to the satisfaction of the engineer by using a grout composed of one part cement and two parts sand .
severely honeycombed areas shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
joints shall be constructed at the locations and of the dimensions shown on the plans or as directed .
when pcc pavement is adjacent to the curb and gutter the joints shall match the contraction joints of the pavement .
num concrete curb and gutter page num when curb and gutter is placed prior to surfacing the contractor shall be responsible to provide drainage of the roadway .
the exposed surfaces of the curb and gutter shall be protected and cured in accordance with section num except the minimum curing time shall be num hours .
after the curing period the area adjacent to the curb and gutter shall be filled to the required elevation with suitable material and the material shall be satisfactorily compacted .
num method of measurement concrete curb gutter and combined curb and gutter will be measured to the nearest foot .
measurement for concrete curb will be on the inside bottom face of the curb .
measurement for separate gutters and combined curb and gutter will be on the inside edge next to the pavement .
deductions will not be made for lengths of drop inlets grates etc .
or for the tapering of curb for entrances .
separate measurements will be made for the various types specified and constructed .
num basis of payment concrete curb gutter and combined curb and gutter will be paid for at the contract unit prices per foot for the types constructed .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing materials the expansion joints steel reinforcement forms bracing excavation backfill labor equipment and incidentals necessary .
concrete sidewalk num page num num description this work consists of constructing sidewalks on a prepared subgrade .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections a .
concrete class mnum section num .
b. preformed expansion joint filler section num .
c. cushion material cushion material shall consist of rock gravel or sand crushed or screened to eliminate material retained on a num inch sieve .
the material shall be free from roots sod and lumps of dirt .
not more than num by weight shall pass a num sieve .
d. curing compound section num .
num construction requirements the foundation shall be excavated shaped and compacted to a firm uniform bearing surface .
unsuitable foundation material shall be removed and replaced as directed .
the foundation shall be thoroughly moistened immediately prior to placing concrete .
moisture shall be applied without forming pools of water .
cushion material shall be placed to the depth specified and satisfactorily compacted .
forms shall be made of wood not less than num inches nominal thickness or of steel of equal rigidity .
flexible strips may be used on curves .
the forms shall be securely held to line and grade and shall not deviate more than num inch from an accurate template num feet in length .
the forms shall remain in place until the concrete has hardened to the point that no damage will be done to the concrete during form removal .
damage to the concrete as the result of form removal shall be repaired by the contractor at no additional expense to the department .
joint and edging tools shall have an approved num inch radius .
immediately after the water sheen has disappeared the concrete shall be brushed or broomed to slightly roughen the surface and remove tool marks .
contraction joints shall be placed at intervals that will provide square sections .
the contraction joints shall be formed by a grooving tool or sawing to a depth of at least one third the thickness of the sidewalk .
when the sidewalk is num feet or greater in width a longitudinal joint shall be provided at the center .
expansion joints shall be constructed of num inch preformed expansion joint filler at a maximum spacing of num feet or at the locations and of the dimensions specified on the num concrete sidewalk page num plans .
when the concrete sidewalk is placed adjacent to the curb and gutter the contractor shall place num inch preformed expansion joint filler longitudinally along the backface of the curb and gutter .
when the concrete sidewalk is placed adjacent to other solid fixtures including but not limited to buildings parking lots driveways and retaining walls the contractor shall place a double thickness of preformed expansion joint filler at the back of the sidewalk .
all other obstructions will require num inch preformed expansion joint filler as directed by the engineer .
in areas where the sidewalk widens at the bridges num inch preformed expansion joint filler shall be placed transversely across the sidewalk at the beginning of the transition and adjacent to the bridge sidewalk .
the expansion joint filler shall be placed the full depth of the sidewalk .
concrete sidewalk shall be protected and cured in accordance with section num except the minimum curing time shall be num hours .
concrete sidewalk with slopes exceeding the design slopes shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
after the curing period the area adjacent to new sidewalk shall be filled to the required elevation with suitable material .
the material shall be compacted to the same degree as the adjacent embankment or ground surface .
num method of measurement concrete sidewalk will be measured to the nearest foot and the area computed to the nearest square foot .
num basis of payment concrete sidewalk will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
payment will be full compensation for excavation other than removal of existing sidewalk as provided for under section num .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment tools backfilling furnishing and placing materials including but not limited to granular material and preformed expansion joint material and incidentals necessary including but not limited to disposal of excavation and discarded materials .
drop inlets num page num num description this work consists of furnishing materials and the construction of drop inlets .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections .
a .
concrete class mnum section num .
for precast drop inlets cast at a facility regularly producing other precast concrete items under section num the concrete shall conform to section num .
b .
castings unless otherwise specified frames and grates shall consist of approved gray iron castings meeting the requirements of aashto m num class num .
grates shall fit the frames with which they are to be used .
inaccuracies of bearing shall be corrected by machining before use or replaced with new assemblies .
c. steel reinforcement section num .
d. mortar mortar shall consist of one part portland cement and two parts mortar sand conforming to sections num and num respectively .
as an alternate a commercially available grout conforming to section num k may be used .
e. curing compound section num .
num construction requirements a .
general requirements concrete for drop inlets shall be proportioned mixed hauled and placed in accordance with section num .
for precast drop inlets cast at a facility regularly producing other precast items under section num the concrete proportions slump and air content shall conform to section num .
when the foundation for a drop inlet is in new embankment the embankment shall be constructed to an elevation at least num foot above the footing before the foundation for the drop inlet is prepared .
the foundation shall be compacted as specified for the adjacent embankment .
castings shall be set in full mortar beds or secured as specified .
castings shall be set accurately to the correct elevation so subsequent adjustment will not be necessary .
inlet and outlet pipe connections shall be of the same size and kind and shall meet the same requirements as the pipe they connect .
pipe sections shall be flush on the inside of the structure wall and project outside sufficiently for proper connection with the next pipe section .
masonry shall fit neatly and tightly around the pipe .
grouting of the pipe connection may be required as directed by the engineer if voids exist after form removal .
num drop inlets page num drop inlets shall be either cast in place or precast .
precast drop inlets shall be defined as those drop inlets cast outside of the project limits .
drop inlets cast within the project limits will be considered cast in place .
b .
cast in place drop inlets the foundation excavated for drop inlets shall be thoroughly moistened immediately prior to placing concrete .
moisture shall be applied without forming pools of water .
steel reinforcement shall be placed in accordance with section num .
concrete shall be protected and cured in accordance with section num .
the minimum curing time shall be num hours .
the finished surface of the concrete shall present a neat and smooth appearance .
upon completion and curing of the unit the sheeting bracing forms and falsework shall be removed and the excavation backfilled .
the unit shall not be backfilled until the completion of the num hour curing period or until the concrete reaches a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
backfill shall be placed in loose layers not exceeding num inches thick and compacted to the same degree as specified for the adjacent embankment .
installations shall be completed and left in a neat appearing condition .
c. precast drop inlets precast drop inlets shall conform to the following requirements num .
notification the contractor shall notify the engineer num hours in advance of all concrete pours for inspection and observation of contractor testing .
num .
design precast drop inlets shall conform to the configurations of the standard plates .
variations from the standard plates may be accepted provided the aashto materials design fabrication specifications and the requirements of this section are complied with .
precast drop inlets shall be designed to specified load conditions .
the design engineer of the drop inlets must be a professional engineer registered in the state of south dakota .
the design shall conform to the aashto design requirements for the depth of fill including surfacing as well as live load or other specified loading .
the contractor shall furnish a checked design with the shop plans .
a checked design shall include the design calculations and check design calculations performed by an independent engineer registered in the state of south dakota .
num .
shop plans if using a design that varies from the standard plates the contractor shall submit shop plans in accordance with this section .
prior to fabrication the contractor shall submit shop plans to the department for the departments review and approval .
the contractor shall send an email with the shop plans attached as a pdf to the project engineer and office of bridge design .
upon request the project engineer will provide the contractor the appropriate email addresses .
the contractor shall not begin fabrication prior to the departments review and final approval of shop plans .
within num calendar days of receiving the initial shop plans drop inlets num page num the office of bridge design will send a response to the contractor and submitter with the departments final approval or one reviewed copy of the shop plans with changes to the design marked .
the contractor will make the necessary changes if any to the shop plans .
the contractor will then send the project engineer and the office of bridge design an email with the final approved shop plans as a pdf for distribution .
the shop plans shall consist of fabrication details including reinforcing steel and spacer placement and configurations total quantities for the complete item and all information necessary for fabrication and erection .
num .
forms the forms shall be designed to withstand the fluid pressure of the concrete and the added forces due to vibration and impact without distortion .
the forms shall be mortar tight and free from warp .
the form surface area in contact with the concrete shall be treated with an approved form oil or wax before the form is set in position .
the forms shall be thoroughly cleaned of all other substances .
num .
concrete cure the concrete shall be cured by low pressure steam radiant heat or as specified in section num m. when curing in accordance with section num m. the concrete temperature requirements of section num n. shall apply .
low pressure steam or radiant heat curing shall be done under an enclosure to contain the live steam or the heat and prevent heat and moisture loss .
the concrete shall be allowed to attain initial set before application of the steam or heat .
the initial application of the steam or heat shall be three hours after the final placement of concrete to allow the initial set to occur .
when retarders are used the waiting period before application of the steam or radiant heat shall be five hours .
when the time of initial set is determined by astm c num the time limits described above may be waived .
during the waiting period the minimum temperature within the curing chamber shall not be less than numf and live steam or radiant heat may be used to maintain the curing chamber between numf and numf .
during the waiting period the concrete shall be kept moist .
application of live steam shall not be directed on the concrete forms causing localized high temperatures .
radiant heat may be applied by pipes circulating steam hot oil hot water or by electric heating elements .
moisture loss shall be minimized by covering exposed concrete surfaces with plastic sheeting or by applying an approved liquid membrane curing compound to exposed concrete surfaces .
the top surface of concrete members for use in composite construction shall be free of membrane curing compound residue unless suitable mechanical means for full bond development are provided .
during the initial application of live steam or radiant heat the concrete temperature shall increase at an average rate not exceeding numf per hour until the curing temperature is reached .
the maximum concrete temperature shall not exceed numf .
the maximum temperature shall be held until the concrete has reached the num drop inlets page num desired strength .
after discontinuing the steam or radiant heat application the temperature of the concrete shall decrease at a rate not to exceed numf per hour until the concrete temperature is within numf of the ambient air temperature .
the test cylinders shall be cured with the unit or in a similar manner similar curing method and concrete curing temperature as approved by the concrete engineer as the unit until minimum compressive strength has been obtained .
num .
surface finish and patching if a precast or prestressed item shows stone pockets honeycomb delamination or other defects which may be detrimental to the structural capacity of the item it will be subject to rejection at the discretion of the engineer .
minor surface irregularities or cavities which do not impair the service of the item and which are satisfactorily repaired will not constitute cause for rejection .
repairs shall not be made until the engineer has inspected the extent of the irregularities and has determined whether the item can be satisfactorily repaired .
if the item is deemed to be repairable the repair method and procedures shall be agreed upon by the department and fabricator prior to the work commencing .
depressions resulting from the removal of metal ties or other causes shall be carefully pointed with a mortar of sand and cement in the proportions which are similar to the specific class of concrete in the unit .
num .
fresh concrete testing the contractor shall be responsible for performing all fresh concrete testing in accordance with the departments materials manual .
tests shall be documented on a dotnum form and submitted to the engineer .
num .
concrete compressive strength the contractor shall make a minimum of one group of test cylinders for each class of concrete for each days production not to exceed num cubic yards per group of cylinders .
at a minimum a group of test cylinders shall consist of the following a .
two test cylinders are required for the num day compression test .
b .
two additional cylinders will be required for determining concrete strength when the contractor desires to make delivery and obtain acceptance by the department prior to the num day compression test .
acceptance of the precast units shall be in accordance with section num b. except that the fabricator shall be responsible for the sampling preparing and properly curing of all concrete cylinders for concrete compressive strength in accordance with the departments materials manual and the fabricator shall be responsible for all costs .
the precast units will be accepted when the minimum design concrete compressive strength requirements have been met .
accepted precast units represented by that test group of cylinders may be delivered to the project and will not require the num day cylinder test .
drop inlets num page num the engineer will be responsible for breaking of all concrete cylinders for concrete compressive strength in accordance with the departments materials manual .
num method of measurement drop inlets will be measured per each or when specified the materials for drop inlets will be measured under the following items a .
cast iron frames with grates drop inlet cast iron frames with grates will be measured as units .
b .
concrete class mnum concrete will be measured in accordance with section num .
c. reinforcing steel reinforcing steel will be measured in accordance with section num .
num basis of payment when payment for drop inlets is made per each payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing cast iron frames and grates concrete reinforcing steel mortar bed and for labor equipment and incidentals necessary .
unless otherwise specified in the plans the cost for removal of existing pipe if necessary to facilitate the installation of new drop inlets shall be incidental to the associated drop inlet contract unit prices .
when payment for drop inlets is not made per each the various items will be paid for as follows a .
cast iron frames with grates drop inlet cast iron frames with grates will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing the cast iron frame and grate as a unit inclusive of the required mortar bed .
b .
concrete concrete will be paid for as class mnum concrete in accordance with section num .
payment will be full compensation for excavation required to furnish and install the drop inlet .
c. reinforcing steel reinforcing steel will be paid for in accordance with section num .
num drop inlets page num this page intentionally left blank manholes num page num num description this work consists of the construction or reconstruction of manholes .
num materials materials shall conform to the following sections .
a .
cast in place concrete class mnum section num .
b .
brick clay or shale brick shall comply with the requirements for building bricks as provided in astm cnum .
the brick shall be grade sw. c. concrete block concrete block masonry shall conform to astm cnum .
the dimensions of the block may be any standard size which will produce the required dimensions in the completed structure .
d. precast units precast manhole units shall conform to aashto m num .
e. castings unless otherwise specified on the plans frames and covers shall consist of approved gray iron castings meeting aashto m num class num .
f. mortar mortar shall consist of one part portland cement and two parts mortar sand conforming to sections num and num respectively .
as an alternate a commercially available grout conforming to section num k. may be used .
g. steel reinforcement section num .
num construction requirements concrete for cast in place manholes shall be hauled placed finished cured and protected in accordance with section num .
when the foundation for a manhole is in new embankment the embankment shall be constructed at least num foot above the footing before the foundation is prepared .
the foundation shall be compacted to the same degree as specified for the adjacent embankment .
castings shall be set in full mortar beds or secured as specified .
castings shall be set to the correct elevation so subsequent adjustment will not be necessary .
inlet and outlet pipe connections shall be the same size and kind and shall meet the same requirements as the pipe they connect .
pipe sections shall be flush on the inside of the structure wall and project outside for proper connection with the next pipe section .
masonry shall fit neatly and tightly around the pipe .
upon completion and curing of the unit the sheeting bracing forms and falsework shall be removed and the excavation backfilled .
backfill shall be placed in loose layers not num manholes page num exceeding num inches thick and compacted to the same degree as specified for adjacent embankment .
installations shall be finished and left in a satisfactory condition .
the following specific provisions shall apply to the various types of construction .
a .
cast in place concrete the foundation for manholes shall be thoroughly moistened immediately prior to placing concrete .
moisture shall be applied without forming pools of water .
steel reinforcement shall be placed in accordance with section num .
concrete shall be protected and cured in accordance with section num .
the minimum curing time shall be num hours .
the finished surface of the concrete shall present a neat and smooth appearance .
upon completion and curing of the unit the sheeting bracing forms and falsework shall be removed and the excavation backfilled .
the unit shall not be backfilled until the completion of the num hour curing period or until the concrete reaches a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
backfill shall be placed in loose layers not exceeding num inches thick and compacted to the same degree as specified for the adjacent embankment .
installations shall be completed and left in a neat appearing condition .
b .
brick brick shall be saturated with water before laying .
bricks shall be laid in level courses with staggered vertical joints .
joints shall be completely filled with mortar .
joints on the inside of the manhole shall not be more than num inch wide .
joints on the inside of the manhole shall be struck .
the outside shall be plastered with mortar to a smooth surface .
in circular type manholes the bricks shall be laid flat and radially with the ends exposed on the structure .
when the thickness of the wall is greater than the length of a brick the outside bricks may be laid circumferentially using full header construction in at least each sixth course .
in rectangular type manholes the bricks shall be laid in regular courses of stretchers using full header construction in at least each sixth course .
bats or spalls shall not be used except for shaping around openings or finishing out a course in which case full bricks shall be placed in the corners and the bats in the interior of the course .
c. concrete block the requirements for brick construction shall apply when applicable .
d. precast sectional reinforced concrete units the concrete and fabrication of precast manholes shall conform to section num .
the bottom precast section shall be set in a full mortar bed and the joints between sections and around pipes shall be filled with mortar .
manholes num page num e. adjusting manholes when the manhole rim and cover is to be lowered sufficiently to require reconstruction of the arch or raised more than num foot or when reconstruction of existing manhole is specified without change in grade the manhole shall be reconstructed to the extent necessary to provide the adjustment specified .
when the rim and manhole is to be lowered to an extent which does not require reconstruction of the arch or when the rim and cover are to be raised num foot or less the adjustment shall be made by removing the top as necessary and setting the rim at the proper elevation on a building up of brick or concrete .
num method of measurement a .
brick concrete block and precast manholes manholes of brick concrete block and precast sectional reinforced concrete units will be measured as a unit for each manhole constructed .
b .
cast in place concrete manholes manholes will be measured on a per each basis for each manhole constructed .
c. manhole frame and lid manhole rims and covers will be measured as an assembly unit with all castings in any one manhole being considered as one assembly .
d. reconstructing and adjusting manholes reconstructing and adjusting manholes will be measured as a unit for each manhole reconstructed or adjusted .
num basis of payment unless otherwise specified in the plans the cost for removal of existing pipe if necessary to facilitate the installation of new manholes shall be incidental to the associated manhole contract unit prices .
a .
brick concrete block and precast manholes manholes of brick concrete block and precast sectional reinforced concrete units will be paid for at the contract unit price per manhole of each design furnished and accepted inclusive of materials labor equipment excavation and incidentals necessary .
b .
cast in place concrete manholes manholes of cast in place concrete will be paid for at the contract unit price per manhole of each design furnished and accepted inclusive of materials labor equipment excavation and incidentals necessary .
c. manhole frame and lid manhole rims and covers will be paid for at the contract unit price per assembly .
d. reconstructing and adjusting manholes reconstructing and adjusting manholes will be paid for at the contract unit price per each reconstruction or adjustment of manhole .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing materials labor and equipment necessary .
num manholes page num this page intentionally left blank underdrains num page num num description this work consists of installations of porous backfill drainage tubing and headwalls for subgrade drainage .
num materials a. porous backfill porous backfill for underdrains shall conform to section num with the following modifications the material shall consist of natural sand .
crushed material is not acceptable .
the percentage of material passing a num sieve shall not exceed num .
quality testing will not be required .
b. impermeable plastic membrane impermeable plastic membrane when required shall conform to section num .
c. corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing shall conform to section num .
d. pvc pipe in lieu of corrugated polyethylene tubing a profiled wall pvc pipe may be substituted .
pvc pipe and fittings shall meet the physical requirement specified for polyethylene pipe and shall meet the material requirements of astm dnum except dimensions at time of manufacture .
e. concrete concrete for headwalls shall conform to class mnum section num .
num construction requirements the trench to receive the porous backfill shall be excavated to the lines shown on the plans or as staked by the engineer .
the trench bottom shall be shaped and tamped as required by the engineer .
disposal of surplus excavation shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the porous backfill material shall be placed in num foot layers without compaction .
the backfill shall be uniformly spread without segregation or contamination .
tarpaulins or other approved devices shall be used as guides from the hauling vehicle to the trench to prevent pulling dirt in with the backfill .
clear and unobstructed outlets shall be provided for all drains .
where possible all outlets shall have a num inch free fall and shall be properly marked and protected with a num inch by num inch by num foot guide post painted with two coats of white paint .
drain installations and waste disposal areas shall be shaped and left in a neat appearing condition satisfactory to the engineer .
num underdrains page num num method of measurement a. porous backfill porous backfill will be measured to the nearest num ton .
material used to fill unauthorized trench widths or other dimensions will not be measured for payment .
b. underdrain pipe underdrain pipe will be measured parallel to the pipe to the nearest foot .
c. concrete headwall for underdrain concrete headwall for underdrain will be measured by the number of headwalls installed .
num basis of payment a. porous backfill porous backfill will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
payment will include full compensation for furnishing the material labor equipment and incidentals necessary .
b. underdrain pipe underdrain pipe will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot for the various types and classes of pipe inclusive of necessary bands bolts wyes elbows grates lids covers guide posts screens breathers excavation backfilling and handling waste disposal .
c. concrete headwall for underdrain concrete headwall for underdrain will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
riprap num page num num description this work consists of furnishing and placing approved material for the protection of piers abutments walls embankments and other designated locations .
num materials a. riprap riprap shall conform to section num .
b. drainage fabric drainage fabric shall conform to section num type b .
num construction requirements slopes to be protected by riprap shall be free of brush trees stumps and other objectionable material and shall be dressed to a smooth surface .
soft or spongy material shall be removed to the specified depth and replaced with approved material .
filled areas shall be thoroughly compacted .
all excavation required to construct the slope to the configuration detailed in the plans shall be incidental to the payment for riprap .
when drainage fabric is specified on the plans the surface to be covered shall be smooth free of obstructions and shall conform to plan shown dimensions prior to placement of the drainage fabric .
the drainage fabric shall be placed under and along all sides of the riprap that are in contact with earth unless otherwise shown on the plans .
lapped joints in the drainage fabric shall be placed transverse to the direction of flow with the overlap in the direction of flow .
all lapped joints shall be lapped a minimum of num foot .
vehicles and equipment shall not be operated directly on the drainage fabric .
protection for structure foundations shall be provided as early as the foundation construction permits .
the area to be protected shall be cleaned of waste materials .
riprap shall be placed in a manner which will produce a reasonably well graded mass of stone with the minimum practicable percentage of voids .
riprap shall be placed to its full course thickness in one operation without displacing the underlying material .
bridge berms channel slopesbottoms and other surfaces that will be covered with riprap shall be finished to an elevation that will permit the placement of the required depth of riprap and match plan elevations or existing channels .
placing of riprap in layers or by dumping into chutes or similar methods likely to cause segregation will not be permitted .
the larger stones shall be well distributed and the entire mass of stone shall conform to the gradation specified .
in order to produce a compact riprap protection in which all sizes of material are placed in their proper proportions hand placing or rearranging of individual stones by mechanical equipment may be required .
the riprap protection shall be placed in conjunction with the construction of the embankment .
to prevent mixture of embankment and riprap sufficient lag in construction of the riprap may be necessary .
the contractor shall maintain the riprap protection until accepted .
material displaced by any cause shall be replaced .
num riprap page num num method of measurement a. riprap riprap will be measured to the nearest num ton .
b. drainage fabric drainage fabric will be measured to the nearest square yard .
the lap at joints will not be included in the measurement .
num basis of payment a. riprap riprap will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton of material furnished .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing loading hauling placing and spreading the stone and for labor and equipment required for shaping excavating and performing underwater operations necessary .
b. drainage fabric drainage fabric will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing the drainage fabric as specified .
payment will be for plan quantity unless changes are ordered in writing .
bank and channel protection gabions num page num num description this work consists of furnishing assembling and filling woven wire gabions with stones as specified in the contract in conformance with the dimensions lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
num materials materials shall conform to the following requirements and sections .
a .
stone the stone shall be durable stone or ledge rock free of seams cracks and defects .
slabby stone pieces will not be acceptable .
the stone shall range in size from a minimum of num inches to a maximum of num inches in the greatest dimension .
the majority of the stones shall be in the num to num inch range and cubical or rounded in shape .
stone shall not have an l.a. abrasion of more than num .
b. gabions gabions shall conform to the plans and section num .
c. pvc coating when specified the wire used in the fabrication of the bank and channel protection shall be pvc coated .
after zinc coating the pvc coating shall be extrusion bonded on the wire .
the pvc coating shall have a nominal thickness of num inches and a minimum thickness of num inches .
the lacing wire shall also be pvc coated .
the pvc coating shall not crack peel blister split or have any other defects .
the coating material shall be resistant to the effects of weather and exposure to ultraviolet rays .
d. drainage fabric drainage fabric shall conform to section num type b. e. lacing and internal connecting wire lacing and internal connecting wire shall be num inch diameter steel wire astm anum class num soft temper measured after galvanizing and for pvc coated baskets shall be num inch diameter steel wire measured after galvanizing but before pvc coating .
f. interlocking fasteners interlocking fasteners shall conform to section num .
num construction requirements slopes to be protected by gabions shall be free of brush trees stumps and other objectionable material and shall be dressed to a smooth surface .
soft or spongy material shall be removed to the specified depth and replaced with suitable material .
filled areas shall be thoroughly compacted .
the bank and channel protection shall be assembled individually by erecting the sides ends and diaphragms with all creases in the correct position and the top of all sides satisfactorily level .
lacing wire fasteners or both shall be used to assemble the units and to join the units together .
a. lacing the lacing procedure is as follows num bank and channel protection gabions page num num .
cut a length of lacing wire approximately num times the distance to be laced but not exceeding num feet .
num .
secure the wire terminal at the corner by looping and twisting .
num .
proceed lacing with alternating single and double loops at a spacing not to exceed num inches .
num .
securely fasten the other lacing wire terminal .
b. interlocking fasteners interlocking fasteners may be used for basket assembly as final construction of gabion structures .
spacing of fasteners during all phases of assembly and construction shall not exceed num inches .
c. alternate fasteners the use of alternate fasteners shall be permitted in lieu of lacing wire provided the following has been demonstrated .
num .
the ability of the alternate fastener to contain a minimum of four selvedge wires while remaining overlapped a minimum of num inch for overlapped type or in a locked and closed condition .
num .
the proposed fastener system can consistently produce a four selvedge wire joint with a strength of num pounds per linear foot for a galvanized joint and num pounds per linear foot for pvc coated gabion joints .
num .
the proper installation can be readily verified by visual inspection .
when drainage fabric is specified the surface to be covered shall be smooth free of obstructions and shall conform to plan shown dimensions prior to placement of the drainage fabric .
the drainage fabric shall be placed under and along all sides of the bank and channel protection that is in contact with earth unless otherwise shown on the plans .
lapped joints in the drainage fabric shall be placed transverse to the direction of flow with the overlap in the direction of flow .
all lapped joints shall be lapped a minimum of num inches .
vehicles and equipment shall not be operated directly on the drainage fabric .
a standard fence stretcher chain fall or iron rod may be used to stretch the bank and channel protection and hold alignment .
the units shall be filled with stone carefully placed by hand or machine to assure alignment and avoid bulges with a minimum of voids .
to allow for settlement overfilling of num to num inches is required .
after each unit has been filled the lid shall be stretched tight over the stone fill using only an approved lid closing tool until the lid meets the perimeter edges of the front and end panels .
using crowbars or other single point leverage bars for lid closing shall be prohibited .
after the units are filled the lids shall be folded over to meet the sides and edges and secured with lacing wires fasteners or both .
when pvc coated bank and channel protection is specified special care shall be taken during the filling operation to avoid bank and channel protection gabions num page num damaging the coating .
bank and channel protection on which the pvc coating has been damaged shall be repaired or replaced .
whenever a structure requires more than one tier the upper empty cells shall also be connected to the top of the lower tier along the front and back edges of the contact surface using the same connecting procedure described above using lacing wire or fasteners or both .
internal connecting wires shall be installed in multitiered structures as follows num inch high gabions num inch high gabions shall be filled in three layers num foot at a time .
after the placement of each layer that is at num foot high and num feet high connecting wires shall be placed according to the manufacturers recommendations to connect the exposed face of a cell to the opposite side of the cell .
an exposed face is any side of a cell that will be exposed or unsupported after the structure is completed .
num inch high gabions num inch high gabions do not require connecting wires unless the cells are used to build vertical structures .
in some cases these units shall be filled in two layers num inches at a time .
after the placement of the first layer connecting wires shall be placed according to the manufacturers recommendations to connect the exposed face of a cell to the opposite side of the cell .
an exposed face is any side of a cell that will be exposed or unsupported after the structure is completed .
num method of measurement a .
bank and channel protection gabions bank and channel protection gabions will be measured to the nearest num cubic yard .
if a substitution is made the dimensions of the bank and channel protection installed shall be equal to or greater than the dimensions specified .
payment will be based on plans quantity unless changes are ordered in writing by the engineer .
b. drainage fabric drainage fabric will be measured to the nearest square yard .
the lap at joints will not be included in the measurement .
num basis of payment a .
bank and channel protection gabions bank and channel protection gabions will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for materials equipment labor excavating shaping and incidentals required .
b. drainage fabric drainage fabric will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing the drainage fabric as specified .
payment will be for plan quantity unless changes are ordered in writing .
num bank and channel protection gabions page num this page intentionally left blank seeding num page num num description this work consists of preparing a seedbed and furnishing and planting seed on disturbed areas except roadbeds within the limits of the work .
num materials a .
general the seed shall comply with the requirements of the south dakota seed law .
b .
origin limitations grass seed furnished shall be the grass species listed in the plans .
the contractor may use one of the grass varieties listed in the plans for the specified grass species or the contractor may use a different grass variety of the same grass species specified .
if the contractor uses a grass variety listed in the plans for the specified grass species the grass seed origin limitations will not apply .
if the contractor uses a grass variety not listed in the plans for the specified grass species the grass seed furnished must originate in south dakota north dakota montana wyoming nebraska iowa minnesota kansas colorado or wisconsin .
grass seed grown outside this area may be approved after the contractor has furnished written certification from three seed suppliers confirming seed grown within this area is not readily available .
forb sedge rush shrub and wildflower seed must originate in the united states or canada .
forb sedge rush shrub and wildflower seed grown outside the united states and canada may be approved after the contractor has furnished written certification from three seed suppliers confirming seed grown within the two countries is not readily available .
c. seed testing seed shall be tested within num months prior to planting exclusive of the calendar month in which the test was completed .
testing shall be performed by a state seed lab commercial seed testing lab or a registered member of the society of commercial seed analysts registered seed technologist .
a certified test report shall be furnished prior to the start of seeding operations .
if the seed is not planted within the num month period the contractor shall have the seed retested for germination as described above and a current germination report with the certified test report shall be furnished prior to starting seeding operations .
the retest will be based on a sample obtained from the seed out of compliance .
d. labeling each bag of seed delivered to the project shall bear a tag which shows the following information num .
name and address of supplier .
num .
county and project number for which seed is to be used .
num .
suppliers lot number for each kind of seed in the mixture .
num .
origin where grown for each kind of seed .
num seeding page num num .
purity germination and other information required by south dakota seed law for each kind of seed .
num .
pounds of bulk seed of each kind of seed in each bag .
num .
total pounds of bulk seed mixture in each bag .
num .
pounds of pure live seed pls of each kind of seed in each bag .
num .
total pounds of pls mixture in each bag .
num .
dormant seed and hard seed .
when bulk seed is referred to it is defined as total seed including pls inert matter crop seed and weed seed .
e. inoculation of legumes prior to seeding legumes alfalfa clovers etc .
shall be inoculated with fresh culture of the appropriate nitrogen fixing bacteria in accordance with instruction accompanying the inoculant .
a certification of the inoculation shall be furnished .
num construction requirements a .
general requirements within seasonal limitations seeding shall be done as soon as finish grading and placing topsoil on each section have been completed .
seeding or related work shall not be done when the ground is frozen or the condition of the soil is such that a satisfactory seedbed or uniform seed placement can not be obtained .
seed shall not be sown when the wind interferes with uniform seed application or on areas under water .
slopes shall be worked longitudinally on contour during the preparation of areas drilling and after seeding .
fertilizing and mulching shall be provided as specified in sections num and num .
the engineer may approve necessary adjustments in the requirements outlined to obtain the most satisfactory results under varying conditions .
b .
seasonal limitations permanent seeding shall not be done between june num and august num without written authorization from the region engineer .
c. application rate the seed mixture shall be applied at the plan specified rate of pounds of pls per acre .
if a retest of the seed mixture shows a reduction in pls adjustment of the seed mixture rate will not be made .
measurement will be reduced as set forth in section num .
seeding num page num the contractor will be required to calibrate the drill or hydroseeder on each project .
calibration runs may be performed on areas to be seeded .
d. cover crop seeding when specified in the plans or directed by the engineer cover crop shall be seeded .
exception to the cover crop seeding may include areas where curb and gutter will be placed and areas as determined by the engineer .
cover crop seed shall consist of num pounds of oats spring wheat or winter wheat minimum num pls per acre .
cover crop seeding may be done at any time when the soil and weather conditions are suitable as determined by the engineer .
oats or spring wheat shall be used april through july and winter wheat shall be used august through november .
e. equipment and methods num .
seedbed preparation the contractor shall work areas to be seeded to a depth of approximately num inches .
the contractor shall take every effort to obtain this depth on the first pass with tillage equipment .
the contractor shall remove and dispose of logs stumps brush weeds cobbles and other foreign material which interferes with the proper operation of drills and other implements .
after the initial seedbed preparation the contractor shall prepare seedbeds according to the type of grass seed mixture to be planted .
a .
turf grass seed mixtures the contractor shall remove rocks larger than num inch .
the contractor shall construct the surface to be seeded to the required cross section .
the contractor shall shape the surface to remove mounds and low spots to provide a smooth even surface to match grade and cross section as shown in the plans .
after seeding and fertilizing the seedbed shall be rolled or otherwise worked by a method approved by the engineer to firm the seedbed and break up lumps and clods so they are no larger than num inch in size .
b .
all other grass seed mixtures lumps and clods exposed by the initial pass of tillage equipment over num inches in diameter shall be broken up .
the implement used shall be a tool carrier with rigid shanks with sweeps or chisels or a heavy duty disk as appropriate to the conditions .
the implement shall have positive means of controlling depth of penetration .
the number of passes required to break up lumps and clods shall be kept to a minimum .
working the soil to a fine pulverized condition shall be avoided .
the final prepared seedbed shall be left in a roughened condition consisting mainly of lumps num to num inches in diameter for maximum resistance to erosion .
after seedbed preparation has been completed the contractor shall pick up and dispose of all loose stones and boulders having a vertical projection of num inches or more above the soil surface .
num .
reseeding of previously seeded areas existing vegetation and cover crop shall be preserved for mulch .
the seed shall be drilled directly into existing cover if possible or by mowing and disking to permit penetration of drill openers and placement of seed to the specified depth .
num seeding page num num .
drilling the specified seed mixture shall be uniformly drilled using a press drill equipped with individually mounted adjustable spring loaded double disk furrow openers fitted with depth control bands or drums .
the depth control bands or drums shall be of a size to provide a final planting depth of num to num inch behind the press wheel .
the press drill shall be mounted on rear press wheels which carry a major portion of the weight of the drill and shall have no weight carrying wheels at the ends of the seedbox .
the press wheels shall be mounted independently of the furrow openers .
a press wheel shall follow directly behind each opener to compact the soil over the drill row .
seeding may be done with drills other than press drills provided they are equipped with baffles partitions agitators or augers which keep the seed distributed throughout the seed box .
they must also have packer wheels which follow directly behind double disk furrow openers and provide compaction of the seeded drill rows similar to the compaction obtained by a press drill .
notill drills will be allowed for seeding into cover crop or existing vegetation as long as the seed is planted to the required depth .
the seedbox shall be equipped with positive feed mechanisms which will accurately meter the seed and agitators which will prevent bridging in the seedbox and keep the seed uniformly mixed during drilling .
the drill shall conform to the following drill width maximums a .
single units num feet b. flex coupled side by side units num feet maximum two num foot members c. max .
drill row openers spacing num inches each drill shall be equipped with a metering device which will measure the area covered by the drill .
each drill shall be equipped with fabricated baffles or partitions mounted a maximum of num foot on centers and flush with the top of the seedbox and extending downward to within num inches of the bottom of the seedbox .
on areas where a press drill can not be operated satisfactorily hydraulic cyclone or knapsack hand operated or other broadcast type seeders may be used .
the contractor shall rake or drag incorporate all seed broadcast within the top num to num inch of topsoil .
the engineer may waive this requirement when raking or dragging is deemed in the engineers sole discretion not feasible by conventional methods .
seeding num page num num .
hydroseeding the equipment shall be designed specifically for hydroseeding .
the nozzle shall be adaptable to hydraulic seeding requirements .
storage tanks shall have a means of estimating the volume used or remaining in the tank .
f. care during construction and final inspection dirt ridges which result from seeding operations or from traffic shall be smoothed so they will not interfere with future mowing operations .
following completion of seeding operations foot vehicular or equipment traffic over the seeded area shall be avoided .
areas damaged from such traffic shall be reworked and reseeded .
before the acceptance of field work is made by the area office any area on which the original seed has been lost or displaced shall be reseeded .
g. excluded areas certain areas outside the rightofway widths which are devoted to cultivation and undisturbed areas within the rightofway widths which have a good growth of grass may be excluded from seeding operations .
num method of measurement permanent seed will be measured to the nearest pound of pls furnished and planted .
unauthorized increases in the specified rate of seeding will not be measured for payment .
seed required for calibration of the drill will be measured .
reseeding of areas damaged from causes beyond the control of the contractor will be measured and added to the original quantities used .
the weight of pls is computed by multiplying the purity times the sum of the germination and dormant seed value times the weight of bulk seed applied .
the purity dormant seed and germination values will be as shown on the bag tag .
if the seed has been retested based on section num c the retested value will be used in determining pls .
cover crop seeding shall be measured per bushel .
for purposes of measurement one bushel of cover crop seed shall be considered to be num pounds of bulk seed regardless of whether oats spring wheat or winter wheat is used .
num basis of payment pure live seed will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound of permanent seed .
payment will be full compensation for the preparation of the seedbed labor tools equipment inoculant and its application and incidentals necessary .
cover crop seeding shall be paid for at the contract unit price per bushel .
payment will be full compensation for the preparation of the seedbed labor tools equipment inoculant and its application and incidentals necessary .
num seeding page num this page intentionally left blank fertilizing num page num num description this work consists of furnishing and applying fertilizer material on areas to be seeded or sodded .
num materials a .
requirements fertilizer shall be a dry standard commercial product conforming to the south dakota fertilizer law and subsequent amendments or revisions .
each brand and grade of fertilizer must be registered with the state department of agriculture .
each bag or container shall clearly show the net weight of the contents the name and address of the manufacturer the brand and grade the guaranteed analysis of the contents showing the minimum percentages of total nitrogen phosphoric acid and water soluble potash available in that order .
b .
condition fertilizer shall be in a condition which permits proper distribution .
c. testing testing of fertilizer will not be required .
before fertilizer is approved for use the contractor shall submit a certified statement from the manufacturer stating that the fertilizer is registered for sale in south dakota and complies with the south dakota fertilizer law .
the certified statement shall include the name of the contractor the project number the county and all information that appears on the containers as listed in section num a .
num construction requirements a .
application fertilizer shall be applied not more than num hours prior to seeding .
fertilizer shall be applied by one of the following methods num .
with a fertilizer attachment on the drill which will place the fertilizer in a band on or near the drill row behind the openers during the drilling operations preferred method .
num .
by drilling in with an approved drill prior to seeding .
num .
by spreading the fertilizer uniformly over the areas to be seeded prior to or during seedbed preparation before final pass .
this method will not be acceptable when seedbed preparation is not required .
num .
where the seed is sown by a hydraulic seeder the required amount of fertilizer may be placed in the tank mixed together with the water and the seed and applied in the seeding operation .
num .
by hand operated broadcaster following sod installation .
num .
by equipment mounted broadcast spreaders on slopes flatter than num .
num fertilizing page num b. cleanup the contractor shall sweep all fertilizer misplaced on adjacent pavement onto the seedbed .
the contractor shall remove and dispose of all logs stumps brush and other foreign material exposed during fertilizer application including rocks larger than num inch in areas to be seeded with turf grass mixtures and rocks and clods having a vertical projection of num inches or more above the soil surface in all other areas .
c. refertilizing before the acceptance of field work is made by the area office any area on which the original fertilizer has been lost or displaced shall be refertilized .
num method of measurement fertilizing will be measured to the nearest num ton or as specified in the plans .
refertilizing of areas damaged by causes beyond the control of the contractor will be measured and added to the original quantity used .
num basis of payment fertilizing will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton or as specified in the plans .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing hauling placing labor equipment materials tools and incidentals necessary .
mulching num page num num description this work consists of placing a mulch cover on slopes or other designated areas following seeding and fertilizing operations .
num materials a. grass hay or straw mulch grass hay or straw mulching material shall be free of noxious weed seeds and objectionable foreign matter .
the mulch shall have been baled dry in bales of approximately equal weight and shall be relatively dry when applied .
materials with noxious weed contamination or materials with characteristics unsuitable for the purpose intended will be rejected and the contractor shall remove the contaminated material from the project .
bromegrass is not an acceptable mulch .
b .
fiber mulch fiber mulch shall contain no germination or growth inhibiting factors and shall have the property of becoming evenly dispersed and suspended when agitated in water .
fiber mulch that is blended with recycled paper is not allowed .
when sprayed uniformly with hydraulic seeding equipment on the surface of the soil the fibers shall form a blotter like ground cover which will readily absorb water and allow infiltration to the underlying soil without restricting emergence of seedlings .
weight specification from suppliers and for all applications shall refer only to air dry weight of the fiber considered to be num moisture .
the fiber mulch material shall be supplied in packages marked by the manufacturer to show the air dry weight content .
suppliers shall certify that laboratory and field testing of their product has been accomplished and that it meets all of the foregoing requirements .
c. bonded fiber matrix bonded fiber matrix shall consist of a continuous layer of elongated fiber strands held together by a water resistant bonding agent .
the bonded fiber matrix shall be uniformly applied and shall have no gaps between the product and the seeded soil .
the product shall be num biodegradable and composed of num wood fiber num natural binder and num organic and mineral activators all by weight .
the treatment shall be installed with hydraulic seeding equipment .
d. fiber reinforced matrix fiber reinforced matrix shall consist of thermally processed fiber crimped interlocking fibers crosslinked hydrocolloidal polymer tackifiers and activators .
fiber reinforced matrix shall form an intimate bond with the soil surface .
the fiber reinforced matrix shall form a continuous flexible and lofty interlocking matrix that creates air spaces and water absorbing cavities to improve seed germination reduce the impact of raindrop energy and minimize soil loss .
the treatment shall be installed with hydraulic seeding equipment .
num mulching page num num construction requirements during mulching operations suitable warning signs shall be provided in accordance with section num .
a. grass hay or straw mulch num .
placing the mulch shall be placed within num hours after the seeding has been completed .
mulching operations shall not be performed during periods of high winds which preclude the proper placing of the mulch .
the placing of mulch shall begin on the windward side of the areas to be covered .
the mulch shall be machine blown to uniformly distribute mulch over the seeded areas .
the machine shall blow or eject mulch by a constant air stream that controls the amount of mulch .
the machine shall cause a minimum of cutting or breakage of the mulch .
mulch containing excessive moisture which prevents uniform feeding through the machine shall not be used .
mulch shall be placed uniformly over the seeded areas at a rate of num tons per acre .
approximately num of the soil surface shall be visible through the mulch blanket prior to mulch tiller punching operation .
excessive cover which will smother seedlings shall be avoided .
the engineer may order the placement of mulch on any area where protection is necessary to forestall erosion or encourage turf establishment .
num .
punching immediately following application the mulch shall be punched into the soil by a mulch tiller consisting of a series of dull flat disks with notched or cutout edges .
the disks shall be approximately num inches in diameter num inch thick spaced approximately num inches apart and fitted with scrapers .
working width of the tiller shall not exceed num feet per member but may be operated in gangs of not over three members .
the tiller shall be operated on contour except those on slopes num or steeper diagonal operation will be permitted .
tiller members shall be ballasted to push mulch into the soil approximately num inches with ends exposed above the soil surface .
the mulch tiller shall follow as closely as possible behind the mulcher .
mulch shall not be blown when wind velocity causes appreciable displacement before it can be anchored by the mulch tiller .
more than one pass of the mulch tiller may be required to ensure adequate anchoring .
b .
fiber mulch rate of application shall be num pounds per acre unless otherwise specified in the plans or by the engineer .
excessive thickness of mulch which will smother grass seedlings shall be avoided .
mulching num page num mulch shall be placed on a given area as soon as possible or within num hours after seeding as a separate operation .
the contractor shall allow the fiber mulch to cure a minimum of num hours prior to watering .
c. bonded fiber matrix rate of application shall be num pounds per acre and the mix shall consist of num pounds bonded fiber matrix to num gallons water unless otherwise specified in the plans or by the engineer .
bonded fiber matrix shall be placed on a given area as soon as possible or within num hours after seeding as a separate operation .
d. fiber reinforced matrix fiber reinforced matrix shall not be placed in channels .
fiber reinforced matrix shall be placed on a given area as soon as possible and within num hours after seeding as a separate operation .
fiber reinforced matrix is effective upon application therefore does not require a curing time .
e. care during construction until acceptance of field work traffic either foot equipment or vehicle shall be avoided over the seeded and mulched areas .
before the acceptance of field work is made by the area office any area on which the original mulch has been displaced shall be remulched .
num method of measurement a. grass hay or straw mulch grass hay or straw mulching material will be measured to the nearest num ton of mulch applied .
reapplication in areas damaged from causes beyond the control of the contractor will be measured and added to the original quantities used .
b .
fiber mulch fiber mulch shall be measured to the nearest pound or ton as specified in the plans of mulch applied .
reapplication in areas damaged from causes beyond the control of the contractor will be measured and added to the original quantities used .
c. bonded fiber matrix bonded fiber matrix shall be measured to the nearest pound or ton as specified in the plans of matrix applied .
reapplication in areas damaged by means beyond the control of the contractor will be measured and added to the original quantities used .
d. fiber reinforced matrix fiber reinforced matrix shall be measured to the nearest pound or ton as specified in the plans of matrix applied .
reapplication in areas damaged by means beyond the control of the contractor will be measured and added to the original quantities used .
num basis of payment a. grass hay or straw mulch grass hay or straw mulch will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing hauling placing punching and for materials equipment labor tools and incidentals necessary .
num mulching page num b .
fiber mulch fiber mulch will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound or ton as specified in the plans .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing hauling and placing and for materials equipment labor tools and incidentals necessary .
c. bonded fiber matrix bonded fiber matrix will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound or ton as specified in the plans .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing hauling and placing and for materials equipment labor tools and incidentals necessary .
d. fiber reinforced matrix fiber reinforced matrix will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound or ton as specified in the plans .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing hauling and placing and for materials equipment labor tools and incidentals necessary .
sodding num page num num description this work consists of preparing the ground surface and furnishing transporting placing and fertilizing live sod .
num materials the sod shall consist of a dense well rooted growth of kentucky bluegrass or other specified grass native to the general locality of the project .
the sod shall be free from noxious weeds objectionable grasses weeds and foreign materials .
peat sod will not be allowed .
at the time the sod is cut the grass shall have a length of approximately num inches if longer than num inches the grass shall be cut to approximately num inches in length and the sod shall have been raked free of debris .
if the sod is in a dry condition so that it can not be cut rolled loaded and hauled to the job site without crumbling or breaking water shall be applied in sufficient quantity to provide a well moistened sod to the depth to which it is to be cut .
water used on sod shall be from municipal domestic or other sources known to be suitable for irrigation .
num construction requirements a .
cutting sod sod shall be machine cut into rectangular sections .
the sections shall be of uniform width .
the sod shall be cut to a depth of num inch or more so the dense root system will be retained and exposed in the bottom side of sod and the sod can be handled without undue tearing or breaking .
sod shall be rolled with the top growth inside .
sod strips which indicate crumbling tearing breaking or loss of soil during the operations of cutting transporting or handling will not be acceptable .
sod shall be laid in its final position within num hours after being cut .
during the period between cutting and laying the sod shall be protected from damage .
b .
preparing surface for sodding the surfaces to be sodded shall be constructed to the required cross section and contour and shall be smooth uniform and free from stones roots and other undesirable foreign material .
the surfaces shall be undercut to sufficient depth below adjacent areas so the top of newly laid sod will be flush with any adjacent seeded or turfed areas and num inch below top of sidewalks curbs and other structures .
some trenching in of the areas to be sodded and some building up of the adjacent areas may be necessary .
the adjacent areas shall smoothly blend with each other without sharp breaks in the contours .
immediately prior to placing the sod the soil shall be loosened and brought to a fine granular texture to a depth of not less than num inch .
clods lumps weeds rocks larger than num inch and other undesirable materials shall be removed .
num sodding page num if the ground prepared for sodding is dry or hot prewatering of the earthbed to a depth of num inch may be required prior to sodding .
the earthbed shall be allowed to dry sufficiently after watering to permit sod placement without tracking .
c. rolling while not generally required rolling may be specifically ordered for any areas where an especially smooth and level surface is desired .
d. seasonal limitations sodding shall not be done between june num and august num without written authorization from the region engineer .
e. laying sod the sod on bridge berm slopes shall be laid by hand in horizontal strips beginning at the bottom of the slope and working upwards .
in waterways strips shall be laid parallel to the flow .
each section of sod shall join the adjacent sections without overlapping but shall abut snugly against the section previously laid .
end joints shall be staggered and open joints or gaps shall be filled with sod cut to the proper size and shape .
the top and bottom ends of sodded areas shall extend at least num inches into the ground or ditch bottom .
other edges of sodded areas shall be turned into the ground num inches and covered with a layer of topsoil which shall be compacted to conduct the surface water over the edge of the sod and blend the sodded areas into the adjacent finished grades .
f. fertilizing following sod installation and just prior to watering fertilize the sod at the specified rate .
g. anchoring on slopes steeper than num the sod shall be anchored with num inch wide by num inches long ushaped staples made from num or heavier ungalvanized steel wire .
a minimum of four staples per sod strip in every other row shall be used .
in waterways two staples shall be placed in the upper end of each sod strip in the end facing flow .
staples shall be driven flush with the top of the sod .
additional staples required to obtain adequate anchoring shall be placed as directed .
h. watering after sod has been laid it shall be watered to provide a moist condition throughout the thickness of the sod and well into the underlying soil bed .
sodded areas shall be kept thoroughly moistened by sprinkling as necessary for four weeks after sodding .
at the end of the fourweek period an inspection will be made to determine if the sod is alive and growing .
if this can not be determined the contractor shall have the option of maintaining the sod until it can be determined or replacing the sod .
such maintenance or replacement shall be at the expense of the contractor .
replaced sod shall be watered as required for original sod at the expense of the contractor .
if it is determined sodding num page num at the end of the fourweek period the sod is alive and growing the contractor shall be relieved of the responsibility of maintaining the sod .
num method of measurement sodding will be measured to the nearest square yard .
necessary resodding of areas damaged from causes beyond the control of the contractor will be measured and added to the original quantity used .
water will be measured as provided in section num .
fertilizer will be measured as provided in section num .
num basis of payment sodding will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for preparing the earth bed for materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary .
water will be paid for under the item water for vegetation .
fertilizer will be paid for as provided in section num .
num sodding page num this page intentionally left blank erosion control and water pollution control num page num num description this work consists of permanent and temporary measures to control erosion sedimentation and water pollution .
num materials a .
water pollution control materials used in water pollution control work shall conform to the requirements set forth in the contract .
when work is ordered for which no provisions are contained in the contract material requirements shall be set forth in the agreement covering the additional work .
b .
temporary erosion control num .
silt fence silt fence shall consist of a temporary vertical barrier of fabric attached to and supported by woven wire and wood or steel posts and entrenched into the ground .
only silt fence on the departments approved products list will be allowed .
a. woven wire woven wire shall be num inch wide num gauge and have six horizontal wires with num inch or num inch spacing of vertical stay wires .
woven wire is required for low flow silt fence installations .
woven wire is not required unless specified in the plans or ordered by the engineer for high flow silt fence installations .
b .
posts the posts used shall be steel t line posts with num foot minimum length or wood posts with num foot minimum length and num inch minimum diameter .
num .
erosion control wattles erosion control wattles shall consist of weed free straw excelsior or coconut husk encased in ultraviolet degradable or biodegradable netting .
anchors for erosion control wattles shall be wooden or other biodegradable stakes .
only erosion control wattles on the departments approved products list will be allowed .
num .
erosion bales erosion bales shall consist of hay or straw bales free of noxious weeds .
erosion bales with noxious weed contamination will be rejected and the contractor shall remove the contaminated bales from the project .
num .
erosion bale anchors the erosion bale anchors shall be as detailed in the plans .
c. permanent erosion control num .
erosion control blanket when called for in the plans erosion control blanket shall be used to prevent erosion in ditches and on roadway slopes .
the blanket shall be installed in accordance with the plans .
only designated erosion control blanket on the departments approved products list will be allowed .
num .
turf reinforcement mat when called for in the plans turf reinforcement mat shall be used to prevent erosion in ditches and on roadway slopes .
the mat shall be num erosion control and water pollution control page num installed in accordance with the plans .
only designated turf reinforcement mat on the departments approved products list will be allowed .
num construction requirements the contractor shall designate an employee as erosion control supervisor whose primary responsibility is the construction and maintenance of erosion and sediment control .
this person shall be available to be reached by phone num hours a day num days a week and must be able to respond to emergency situations at the job site within num hours .
the person so designated must have training and be certified by the south dakota department of transportation in the area of erosion and sediment control .
the name phone number and location of the person shall be provided to the department at the preconstruction meeting .
erosion control and water pollution control devices shall be inspected by the contractor and the engineer once a week and within num hours of every rainfall greater than num inch .
the engineer shall document these inspections on a dotnum form .
a .
water pollution control these temporary pollution control provisions shall be coordinated with the permanent erosion control features specified elsewhere in the contract to the extent practical to assure economical effective and continuous erosion control throughout the construction and postconstruction period .
the contractor will be required to perform water pollution control measures in the sequence and manner outlined in the contract .
additional water pollution control measures found necessary after award of the contract shall be performed at such times and in the sequence ordered .
at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit for approval to the engineer a proposed schedule and method of operation for performance of temporary and permanent water pollution control measures .
the engineer has the authority to direct the contractor to provide immediate permanent or temporary pollution control measures to prevent contamination of adjacent streams or other watercourses lakes ponds wetlands or other areas of water impoundment .
such work may involve the construction of temporary structures berms dikes dams sediment basins slope drains and use of temporary mulches rolled erosion control products seeding or other control devices or methods as necessary to control erosion .
pollutants used during construction shall be stored or disposed of where runoff will not carry them into streams or lakes .
pollutants shall not be disposed of in streams or lakes .
contractor equipment yards and service areas shall be located or bermed so runoff from the areas and pollutants do not reach waterways or impoundments of water .
if conflicts between these requirements and pollution control laws rules or regulation of other federal or state or local agencies occur the more restrictive laws rules or regulations shall apply .
erosion control and water pollution control num page num b .
temporary erosion control the contractor shall not begin the removal of surfacing or topsoil until all temporary erosion control measures are placed beyond the work limits but within the rightofway or easement .
the contractor shall not begin earth moving operations in a third mile until erosion control measures within the work limits have begun in the first mile .
erosion control measures shall be continued in an orderly and progressive manner .
num .
silt fence silt fence shall be in place at locations designated on the plans or at locations selected by the engineer before earth disturbing activities have begun .
exceptions are at those areas where it is impractical to do so because of interference with construction activities .
these exceptions must be approved by the engineer .
silt fence may also be used during construction for interim sediment control .
when a trench can not be dug num to num pound sandbags may be used to prevent underflow at the bottom of the silt fence .
silt fence shall be constructed according to the plans .
a. mucking silt fence mucking silt fence is the removal of muck trapped by the silt fence and spreading the material evenly over the adjacent area to conform to the grade .
the muck will be removed when the surface of the muck is at approximately onethird the height of the silt fence .
b .
repair silt fence repair of silt fence will be as directed by the engineer .
this item shall consist of repairing silt fence to meet installation requirements specified in the plans .
c. remove silt fence silt fence shall be removed when vegetation is established .
some or all silt fence may be required to be left on the project until vegetation is established .
num .
erosion control wattle erosion control wattle shall be in place at locations designated on the plans or at locations selected by the engineer .
exceptions are at those areas where it is impractical to do so because of interference with construction activities .
these exceptions must be approved by the engineer .
erosion control wattle may be placed before earth moving activities begins and during construction for interim erosion and sediment control .
a .
remove and reset erosion control wattle the contractor shall remove and reset erosion control wattles as necessary as work progresses .
the erosion control wattles removed and reset shall be in useable condition .
b .
remove erosion control wattle erosion control wattles shall be removed when vegetation is established .
some or all erosion control wattles may be required to be left on the project until vegetation is established .
num .
floating silt curtain floating silt curtain shall be placed at locations designated in the plans .
the placement shall be prior to earth disturbing activities including clearing and grubbing upstream or adjacent to the location of the floating silt curtain .
num erosion control and water pollution control page num num .
erosion bales erosion bales shall be installed as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num .
erosion bale anchors the erosion bale anchors shall be as detailed in the plans .
c. permanent erosion control this work shall be done as soon as possible after finish grading and topsoil placement is completed and if practical prior to seeding fertilizing and mulching of adjacent areas .
seasonal limitations on the installing of erosion treatment material shall be as provided in section num .
num .
preparation of areas to be treated a .
shaping ditches and medians shall be reshaped to their typical section or to the ditch section specified for ditch liner material .
material shall be laid in ditches and medians to the widths specified .
when watercourses leading out of ditches are shallow or not well defined special channels shall be constructed and undercut to allow for placement of topsoil .
the material shall be placed below edges of channels and excavated material drifted back away from the edges of the material to direct flow directly into the treated waterway .
b. topsoil topsoil shall be spread to the depths specified over reshaped areas in accordance with section num. c. condition of finished surface rocks and clods over num inch in diameter and other foreign material shall be removed prior to placing material .
num .
seeding and fertilizing immediately after the area to be treated has been shaped and smoothed and prior to placing permanent erosion control the areas to be treated shall be seeded and fertilized as prescribed in sections num and num .
broadcasting raking or dragging in of seed and fertilizer will be permitted on areas where a drill can not operate satisfactorily .
num .
application of erosion control blanket and turf reinforcement mat a .
manner of application material shall be applied beginning at the top of the slope or ditch grade and rolling downward parallel to and in the same direction as the flow of water .
the center strip shall be placed first and centered in the low point of the ditch or channel throughout the length of treatment .
erosion control and water pollution control num page num b .
overlap where more than one width of material is required edges shall overlap approximately num inches and ends shall overlap approximately num inches with the upslope section of material on top .
c. trench the top or upslope end shall be buried in a trench num inch deep by num inch wide and stapled .
the trench shall be backfilled to grade and compacted .
d. anchoring prior to anchoring adjust erosion blanket or turf reinforcement mat laterally in ditches and channels to bring both edges to the same elevation .
material shall be held in place in accordance with the manufacturers recommended spacing and pattern or the following manufacturers recommendations shall be submitted to the engineer prior to installation .
material shall not be drawn taut in stapling .
material which bridges over surface depressions shall be secured with extra staples or t pins to ensure good contact with the soil .
e. maintenance and repair the contractor shall maintain the areas where material has been used until work in the project has been completed and the acceptance of field work is issued by the area office .
prior to the date the acceptance of field work is issued damaged areas shall be repaired .
num method of measurement a. silt fence will be measured to the nearest foot .
b. mucking silt fence will be measured to the nearest cubic yard .
c. repair silt fence will be measured to the nearest foot .
d. remove silt fence will be measured to the nearest foot .
e. erosion control wattle erosion control wattle will be measured to the nearest foot .
f. remove and reset erosion control wattle remove and reset erosion control wattle will be measured to the nearest foot .
g. remove erosion control wattle remove erosion control wattle will be measured to the nearest foot .
h. floating silt curtain will be measured to the nearest foot .
silt curtain damaged from causes beyond the control of the contractor shall be replaced and the replacement quantity added to the original contract amount .
i .
erosion bales will be measured by the actual count of bales placed .
num erosion control and water pollution control page num j .
erosion control blanket will be measured to the nearest square yard .
measurement of the overlap and top and bottom folds will not be made .
erosion control blanket damaged from causes beyond the control of the contractor shall be replaced and the replacement quantity added to the original quantities used .
k. shaping for erosion control blanket will be measured to the nearest foot .
l. turf reinforcement mat turf reinforcement mat will be measured to the nearest square yard .
measurement of the overlap and top and bottom folds will not be made .
turf reinforcement mat damaged from causes beyond the control of the contractor shall be replaced and the replacement quantity added to the original quantities used m. topsoil will be measured for as provided in section num .
n. seed will be measured for as provided in section num .
o .
fertilizer will be measured for as provided in section num .
num basis of payment a. silt fence will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment shall be full compensation for furnishing installing labor equipment and incidentals .
b. mucking silt fence will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
payment will be full compensation for labor equipment and incidentals required to remove spread this material evenly over the adjacent area as determined by the engineer and seed .
c. repair silt fence will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment shall be full compensation for repair and inspection of the silt fence .
d. remove silt fence will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment shall be full compensation for labor equipment and incidentals .
e. erosion control wattle erosion control wattle will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment shall be full compensation for labor equipment and incidentals .
f. remove and reset erosion control wattle remove and reset erosion control wattle will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment shall be full compensation for labor equipment and incidentals .
g. remove erosion control wattle remove erosion control wattle will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment shall be full compensation for labor equipment and incidentals .
h. floating silt curtain will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment will be full compensation for materials labor and equipment necessary to install and remove the floating silt curtain .
erosion control and water pollution control num page num i .
erosion bales will be paid for at the contract unit price for each bale .
payment shall be full compensation for furnishing installing all labor equipment and incidentals .
j .
erosion control blanket will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for shaping and finishing ditches and channels which are not specifically addressed with the item shaping for erosion control blanket installing material and the furnishing of labor equipment staples material and incidentals necessary .
k. shaping for erosion control blanket will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
payment shall be full compensation for labor equipment and incidentals .
l. turf reinforcement mat turf reinforcement mat will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be full compensation for shaping and finishing ditches and channels installing material and the furnishing of labor equipment staples material and incidentals necessary .
m. topsoil will be paid for as provided in section num .
n. seed will be paid for as provided in section num .
o .
fertilizer will be paid for as provided in section num .
num erosion control and water pollution control page num this page intentionally left blank aggregate for maintenance stockpiles num page num num description this work consists of furnishing and stockpiling the type and size aggregate specified in the plans .
num materials the aggregate shall conform to the requirements in the plans .
num construction requirements materials shall be proportioned blended and crushed when required in accurately measured quantities .
the aggregate shall be placed in neatly shaped storage piles on suitably prepared sites at the location designated in the plans .
num method of measurement aggregate will be measured to the nearest num ton furnished delivered and neatly stockpiled .
num basis of payment aggregate will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing materials labor equipment and incidentals required .
num aggregate for maintenance stockpiles page num this page intentionally left blank division iii materials requirements references in this division to other publications shall mean the code or standard in effect at the date of the bid letting .
portland cement num airentraining admixtures num chemical admixtures for concrete num page num num portland cement a. portland cement portland cement shall conform to aashto m num for the type specified .
all cements shall not have more than num of alkalies nanumo numknumo .
unless otherwise permitted by the engineer the product of only one mill of any one brand and type of portland cement shall be used on the project .
b. portlandpozzolan cement portlandpozzolan cement shall conform to aashto m num .
fly ash may not be substituted for a portion of the portlandpozzolan cement .
the portlandpozzolan cement components cement and fly ash individually shall conform to the requirements shown on the plans and shall be mixed in the proportions as specified .
num airentraining admixtures airentraining admixtures for concrete shall be one hundred percent vinsol resin based or one of the products as listed on the departments approved products list for airentraining admixtures and shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num except as modified below concrete having sufficient airentraining admixture added to entrain num to num air shall have compressive strength at the age of num days of not less than num of the standard .
the standard shall consist of a concrete of equal cement content equal consistency and of the same aggregates in adjusted proportions but without the addition of an airentraining admixture .
num chemical admixtures for concrete the chemical admixtures used for concrete shall conform to aashto m num .
chemical admixtures for concrete shall be a nonchloride based material containing less than num chloride ion by weight of admixture .
viscosity modifying admixtures vma may be used in selfconsolidating concrete scc to attain desired performance .
the approval of the departments concrete engineer is required prior to use of any vma .
num fly ash page num num fly ash fly ash shall be from a base loaded electric generating plant using a single coal source .
plants using a limestone injection process for controlling air pollutants are not acceptable .
fly ash from the start up and shut down of the plant shall not be used .
a .
class c fly ash class c fly ash conforming to aashto m num will only be allowed in grout for pavement jacking undersealing or when specified .
b .
class f modified fly ash fly ash used in all other concrete shall conform to aashto m num class f including the optional requirements in the referenced aashto specification except as modified by the following loss on ignition num maximum moisture content num maximum available alkalis as nanumo num maximum note these modifications shall not apply to fly ash used in slurry for pavement jacking or undersealing operations .
available alkalis up to num may be used provided mortar expansion test results at num days is less than or equal to that of the control sample .
the expansion test shall be run in accordance with modified astm cnum .
the control sample shall be made using cement that will be used on the project .
the test sample shall be made using cement and fly ash that will be used on the project .
the total of silicon dioxide sionum plus aluminum oxide alnumonum plus iron oxide fenumonum shall be at least num by dry weight of the total fly ash composition .
the silicon dioxide sionum shall be at least num by dry weight of the total fly ash composition .
number of tests each sample representing num tons or less shall be tested for the following num .
fineness num sieve analysis .
num .
moisture content .
num .
specific gravity .
num .
loss on ignition .
num .
soundness .
num .
all other physical tests and chemical determinations shall be made on composite samples representing each num tons .
this composite sample shall be prepared by combining equal parts of num consecutive samples each representing num tons .
the test data shall be furnished to the engineer in the form of a chemical and physical analysis report .
fly ash delivered without an acceptable certificate of compliance will be subject to rejection .
hydrated lime num page num num hydrated lime hydrated calcium or dolomitic lime shall consist of a dry powder obtained by treating quicklime with enough water to satisfy the chemical affinity for water under the conditions of hydration .
hydrated lime shall meet the following requirements calcium and magnesium oxide nonvolatile basis minimum num determined on ignited sample carbon dioxide as received basis maximum if sampled at place of manufacture num maximum if sampled at any other place num free water or mechanical moisture as received basis maximum if sampled at place of manufacture num maximum if sampled at any other place num the maximum accumulative percent by weight of residue retained shall conform to the following requirements sieve size maximum accumulative percent retained num num num num num num hydrated lime shall be sampled according to sd num .
the properties enumerated above shall be tested in accordance with the following chemical tests astm cnum physical tests astm cnum modified to use only the num num and num sieves .
lime shall be stored and handled in closed weatherproof containers until immediately before distribution on the project .
when storage bins are used they shall be completely enclosed .
lime furnished in bags shall be stored in weatherproof buildings with protection from ground dampness .
when lime is furnished in trucks the contractor shall have the weight of each truck of lime certified on a public scale or the contractor shall provide a set of standard platform truck scales or hopper scales approved by the engineer .
when lime is furnished in bags each bag shall designate the weight type of material and name of manufacturer .
bags varying more than num from the certified weight may be num hydrated lime page num rejected .
the average weight of bags in any shipment as shown by weighing num bags taken at random shall not be less than the manufacturers certified weight .
calcium chloride num sodium chloride num water for use in portland cement concrete num page num num calcium chloride calcium chloride shall conform to aashto m num .
num sodium chloride sodium chloride shall conform to aashto m num .
num water for use in portland cement concrete water used in portland cement concrete and cement stabilization shall be clean and free of oil salt acid alkali sugar vegetation effluent from a sewage disposal plant and other substances detrimental to the finished product .
water containing suspended matter shall be checked for total solids .
the total solids shall not exceed num parts per million .
water shall be tested for ph and dissolved solids .
the ph shall be no less than num or more than num .
maximum dissolved solids shall be no more than num parts per million .
testing total solids astm cnum dissolved solids sd num ph manufacturers instructions with meter num fine aggregate for use in portland cement concrete page num num general requirements the fine aggregate shall consist of natural sand or subject to approval other inert materials with similar characteristics or combinations having hard strong durable particles .
fine aggregate from different sources shall not be mixed or stored in the same pile or used alternately in the same class of construction or mix without permission from the engineer .
num specific requirements a. deleterious substances the amount of deleterious substances shall not exceed the following limits by dry weight clay lumps num coal and lignite num particles less than num specific gravity num other deleterious substances such as alkali mica coated grains soft and flaky particles num the maximum amount of all deleterious substances listed above shall not exceed num by dry weight .
b .
soundness when the fine aggregate is subjected to num cycles of the sodium sulfate soundness test the weighted loss shall not exceed num by weight .
when class m concrete fine aggregate is subjected to num cycles of the sodium sulfate soundness test the weighted loss shall not exceed num by weight .
c. organic impurities the fine aggregate shall be free from injurious amounts of organic impurities .
aggregates subjected to the colorimetric test for organic impurities and producing a color darker than the standard number num shall be rejected .
should the aggregate show a darker color than samples originally approved for the work the aggregate shall not be used until tests have been made to determine whether the increased color is indicative of an injurious amount of deleterious substances .
d. alkalisilica reactivity asr requirements when specified in the plans the following items shall apply .
fine aggregates from sources that have not been tested by the department shall be submitted to the departments materials and surfacing central materials laboratory for asr testing num days prior to performing the concrete mix design .
asr testing shall be performed in accordance with astm cnum except that the gradation of the material used for testing shall be as produced from the source .
the fine aggregate shall only be sampled at the source by a department representative or in the presence of a department representative .
fine aggregate for use in portland cement concrete num page num fine aggregate with a num day expansion value below num shall require type ii cement in the concrete mix .
fine aggregate with a num day expansion value of num or greater shall require type v cement in the concrete mix .
fine aggregate with a num day expansion value of num or greater shall not be used .
when a fine aggregate supplier changes locations within the pit the fine aggregate from the new location in the pit shall be submitted for testing .
when more than one source of fine aggregate is blended to meet the gradation specifications the expansion value of the blended sands will be used for determining acceptability and type of cement required .
blended sources will be treated as a new source and it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to submit the blended samples for testing num days prior to performing the concrete mix design .
the expansion value of the blended sources will be used to determine the type of cement required .
e. gradation fine aggregate shall be well graded from coarse to fine and shall conform to the following gradation requirements sieve size percent passing num inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num class m concrete fine aggregate shall conform to the above gradation requirements except the percent passing a num sieve shall be from num num .
the percentage of material passing the num sieve shall be such that the composite mixture of fine and coarse aggregate will conform to section num .
blending of fine aggregate will only be allowed to correct for gradation .
all fine aggregate sources shall meet the quality requirements individually prior to blending .
the materials and surfacing office shall be contacted prior to the blending of fine aggregates .
the blending process shall be by an approved method that can accurately control the amount of each individual fine aggregate .
the blending process shall be approved prior to starting .
f. uniformity of grading the gradation requirements given in section num e represent the extreme limits which shall determine suitability for use from all sources of supply .
the gradation from any source shall be uniform and not subject to the extreme percentages of gradation specified above .
for the purpose of determining the degree of uniformity a fineness modulus fm shall be made upon representative samples from sources proposed for use .
fine aggregate from any source shall maintain a fineness modulus within num from the design mix fineness modulus .
if the fineness modulus falls outside this limit the departments concrete engineer shall be notified .
a new or num fine aggregate for use in portland cement concrete page num adjusted mix design may be provided or approved .
the uniformity of grading requirements do not apply to fine aggregate for low slump dense concrete and class m concrete .
for determining the fm deviation from the design mix fm the average of the num most recent fm tests shall be used .
until five fm tests have been made base the deviation on the first fm test then on the average of all previously run fm tests .
for portland cement concrete paving conforming to section num the fine aggregate fm established by the mix design shall be from num to num wide band .
a num variation narrow band from the established fm target value will be allowed provided the narrow band fm test results are within the wide band limits .
g. sampling and testing sampling sd num gradation sd num particles less than num specific gravity sd num soundness test sodium sulfate solution five cycles sd num organic impurities aashto t num clay lumps aashto t num uniformity of grading fineness modulus aashto m num materials for polymer chip seals num page num num polymer polymer shall be a two component polymer consisting of a base component and a hardener .
both components shall be supplied in tightly sealed undamaged containers .
the containers shall be marked to identify each component and shall be clearly labeled with product name mixing instructions and proportions recommended storage temperature lot number batch number date of manufacture and quantity contained .
the polymer shall be one of the polymers from the departments approved products list or as approved by the departments bridge construction engineer .
num cover aggregate the cover aggregate shall be processed washed and dried dark grey or black colored aggregate .
washing shall remove dust covering the aggregate .
recycled cover aggregate shall not be used .
cover aggregate shall conform to the following a .
the mohs hardness must be num minimum .
b .
the gradation shall conform to the following sieve size percent passing num num num num num num num num num num num c. the maximum aggregate moisture at the time of application shall not exceed num .
d. the aggregate shall be supplied in waterproof bags and shall be stored in a dry moisturefree atmosphere .
the aggregate shall be fully protected from any contaminants on the job site and shall be stored so as not to be exposed to rain or other moisture sources .
materials shall remain adequately covered and protected from contamination throughout the project .
any material not adequately covered or found to be contaminated shall not be used .
e. the contractor shall submit a sieve analysis for the processed washed and dried aggregate and documentation of the mohs hardness with the certified test reports .
no field samples for sieve analysis or hardness shall be required .
num masonry mortar sand and epoxy resin mortar sand page num num masonry mortar sand a .
general aggregate for use in masonry mortar shall consist of natural sand or manufactured sand .
manufactured sand is the product obtained by crushing stone gravel or air cooled iron blast furnace slag specially processed to assure suitable particle shape as well as gradation .
b. gradation percent passing sieve size natural sand manufactured sand num num num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num note not more than num may be retained between any two consecutive sieves listed .
not more than num may be retained between the num and num sieves .
c. deleterious substances the amount of deleterious substances shall not exceed the following limits by dry weight num .
clay lumps and friable particles num num .
lightweight particles having a specific gravity of less than num num d. soundness when the fine aggregate is subjected to num cycles of the sodium sulfate soundness test the weighted loss shall not exceed num by weight .
e. organic impurities the aggregate shall be free of injurious amounts of organic impurities .
except as herein provided aggregates subjected to the test for organic impurities and producing a color darker than the standard shall be rejected .
aggregate failing in the test may be used provided that the principally due to the presence of small quantities of coal lignite or similar discrete particles .
aggregate failing the colorimetric test may be used provided that when tested for the effect of organic impurities on strength of mortar the relative strength at num and num days when calculated in accordance with section num of aashto t num the organic impurities in fine aggregate on strength of mortar is not less than num .
num epoxy resin mortar sand a .
general the aggregate shall be silica sand .
masonry mortar sand and epoxy resin mortar sand num page num b. gradation sieve size percent passing num num num num to num num num to num num num to num num coarse aggregate for use in portland cement concrete page num num general requirements a. coarse aggregate for concrete pavement the coarse aggregate shall consist of ledge rock .
coarse aggregate for continuously reinforced concrete pavement shall conform to size num .
coarse aggregate for all other pcc pavements shall conform to size num .
b. coarse aggregate class a concrete the coarse aggregate shall consist of ledge rock .
coarse aggregate for class a concrete shall conform to the gradation requirements of size num size num or size num as indicated on the mix design .
c. coarse aggregate for bridge deck resurfacing the coarse aggregate shall be produced from ledge rock .
the coarse aggregate shall conform to the gradation requirement of size num .
d. coarse aggregate for class m concrete coarse aggregate for class m concrete shall meet the gradation requirements for size num .
if class m concrete is cast at a commercial precast facility regularly producing other precast items under section num the coarse aggregate shall conform to section num e. e. coarse aggregate for prestressed and precast concrete the coarse aggregate shall be ledge rock .
the aggregate size shall be consistent throughout the entire structure .
only one source shall be used to produce each aggregate size .
coarse aggregate for wet cast concrete shall meet the gradation requirements of size num or size numa as indicated on the mix design .
the gradation requirement shall not apply for dry cast concrete .
f. coarse aggregate for spall repair and extender aggregate for packaged patching mix material including dowel bar retrofit patching material the coarse aggregate shall be ledge rock .
coarse aggregate for spall repair except the coarse aggregate used in a packed patching material shall meet the gradation requirements of size num .
the gradation section does not apply to extender aggregate .
num specific requirements a. deleterious substances the amount of deleterious substances shall not exceed the following limits by dry weight clay lumps num shale and other materials having a specific gravity less than num num scratch hardness num other deleterious substances such as alkali mica coated grains flaky particles coal lignite and chocolate rock num the maximum amount of deleterious substances listed above shall not exceed num by dry weight .
coarse aggregate for use num in portland cement concrete page num the deleterious substances in the coarse aggregate for class m concrete shall not exceed the following limits clay lumps num shale and other materials having a specific gravity less than num num scratch hardness num other deleterious materials such as alkali mica coated grains flaky particles coal lignite and chocolate rock num the maximum amount of all deleterious material shall not exceed num by dry weight .
b .
percentage of wear the percentage of wear la abrasion test shall not be more than num by weight .
c. soundness when the coarse aggregate is subjected to num cycles of the sodium sulfate soundness test the weighted loss shall not exceed num by weight .
when class m coarse aggregate is subjected to num cycles of the sodium sulfate soundness test the weighted loss shall not exceed num by weight. . d. gradation each size of coarse aggregate shall conform to the gradation requirements specified in the following table percentage by dry weight passing sieve size nominal size square openings num inch num inch num inch  inch  inch num inch num num num num inch to num num num num num num numa num inch to num num num num num num num num inch to num num num num num num num num inch to num num num num num num num num inch to num num num num num num num num num inch to num num num num num num num num num the combined mixture of fine and coarse aggregate shall be such that not more than num passes the num sieve .
this limit shall not be more than num for class m concrete .
e. flat and elongated particles the maximum amount of flat and elongated particles for the coarse aggregate shall not exceed num .
flat and elongated particles are defined as those particles with a ratio of maximum to minimum dimension greater than num f. sampling and testing sampling sd num gradation sd num clay lumps aashto t num particles less than num specific gravity sd num num coarse aggregate for use in portland cement concrete page num scratch hardness sd num flat and elongated particles sd num chocolate rock sd num la abrasion sd num soundness test sodium sulfate solution five cycles sd num material finer than num sieve sd num not required for ledge rock concrete curing materials num page num num requirements curing materials shall conform to the following requirements as specified a. curing blankets num .
burlap cloth made from jute or kenaf aashto m num num .
nonwoven polypropylene geotextile fabric white nonwoven polypropylene geotextile fabric conforming to the following requirements may be used in lieu of burlap for horizontal applications only .
this material is not to be used for curing vertical surfaces .
property test method unit minimum average roll value weight astm d num ouncessquare yard num b .
polyethylene sheeting white polyethylene sheeting shall be durable to withstand the intended job use without puncturing or tearing .
during cool weather the engineer may permit the use of black polyethylene sheeting in lieu of white polyethylene sheeting .
c. liquid membrane forming compounds for curing concrete curing compounds for concrete shall be either white pigmented or linseed oil base emulsion unless one type is specifically required in the plans .
num .
white pigmented the white pigmented compound shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum type num .
num .
linseed oil base emulsion the linseed oil base emulsion compound shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum type num except as modified by the following a .
the compound shall be a water emulsified linseed oil emulsion of num num oil phasenum num water phase composition .
linseed oil phasewater phase proportions shall be formulated exclusive of added pigment .
the oil and water phase composition of linseed oil base emulsion shall be tested in accordance with sd num. b. linseed oil used in the emulsion formulation shall consist of a blend of num boiled linseed oil and num znum viscosity linseed oil .
c. the compound shall be sprayable above numf .
num .
storage the compounds shall be stored at temperatures above numf .
compound stored for a period in excess of six months will require resampling and testing for compliance prior to use .
num concrete curing materials page num num .
sampling and testing the department will test the liquid membrane forming compounds for water retention in accordance with aashto t num at an application rate of num gallon per num ftnum .
rip rap num page num num requirements a. riprap stone for riprap shall be hard and durable and shall have a minimum weight of num pounds per cubic foot .
riprap may be ledge rock or field stone .
if field stone is utilized for class c or larger the stone shall have a minimum of num crushed faces as defined under sd num .
stone shall be free from overburden spoil shale and organic material .
the riprap stone shall meet the following gradation requirements riprap class rock sizenum in feet rock size in pounds percent of riprap smaller than a num num num num num num num num num b num num num num num num num num num c num num num num num num num num num d num num num num num num num num num e num num num num num num num num num f num num num num num num num num num num based on a specific gravity of num and spherical shape .
the riprap class is the median particle weight with num of the material smaller and num of the material larger .
each load of riprap shall be well graded from the smallest to the maximum size specified .
b .
testing specific gravity sd num num geotextiles and impermeable plastic membrane page num num geotextiles and impermeable plastic membrane geotextiles and impermeable plastic membrane shall meet the following requirements as applicable for the specified use .
the contractor shall provide a certificate of compliance verifying that the material meets the following specifications or documentation the material is listed on the approved products list .
note if the type of fabric to be used is not specified drainage fabric type b shall be used .
all values listed are minimum average roll values marv unless otherwise specified .
fabric and membrane property test method drainage fabric separator fabric reinforcement fabric mse impermeable plastic membrane type a type b woven non woven aashto class aashto m num num non woven num non woven num woven num non woven num woven performance criteria during service life aos us standard sieve astm dnum num num num num num permittivity secnum astm dnum num min num min num min num min num min num us perms astm enum thickness mils astm dnum num strength requirements grab strengthnum ibs astm dnum num num num num num num num grab elongationnum astm dnum num min num min num max num min num max num min num trapezoid tear strength lbs astm dnum num num num num num puncture strength lbs astm dnum num num num num num num uv strength retention astm dnum num num num num num num num wide width strip tensile strengthnum lbsinch astm dnum num num typical uses a b c c d e num test results from astm dnum will be acceptable for impermeable plastic membrane .
num num inch wide x num inch length specimen tested at a strain rate of num num inch per minute .
num nonstabilized or low susceptible geotextiles should not be exposed to ultraviolet radiation for more than num days .
num grab strength grab elongation and wide width strip tensile strength are measured in machine and cross machine directions .
a joints for concrete pipe culverts rc boxes edge drains drainage tubing etc .
used as a general filtration fabric .
b riprap gabions inslopes retention on mse backfill etc .
usesame as a except has a higher construction loading .
c subgrades embankments etc .
used to separate granular material from subgrade .
d bridge end backfill and reinforced slopes .
used to create a reinforced fill andor used as the wall facing material .
e under pavements .
used to restrict the flow of fluids to underlying materials .
select granular backfill num page num num select granular backfill this material shall be free from dirt vegetation or other foreign substance .
the material shall meet the following gradation requirements by dry weight sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num inch num num num num num num num num la abrasion loss shall not exceed num .
sampling and testing sampling sd num gradation sd num la abrasion sd num num preformed expansion joint filler for concrete page num num requirements preformed expansion joint filler for concrete shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
concrete joint sealer num page num num requirements a .
hot poured elastic joint sealer the sealant shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum type ii or type iv or be on the departments approved products list for joint sealants for asphalt over long jointed concrete pavement .
hot poured elastic joint sealer meeting the requirements of astm dnum type iv shall not weigh more than num pounds per gallon .
test methods shall conform to astm dnum except the fine aggregate used in preparing the concrete test blocks shall conform to section num .
the contractor shall furnish a certificate of compliance for hot poured elastic joint sealer not listed on the departments approved products list .
b .
low modulus silicone sealant low modulus silicone sealant shall be furnished in a one part silicone formulation .
the sealant must be on the departments approved products list and must meet the following requirements test limit test method tack free time num minutes mil s num specific gravity num astm dnum method a durometer hardness type a cured num days at numf num and num to num r.h. num numf astm dnum tensile stress num elongation num days at numf num and num r.h. num psi maximum astm dnum die c elongation num day cure at numf num and num r.h. num minimum astm dnum die c shelf life num month minimum from date of manufacture ozone and ultra violet resistance no chalking cracking or bond loss after num hours movement capability and adhesion num day cure in air numf num no adhesive or cohesive failure num all num specimens must exceed num extension at numf bond to concrete mortar concrete briquettes air cured num days at numf num num psi minimum numf aashto t num num prepare the specimens using num x num x num concrete blocks made in accordance with astm d num except the fine aggregate shall conform to section num .
a sawed face shall be used for bond surface .
seal num inches of block leaving num inch on each end of specimen unsealed .
the depth of sealant shall be num inch and the width num inch .
subject the sealant to movement at a rate of num inches per minute until failure .
num briquettes molded in accordance with aashto t num sawed in half and bonded with approximately num mils of sealant and tested using clips meeting aashto t num .
briquettes shall be dried to constant weight in oven numc num .
they shall be tested in tension at a loading rate of num inches per minute .
num concrete joint sealer page num the backer rod shall be a nonmoisture absorbing closed cell resilient material meeting the requirements of astm dnum approximately num larger in diameter than the width of the joint to be sealed .
the backer rod shall be compatible with the sealant and no bond or reaction shall occur between the rod and the sealant .
asphalt concrete crack sealant new section num page num num asphalt concrete crack sealant the sealant shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum type iv .
the sealant material shall not weigh more than num pounds per gallon .
only products that meet the above requirements and have performed satisfactorily based on department analysis may be used .
a listing of acceptable products meeting astm dnum type iv requirements may be obtained from the departments approved products list .
products on the departments approved products list for joint sealant for asphalt over long jointed concrete pavement may also be used .
the blocking medium shall be an inert compressible material which is compatible with the sealant .
num blotting sand page num num requirements a .
sand for prime sand for prime shall meet the following requirements percent passing num inch sieve num percent passing num sieve num percent passing num sieve num plasticity index num max .
b .
sand for flush seal and sand for fog seal sand for flush seal and sand for fog seal shall meet the following requirements percent passing num inch sieve num percent passing num sieve num percent passing num sieve num percent passing num sieve num plasticity index num max .
the sand shall be free from dirt and vegetation .
crushing is not required .
blow sand is not considered satisfactory material .
c. sampling and testing sampling sd num gradation sd num plasticity index sd num aggregates for asphalt concrete num page num num general requirements the material shall conform to the specifications for the particular material required by the contract .
the material shall not contain dirt clay balls vegetation or organic debris paper metal glass and other foreign material .
the particles shall be free from coating with clay or dust which prevents thorough coating with asphalt .
num specific requirements a. reclaimed asphalt pavement rap rap shall conform to the requirements of section num .
b .
mineral aggregate the mineral aggregate job mix formula without the addition of hydrated lime shall conform to the requirements shown in table num .
the single percentage aggregate gradation established in the job mix formula for class d e and g asphalt concrete mixes shall be within the limits in table num .
the single percentage aggregate gradation established in the job mix formula for class s asphalt concrete mixes will be the center of the gradation band in table num .
the class s gradation will include mineral fillers or other approved additives .
table num requirements class d class e class g class s type num type num type num type num type num type num type num type num sieve percent passing num inch num num num num inch num num num num num num num num inch num num num inch num num num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num other properties processing required crushed crushed crushed crushed liquid limit max num num num num plasticity index max num nonplastic nonplastic nonplastic la abra .
loss max num num num num absorption maxnum num sodium sulfate soundness maximum num sieve num num num num num sieve num num num num lightweight particles maximum num sieve num num num num num sieve num num num num num aggregates for asphalt concrete page num crushed particles minimum num sieve num numcf num numcf num numcf num numcf num manufactured finesnum na num min .
num min .
num min .
num mineral aggregate shall be produced from a ledge rock source .
num will be evaluated at mix design by the departments central materials laboratory .
num manufactured fines shall be manufactured solely from material retained on the num inch sieve unless the aggregate material is produced from a ledge rock source .
c. classes d e and g num .
filler for mineral aggregate shall consist of fine inert silt or stone dust which is essentially free from lumps .
the material shall be fine enough that when pulverized for testing num by dry weight will pass a num sieve and num by dry weight will pass a num sieve .
the linear shrinkage shall not exceed num and the plasticity index shall not exceed num .
the material shall be such that not more than num by volume will separate from asphalt in the presence of water .
during production the filler shall be screened over a screen of a size corresponding to the maximum size of the mineral aggregate .
a larger size screen may be permitted or a smaller size required if necessary to facilitate production or to remove objectionable material .
lumps shall be pulverized prior to blending .
num .
mineral filler for mineral aggregate shall consist of finely ground particles of stone flyash or portland cement .
mineral filler shall be thoroughly dry and free from lumps .
mineral filler shall meet the following gradation requirements by dry weight when tested in accordance with aashto t num sieve size percent passing num num num num num num num num num num num num .
hydrated lime shall meet the requirements of section num .
the maximum amount of hydrated lime allowed in the mixture will be num of the total weight of the mineral aggregate .
d. class s mineral filler if needed shall meet the requirements of section num c. mineral filler if added to meet the gradation requirements will not be considered when calculating the num manufactured fines specification .
the mixture shall have a coarse aggregate skeleton with stone on stone contact meeting the requirements in section num of aashto r num designing stone matrix asphalt .
the mixture will be evaluated for compliance at mix design by the departments materials surfacing office .
aggregates for asphalt concrete num page num num sampling and testing sampling sd num gradation sd num liquid limit and plasticity index sd num la abrasion test sd num linear shrinkage filler sd num soundness test sodium sulfate solution five cycles sd num w.a.p .
test filler sd num crushed particle test sd num particles less than num specific gravity sd num sd num absorption sd num num aggregates for asphalt surface treatments page num num general requirements the material shall conform to the specifications for the particular material required by the contract .
the material shall be sand crushed rock or crushed gravel .
the material shall not contain dirt clay balls vegetation or organic debris paper metal glass and other foreign material .
num specific requirements requirements type num type num type num a b a b c sieve percent passing num inch num num inch num num inch num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num other properties flakiness index max num num num num num plasticity index max num num num num np num la abrasion loss max num num num num num num soundness loss max num num num num num num crushed particles min num sieve num numcf num numcf num numcf num numcf foot notes num num num num num the plasticity index may be waived if not more than num of the material passes the num sieve .
num sampling and testing sampling sd num gradation sd num plasticity index sd num la abrasion test sd num soundness test sodium sulfate solution five cycles sd num crushed particle test sd num flakiness index test sd num aggregates for granular bases and surfacing num page num num general requirements the material shall conform to the specifications for the particular material required by the contract .
the material shall be sound durable particles of ledge rock gravel recycled concrete pavement rca removed from within the project limits and sand .
the material may include limited amounts of fine soil particles but shall be free of vegetation or organic debris paper metal glass and other foreign material .
num specific requirements aggregates for granular bases and surfacing shall conform to the requirements of table num .
table num num the fraction passing the num sieve shall not be greater than num of the fraction passing the num sieve .
in no case shall the upper limit specified for the num sieve be exceeded .
num requirements apply to ledge rock other than limestone ledge rock .
num acceptance of pit run will be by visual inspection .
the engineer may require a sieve analysis to verify the material meets the specified gradation .
independent assurance will not be required .
num sampling testing sampling sd num gradation sd num liquid limit and plasticity index sd num la abrasion test sd num crushed particles sd num requirement subbase gravel cushion aggregate base course limestone ledge rock gravel surfacing pit run granular bridge end backfill base course gravel cushion sieve percent passing num inch num num inch num num inch num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num other properties liquid limit max num num num num num plasticity index num num num num num num num la abrasion loss maximum num num num num num num num crushed particles minimum num sieve num numcf num numcf num numcf num numcf num numcf num numcf num numcf foot notes num num num num clay page num num clay clay to be used for gravel surfacing or granular materials to be lime treated shall consist of soil binder or fines uniform in texture fineness and other characteristics .
seams layers and pockets of soil encountered not having qualities considered suitable for the intended use shall be wasted .
during production the clay shall be screened over a num inch sieve to remove oversize clumps and vegetation .
the plasticity index of the clay shall be from num to num and the liquid limit shall not exceed num when tested in accordance with sd num .
when mixing by a central plant is required the clay shall be pulverized and shall meet the following requirements based on undried weight just prior to blending with the gravel when tested in accordance with sd num .
sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num num num milled reclaimed and salvaged material new section num page num num general requirements the material shall conform to the specifications for the particular material required by the contract .
the specific requirements contained in section num shall apply to the specified material at the time of use or incorporation into the final product .
the milled reclaimed and salvaged material shall not contain clay balls or organic debris .
num specific requirements a .
cold milled asphalt concrete cold milled asphalt concrete material shall conform to the gradation requirements for the specified use of the cold milled asphalt concrete material .
the contractor may be required to crush oversized material to obtain the quantities required in the plans .
b .
cold milled asphalt concrete and placing cold milled material cold milled asphalt concrete material placed directly from the cold milling operation into the final product as indicated by the bid item shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num c. reclaimed asphalt pavement rap num .
rap in asphalt concrete rap used in asphalt concrete production shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num .
rap in cold in place recycling the rap used in cold in place recycling shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num d. salvaged material num .
subbase salvaged subbase salvaged shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num milled reclaimed and salvaged material new section page num num .
base course salvaged base course salvaged shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num .
base course salvaged asphalt mix material base course salvaged asphalt mix material shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num .
gravel cushion salvaged gravel cushion salvaged shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num .
gravel surfacing salvaged gravel surfacing salvaged shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num .
salvage and stockpile asphalt mix material asphalt mix material salvaged and placed into a stockpile shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num .
salvage and stockpile asphalt mix and granular base material asphalt mix and granular base material salvaged and placed into a stockpile shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num .
salvage and stockpile granular material granular material salvaged and placed into a stockpile shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num milled reclaimed and salvaged material new section num page num e. full depth reclamation fdr the asphalt mix and granular base material shall meet the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num sampling and testing sampling sd num gradation sd num num asphalt material page num num general requirements transporting conveyances for asphalt material shall be free of contaminating material .
a record of material hauled the previous load in truck transport tanks shall be furnished as a prerequisite to loading .
a determination shall be made if the previously hauled material is compatible with the material to be loaded or if cleaning of the tank is required to prevent contamination .
all sampling shall be performed in accordance with sd num .
if the material is to be used prior to testing by the department the asphalt material supplier shall furnish two copies of a certificate of compliance for each tank car truck tank or other individual conveyance .
the certificate of compliance shall show all information contained on form dotnum and a properly executed certification statement .
temperatures to provide kinematic viscosities of num centistokes and num centistokes for mixing application and num centistokes and num centistokes for spray application shall be furnished with the first load of each type of asphalt material delivered to the project on or along with the certificate of compliance .
upon presentation of a certificate of compliance the engineer may permit incorporation into the work the asphalt material covered by the certificate .
permission by the engineer to use asphalt material shall not be construed as an acceptance of the material .
acceptance of asphalt material will be based on test results from the samples obtained .
asphalt material tested and accepted for use on a project and transferred by the contractor to another project may be accepted for use in the terminating project on the basis of the test results of the originating project .
the contractor must request and receive from the engineer of the originating project prior to transfer a letter of transfer covering the material .
dotnum num specific requirements a .
rapid curing cutback asphalt shall conform to aashto m num .
b .
medium curing cutback asphalt shall conform to aashto m num .
c. slow curing cutback asphalt shall conform to the following requirements .
num .
the oil shall be uniform in appearance and consistency and shall show no foaming when heated to the application temperature .
the residue of specified penetration shall be smooth and homogeneous in appearance .
num .
the grade of liquid asphaltic material specified shall conform to the requirements shown in the following table .
asphalt material num page num requirement test method scnum scnum scnum scnum min max min max min max min max kinematic viscosity at numfnum centistokes aashto t num num num num num num num num num flash point num f aashto t num num num num num asphalt residue of num pen .
percent by weight sd num num num num num ductility of num pen .
residue numf num cm .
per min .
cm aashto t num num num num num solubility in trichlorethylene percent aashto t num num num num num spot testnum aashto t num negative for all grades num as an alternative sayboltfurol viscosities may be specified as follows grade scnum furol viscosity at numc num to num sec .
grade scnum furol viscosity at numc num to num sec .
grade scnum furol viscosity at numc num to num sec .
grade scnum furol viscosity at numc num to num sec .
num if flash point is anticipated to be above numf test shall be performed in accordance with aashto t num .
num the use of the spot test is optional .
when specified the engineer shall indicate whether the standard naphtha solvent the naphtha xylene solvent or the heptane xylene solvent will be used in determining compliance with the requirement and in the case of xylene solvent the percentage of xylene to be used .
d. performance graded asphalt binder shall conform to aashto m num and the combined state binder group method of acceptance for asphalt binders available from the departments bituminous engineer .
the asphalt binder shall if necessary be blended at the terminal with permissible additives styrenebutadiene styrene sbs or styrenebutadiene rubber sbr necessary to meet the specifications .
the supplier shall assign the modifying process with a unique name and type of modification and shall provide the actual modifier modifying process and unique name to the departments bituminous engineer and the departments certification engineer for tracking and monitoring purposes .
the unique name of the modifying process shall then be listed on the certificate of compliance .
air blown asphalts acid modifiers and other modifiers will not be allowed unless approved by the departments bituminous engineer .
shrp performance graded asphalt binders pg num pg num pg num pg num num and pg num shall also meet the following requirements num asphalt material page num test specification test method elastic recovery rtfo residue numf min num aashto t num e. emulsified asphalt shall conform to aashto m num with the following exceptions .
when ssnumh emulsified asphalt is specified for tack or flush seal coat the cement mixing test requirement is waived .
the sieve test requirement on representative samples will be waived unless requested by the engineer .
aenums aenuml aenums aenum min max min max min max min max tests on emulsions viscosity saybolt furol at numf s num num num num num num num num sieve test num num num num oil portion num num num num num residue by distillation num num num num tests on residue from distillation tests penetration numf num g nums num num num num num num ductility numf num cmmin cm num num num num solubility in trichloroethylene num num num num float test numf s num num num num num distillation as described in t num with the following modifications material shall be brought to a temperature of numf numf for a period of num minutes .
total time to distill including the numminute hold period shall not exceed num minutes .
f. cationic emulsified asphalt shall conform to aashto m num with the following exceptions .
when cssnumh is specified for tack or flush seal coat the cement mixing test requirement is waived .
the sieve test shall have a maximum percentage of num for samples taken at point of use .
the sieve test requirement on representative samples will be waived unless requested by the engineer .
the demulsibility test shall be made within num days from the date of shipment .
g. polymer modified emulsified asphalt shall conform to aashto m num with the following exceptions .
the sieve test requirement on representative samples will be waived unless requested by the engineer .
asphalt material num page num hfmsnump hfrsnump crsnump min max min max min max tests on emulsions viscosity saybolt furol numf num num num num num num classification test passes particle charge test positive sieve num num num num demulsibility numml num n caclnum num demulsibility numml num n caclnum num demulsibility numml num sodium dioctylsulfosucinate num oil distillate by volume of emulsionnum num num num residue by distillation num num num tests on residue from distillation tests penetration numf num num num num num num ductility numf numcmmin .
cm num num num softening point rb f num num num elastic recovery numfnum num num num float test numf sec num num solubility in trichloroethylene num num a maximum percentage of num is acceptable for samples taken at the point of use .
num the distillation test for crsnump emulsion shall be in accordance with aashto t num except that the distillation temperature shall be what the emulsion manufacturer recommends .
num the elastic recovery test shall be in accordance with aashto t num except that the residue will be obtained by distillation not oven evaporation .
the distillation temperature shall be as recommended by the emulsion manufacturer .
num asphalt material page num h. petroleum resinoil base emulsion shall conform to the following requirements test limits test method min max tests on emulsions sayboltfurol viscosity at numf seconds num num aashto t num miscibility no coagulation aashto t num sieve test .num aashto t num partial charge positive residue percent num aashto t num tests on residue from distillation tests kinematic viscosity at numf centistokes num num aashto t num num test procedure identical with aashto t num except normal calcium chloride solution shall be used in place of distilled water .
num test procedure identical with aashto t num except distilled water shall be used in place of num sodium oleate solution .
num aashto t num residue by evaporation test for percent residue is made by heating a num gram sample to numf num c until foaming ceases then immediately cooled and results calculated .
the material shall have the capability of increasing the ductility and penetration of the asphalt binder in an asphalt concrete surface when applied at the specified rate .
diluted petroleum resinoil based emulsion shall be diluted with potable water in the ratio of approximately two parts emulsion to one part water by volume .
the diluted emulsion shall have a minimum residue of num .
dust control chlorides num page num num dust control chlorides dust control chlorides shall conform to the following specification requirements a bill of lading shall accompany each delivery of calcium chloride or magnesium chloride .
the bill of lading shall contain the following information num .
the gallons of solution .
num .
the weight of the solution .
num .
the percent concentration by weight of anhydrous calcium chloride or anhydrous magnesium chloride .
num .
the specific gravity and temperature of the solution at the time of loading .
each delivery of material to be used will be sampled by the department and submitted for a chemical analysis to the departments materials surfacing central laboratory .
num rightofway fence page num num requirements a .
steel posts steel posts shall be painted t type studded steel posts complete with anchor plates and fastenings .
reflectorized paint will not be permitted in painting posts .
steel posts shall conform to aashto m num .
b .
wood posts wood posts shall be douglas fir inter mountain or pacific coast or pine jack lodgepole ponderosa norway or southern from sound seasoned stock .
gate latch posts and stiffeners shall be from the same stock listed above .
wood posts and lumber shall be treated in accordance with the provisions of section num .
wood posts shall be stripped of all outer and inner bark prior to receiving treatment .
c. barbed wire barbed wire shall be composed of two main strands of num gauge wire with round barbs of num gauge wire .
the main strands of wire shall be twisted together in a continuous twist throughout the full length of each roll of wire .
twopoint barbs shall be wrapped twice around one main strand at num inch spacings and the fourpoint barbs shall be interlocked and wrapped around both main strands at num inch spacings .
the wire shall be galvanized and shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
the zinc coating on the wire shall be class i. d. woven wire the vertical stay wires shall be securely welded or fastened to the line wires .
the fencing shall be galvanized and shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
the zinc coating on the wire shall be class i. e. staples and ties staples shall be the standard type a minimum of num inches long made from num gauge galvanized wire .
ties or clamps for fastening the woven wires or barbed wires to steel posts shall be made from a minimum of num gauge galvanized wire .
f. brace wire diagonal brace wires in panels shall be made from num loops num strands of num gauge galvanized wire .
g. brace wrap wire brace wrap wire shall be two turns of num gage wire or three turns of num gauge wire .
chain link fence num page num num chain link fence chain link fence material shall conform to aashto m num .
chain link fabric posts rails ties bands bars rods and other fittings and hardware shall be type i .
chain link fabric shall be num gauge .
posts rail and gate frames shall be grade num or num .
grade num posts if used shall have an exterior pvc coating conforming to class a or an exterior coating of hotdip zinc plus an organic topcoat and a zinc rich or hotdip zinc interior coating .
the fabric shall have a class c coating .
tension wire shall be class num .
num wood preservatives and preservative treatments page num num requirements a .
general the preservative treatment shall be in compliance with the epa aashto m num and the awpa standard unum referenced in aashto m num and described below .
commodity specification a sawn productsnum commodity specification b post commodity specification d poles commodity specification e round timber piling num guardrail posts and blocks shall be treated with retention specifications from commodity specification b use category numb .
b. preservative selection num .
sawed posts round posts poles and lumber in contact with the ground shall be treated with creosote ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate copper naphthenate pentachlorophenol or chromated copper arsenate .
num .
lumber not in contact with the ground shall be treated with ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate copper naphthenate pentachlorophenol or chromated copper arsenate .
num .
round timber piling shall be treated with creosote copper naphthenate or pentachlorophenol .
c. western red cedar wood preservative treatment for western red cedar is not required and shall be exempt from the above requirements .
timber piling num page num num timber piling timber piling shall conform to astm dnum except as follows the circumferences of piles measured under the bark shall have minimum and maximum values as shown in table below .
circumferences and diameters of timber piles length in feet num feet from butt tip minimum maximum minimum circumference inches diameter approximate inches circumference inches diameter approximate inches circumference inches diameter approximate inches douglas fir hemlock pine spruce or tamarack under num num incl .
num incl .
num incl .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num oak and other hardwoods cypress under num num incl .
over num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num cedar under num num incl .
over num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num piles shall be furnished cut to any of the following lengths as specified by the engineer num feet num feet num feet num feet and in multiples of num feet for piles longer than num feet .
order lengths of num feet and num feet may be obtained by cutting num foot and num foot piles .
piling so obtained will be driven full length and cut off after bearing for the first pile is obtained .
the remaining cutoff will be used as the second pile .
the requirements of the preceding paragraph shall apply to the original full length pile only .
piling shall be treated in accordance with section num .
num steel structures material page num num general these specifications apply to bolted and welded construction .
num structural steel structural steel shall be furnished according to the following specifications .
unless otherwise specified all structural steel furnished shall conform to aashto m num astm anum .
when astm anum structural steel with a t or an f and a temperature zone is specified the structural steel shall be charpy impact tested to the specified zone .
sampling and testing procedures shall be in accordance with astm anum utilizing h frequency testing for grade num num and numw steels and utilizing p frequency testing for grade num and numw steels .
for grade num and numw steels if the yield point of the material exceeds num ksi the temperature for the cvn value for acceptability shall be reduced by numf for each increment of num ksi above num ksi .
a. highstrength bolts highstrength bolts shall conform to section num .
b. welded stud shear connectors shear connector studs shall conform to the requirements of section num type b of the latest edition of the ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code and the following .
finished studs shall be of uniform quality and condition free from injurious laps fins seams cracks twists bends or other injurious defects .
finish shall be as produced by cold drawing cold rolling or machining .
the manufacturer shall certify that the studs as delivered are in accordance with the material requirements of this section .
certified copies of inplant quality control test reports shall be furnished upon request .
the engineer may select at the contractors expense studs of each type and size used under the contract as necessary for checking the requirements of this section .
c. tubular steel piles tubular steel piles shall conform to astm anum grade num with chemical requirements meeting astm anum grade b .
num steel forgings and steel shafting a .
steel forgings steel forgings shall conform to aashto m num astm anum classes c d f or g. b .
cold finished carbon steel shafting cold finished carbon steel shafting shall conform to aashto m num astm anum .
grade num inclusive shall be steel structures material num page num furnished .
num galvanizing when specified ferrous metal products shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto m num astm anum .
num preformed fabric pads preformed fabric pads shall be composed of multiple layers of num ounce cotton duck impregnated and bound with highquality natural rubber or of equivalent and equally suitable materials compressed into resilient pads of uniform thickness .
the number of plies shall be such as to produce the specified thickness after compression and vulcanizing .
the finished pads shall withstand compression loads perpendicular to the plane of the laminations of not less than num pounds per square inch without reduction in thickness or extrusion .
num bronze or copperalloy bearing and expansion plates the sliding surfaces of these plates shall be finished in the direction of the motion to ansi bnum num .
this surface shall be bored on a geometric pattern of recesses and be lubricated with a material suitable for longlife service of the sliding face .
the lubricated area shall comprise approximately num of the bearing face to provide coefficient of friction not to exceed num for loads of num to num psi .
the edges of the plate shall be chamfered num inch .
a .
bronze bearing and expansion plates bronze bearing and expansion plates shall conform to aashto m num astm bnum alloy num .
b .
rolled copperalloy bearings and expansion plates rolled copperalloy bearing and expansion plates shall conform to aashto m num astm bnum alloy num or num .
num bolts page num num requirements these specifications shall apply to all high strength bolts anchor bolts and anchor rods .
num specific requirements a .
general all bolts anchor bolts anchor rods nuts and washers shall have the manufacturer marking on them .
the supplier shall provide the symbol and address of each bolt anchor bolt anchor rod nut and washer manufacturer .
the supplier and contractor shall maintain the identification and integrity of fasteners supplied under either the production lot or shipping lot method .
all certificates test reports and shipping containers shall be identified with the appropriate lot identification number .
the contractor shall either preassemble bolts anchor bolts anchor rods nuts and washers according to the certified rotational capacity tests or indicate how he plans to maintain the integrity of the lots through installation .
the suppliers certification shall provide a lot number which shall match the shipping package .
the certification shall provide all test results and shall indicate when and where all testing was done including the rotational capacity tests and the zinc coating thickness .
nuts for mechanically galvanized fasteners shall be overtapped to the minimum amount required for fastener assembly .
all bolts nuts washers and direct tension indicators shall be mechanically galvanized in accordance with astm bnum class num .
when direct tension indicators are used adjacent to weathering steel the direct tension indicators shall be mechanically galvanized in accordance with astm bnum class num and epoxy coated in accordance with astm fnum .
mechanically galvanized nuts shall be lubricated with a lubricant containing a visible dye .
the test data referred to in num of astm anum and num and num of anum shall be furnished .
b .
high strength bolts bolts shall conform to astm anum .
nuts shall conform to astm anum dh or astm anum numh .
washers shall conform to astm fnum .
bolts num page num direct tension indicators shall conform to astm fnum for the grade of the bolt specified .
highstrength bolts for structural steel joints shall conform to either astm anum or astm anum .
when astm anum type num bolts are specified they along with nuts and washers shall have an atmospheric corrosion resistance approximately two times that of carbon steel with copper .
bolt and nut dimensions shall conform to the dimensions shown in table num and to the requirements for heavy hexagon structural bolts or heavy semifinished hexagon nuts given in ansi standard bnum and bnum respectively .
table num heavy hexagon structural bolts inch heavy semifinished hexagon nuts inch nominal bolt size width across flats height thread length width across flats height d f h t w h num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num circular washers shall be flat and smooth and their nominal dimensions shall conform to the dimensions given in table num except that for lock pin and collar fasteners flat washers need not be used unless slotted or oversized holes are specified .
beveled washers for american standard beams and channels or other sloping faces shall be required and shall be square or rectangular shall taper in thickness and shall conform to the dimensions given in table num .
num bolts page num table num washer dimensions inch circular washers square or rectangular beveled washers for american standard beams and channels bolt size d nominal outside diameternum nominal diameter of hole thickness side min mean dimen .
taper in thickness slope of thickness min .
max .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num over num to num inclusive numdnum dnum num num num may be exceeded by num inch num num inch nominal num num inch nominal where necessary washers may be clipped on one side to a point not closer than num of the bolt diameter from the center of the washer .
other fasteners or fastener assemblies which meet the materials manufacturing and chemical composition requirements of astm anum or astm anum and which meet the mechanical property requirements of the same specification in fullsize tests and which have body diameter and bearing areas under the head and nut or their diameter and bearing areas under the head and nut or their equivalent not less than those provided by a bolt and nut of the same nominal dimensions prescribed in the previous paragraph may be used .
such alternate fasteners may differ in other dimensions from those of the specified bolts and nuts .
their installation procedure may differ from those specified in section num g.num.d .
and their inspection may differ from that specified in section num g.num.f .
when a different installation procedure or inspection is used it shall be detailed in a supplemental specification prepared by the bolt manufacturer applying to the alternate fastener and that specification must be approved by the engineer .
c. anchor bolts and anchor rods bolts or rods conforming to astm anum and fnum are allowed to be used for anchor bolts and anchor rods .
other materials may be submitted for approval providing the following information is submitted num .
the allowable stresses that are to be used for design based on the proposed material .
bolts num page num num .
minimum average charpy vnotch impact values for num ftlb at numf in accordance with astm anum .
num .
ultimate wedge tensile strength in accordance with astm anum .
num .
yield strength reports in accordance with astm anum .
anchor bolts and anchor rods shall be either threaded full length or equipped with a satisfactory mechanical end anchorage .
details for any mechanical end anchorage shall be included in the shop plans submittal for prior approval .
swaged anchor bolts and anchor rods and anchor bolts and anchor rods with hooked end anchorage are not allowed .
the anchor bolt and anchor rod threads shall be three inches plus the projection .
at least three num inches of threads shall be below the top of the concrete .
rolled unc threads are required for all anchor bolts and anchor rods .
nuts shall conform to astm anum numh or astm anum dh .
all nuts are to be heavy hex .
jam nuts shall conform to astm anum grade a. washers shall conform to astm fnum .
direct tension indicators shall conform to astm fnum for the grade of the bolt specified .
direct tension indicators shall be mechanically galvanized in accordance with astm bnum class num .
anchor bolts anchor rods nuts and washers shall be hot dipped galvanized or mechanically galvanized .
anchor bolts and anchor rods shall be galvanized the full length .
d. bolt anchor bolt and anchor rod testing bolt anchor bolt and anchor rod testing shall conform to the following when bolts anchor bolts or anchor rods conforming to astm anum anum anum fnum are designated for use in the plans or shop plans a certified mill test report for each type designated shall be submitted for approval to the certification engineer a minimum of num days prior to incorporating these bolts into the work .
certified mill test reports for nuts washers direct tension indicators and other required hardware shall be included .
the certified mill test reports for the bolts anchor bolts and anchor rods shall include test results tested in accordance with the applicable astm specifications for the following num bolts page num test anum anum anum fnum others chemical analysis x x x x x hardness test x x x x tensile strengthnum by wedge test method x x x x x proof load testnum x x x x x rotational capacity testnum x charpy vnotchnum x x note the requirements set forth in this table are to alert the contractor to the requirements for testing and certification as specified in the applicable astm specifications and are not intended to alter the requirements of the astm specifications .
num certified mill test report shall state that wedge test method was used .
for astm anum and anum bolts the wedge test method is required only for square and hexagon head bolts .
the wedge test method is not required for astm fnum bolts .
see appropriate specifications .
num proof load test andor yield test as allowed or specified by the applicable astm specification .
num rotational capacity test required for zinc coated galvanized bolts only .
this test shall be conducted using the actual nuts used on the project .
num anchor bolts conforming to astm fnum grade num shall satisfy supplemental requirement snum .
anchor bolts conforming to astm fnum grade num shall satisfy supplemental requirement snum .
proof load tests on bolts nuts anchor bolts and anchor rods in accordance with astm fnum method num are required .
wedge testing of full size bolts and anchor rods is required in accordance with astm anum .
galvanized bolts and anchor bolts shall be wedge tested after galvanizing .
proof load tests for the nuts shall be performed after galvanizing overtapping and lubricating .
paint num page num num traffic paint the finished paint shall be smooth and homogeneous free of coarse particles skins or any other foreign materials detrimental to the use or appearance of the paint .
the vehicle shall be composed of a num acrylic polymer such as rohm and haas rhophlex fastrack num dow dtnum or an approved equal .
a. quantitative requirements the finished paint shall meet the following quantitative requirements white yellow lead parts per million num max .
num max .
astm dnum or xray fluorescence pigment percent by weight num num num num tested in accordance with astm dnum the residual extracted pigment upon analysis shall conform to the following quantitative compositional requirements when tested in accordance with astm dnum or astm dnum .
titanium dioxide poundsgallon num min .
num min .
astm d num type ii rutile num min .
tinum tested in accordance with astm dnum or astm dnum total solids percent by weight num min .
num min .
tested in accordance with astm dnum nonvolatile vehicle percent by weight num min .
num min .
tested in accordance with nist numc method num consistency grams num to num num to num krebsstormer shearing rate num rpm .
equivalent k.u .
num to num num to num tested in accordance with astm dnum num the consistency of the paint shall be within the stated specification when determined a minimum num hours after packaging the material .
weight per gallon pounds tested in accordance with astm dnum rohm haas num min .
num min .
dow dt numna num min .
num min .
num in addition to compliance with the minimum the weight per gallon shall not vary more than num poundsgallon between batches .
num paint page num fineness of dispersion hegman scale num min .
num min .
tested in accordance with astm dnum b cleanliness b cleanliness drying time no pickup minutes num max .
num max .
tested in accordance with astm dnum except the wet film thickness shall be num num mils .
the applied film shall be immediately placed in a laboratory drying chamber maintaining the relative humidity of num num the temperature num numf and air flow less than num foot per minute .
drying time drythrough minutesnum num max .
num max .
tested in accordance with astm dnum except the wet film thickness shall be num num mils .
the applied film shall be immediately placed in a laboratory drying chamber maintaining the relative humidity at num num and the temperature at num numf .
the pressure exerted will be the minimum needed to maintain contact between the thumb and film .
a reference control paint will be run in conjunction with the candidate paint .
rohm and haas formulation will be referencedcontrol paint .
num if either the candidate or referencecontrol paint exceeds the num minute maximum then the candidate paint shall not exceed the dry time of the referencecontrol paint by more than num minutes .
field drying time trackfree minutes .
num max .
num max .
when applied under the following conditions the line shall show no visual tracking when viewed from num feet after driving a passenger vehicle over the line at a speed of num mph fifteen mils wet film thickness eight pounds of glass beads per gallon of paint paint temperature at nozzle between num to numf pavement dry pavement temperature num to numf relative humidity of num maximum directional reflectance num min .
num min .
when applied at a wet film thickness of num mils and when tested in accordance with astm enum illuminate c numo ph num min .
num min .
tested in accordance with astm enum dry opacity contrast ratio .
num min .
num min .
when applied at a wet film thickness of num to num mils and when tested in accordance with nist numc method num illuminate c numo volatile organic content voc gramsliter num max .
num max .
tested in accordance with astm dnum flash point closed cup f num min .
num min .
color the paint shall meet the color specification limits and luminance factors listed in tables num num when tested in accordance with astm enum or astm enum .
the paint paint num page num shall not discolor in sunlight and shall maintain the colors and luminance factors throughout the life of the paint .
no bayferrox num iron oxides or other color enhancers will be permitted to achieve the color chromaticity coordinates .
table num color chromaticity coordinates corner points min .
luminance factor y x y x y x y x y white num num num num num num num num num yellow num num num num num num num num num num daytime color specification limits and luminance factors for pavement markings material with cie num standard observer and num num geometry and cie standard illuminant dnum table num color chromaticity coordinates corner points num num num num x y x y x y x y white num num num num num num num num yellow num num num num num num num num num nighttime color specification limits for pavement marking retroreflective material with cie num standard observer observation angle num entrance angle num and cie standard illuminant a .
b. qualitative requirements the finished paint shall meet the following qualitative requirements condition in container storage stability .
within a period of num months from the time of delivery and when examined in accordance with nist numc method num the paint shall not show excessive settling in a freshlyopened full can and shall be easily redispersed with a paddle to a smooth homogeneous state .
the paint shall show no undesirable characteristics to include curdling livering caking gelling or thixotropic properties lumps skins or color separation .
the consistency shall not change more than num kreb units from that of the original sample the degree of settling shall have a rating of num or better and the drying time shall be as specified .
skinning .
the paint shall not skin within num hours in a threequarter filled tightly closed container when examined in accordance with nist numc method num .
flexibility and adhesion .
the paint shall show no cracking flaking or loss of adhesion when tested as specified .
apply a wet film thickness of num inches with a film applicator to a num inch x num inch tin panel weighing num to num pounds per square foot previously cleaned with benzene and lightly buffed with steel wool .
dry the paint film at num to numf in a horizontal position for num hours then bake in an oven at num numf for two hours and cool to room temperature for at least num hour .
bend over a num inch diameter rod and examine without magnification in accordance with nist numc method num .
water resistance .
the paint shall show no softening blistering loss of adhesion or other evidence of deterioration other than a slight loss in gloss when tested as specified .
apply a wet film thickness of num inches with a film applicator to a clean glass plate .
dry the paint film at num to numf in a horizontal position for num hours .
num paint page num immerse onehalf of the painted plate in distilled water in a vertical position at room temperature num to numf for num hours in accordance with nist numc method num .
remove the painted plate from the immersion liquid allow to air dry for two hours and then examine .
dilution stability .
the paint shall be capable of dilution with water with no separation curdling or precipitation observed when examined in accordance with nist numc method num such that the wet paint can be readily cleanable with only water .
spraying properties .
the paint as received shall have satisfactory spraying and hiding properties when applied by either airless or airassisted type traffic stripers to glass or metal plates at a wet film thickness of num inches .
bleeding .
the paint shall have a minimum bleeding ratio of num when tested in accordance with federal specification ttpnum b .
the asphalt saturated felt shall conform to astm d num type i. freezethaw stability .
the paint shall show no coagulation or change in consistency greater than num kreb units when tested in accordance with federal specification ttp num b .
heat stability .
the paint shall show no coagulation discoloration or change in consistency greater than num kreb units when tested in accordance with federal specification ttpnum b .
the degree of settling shall have a rating of num or better when evaluated in accordance with astm dnum .
abrasion resistance .
no less than num liters of sand shall be required for removal of the paint film when tested in accordance with federal specification ttpnum b .
the manufacturer shall submit a certificate of compliance for each batch of paint produced for use under this specification .
the certification shall contain the manufacturers code number and batch number along with the test results of each batch for weight per gallon viscosity drying time percent pigment percent vehicle and fineness of grind .
glass beads num page num num general requirements glass beads for use with pavement marking paint shall be moisture resistant and shall meet the requirements of aashto m num type ii .
the glass beads shall be without floatation properties .
the glass beads shall have dual surface treatment consisting of a moisture resistant silicone treatment and silane adherence surface treatment .
the glass beads shall have a minimum of num true spheres .
roundness shall be tested in accordance with sd num .
num materials for highway signs and delineators page num num general requirements a certificate of compliance shall be furnished for each material item and shall state that the item conforms to the required specification with reference being made to the appropriate specification number .
num specific requirements a .
signs num .
sheet aluminum sheet aluminum shall meet the requirements of astm bnum for alloy numhnum or alloy numtnum .
the aluminum shall be properly degreased and etched or treated with a light tight amorphous chromate coating .
sheet aluminum thickness requirements shall be based on the maximum horizontal in place dimension of each sheet aluminum sign in accordance with the following horizontal dimension of in place sign blank required sign blank thickness num inches and less num inch over num inches num inch sheet aluminum for signs used to overlay other sign surfaces shall have a thickness of num inch .
cutout aluminum backing for removable letters numerals symbols and borders shall be a minimum of num inch thick aluminum sheet of alloy numtnum or alloy numhnum .
route markers for use on guide signs shall be num inch thick aluminum sheet of alloy numtnum .
the sheared edges of blanks shall be straight and free from tears and raggedness .
num .
extruded aluminum extruded aluminum shall meet the requirements of astm bnum for alloy numtnum or alloy numtnum .
no more than one num inch wide panel shall be used in any sign .
num .
sign molding side trim molding shall be an aluminum extrusion designed for the sign panel extrusion with which it is used and shall conform to astm bnum for alloy numtnum or alloy numtnum .
the sign molding shall be of the same color as the sign face it accompanies .
num .
connections u clamp connections shall be fabricated from astm anum steel .
the steel shall be galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
fabrication shall be completed prior to galvanizing .
zbars and angles used to mount sheet aluminum signs shall meet the requirements of astm bnum for alloy numtnum .
post clips for wide flange posts shall meet the requirements of astm bnum for alloy numtnum .
materials for highway signs and delineators num page num bolts nuts and washers for mounting signs to aluminum backing hardware shall be aluminum conforming to the following bolts alloy numtnum astm b num hex nuts alloy numtnum astm b num lock nuts alloy numtnum astm b num washers alloy numtnum astm b num bolts and nuts for attaching signs or attaching sign backing hardware to wood posts shall conform to astm anum and astm anum .
washers shall conform to astm fnum .
bolts nuts and washers shall be galvanized in accordance with astm fnum .
num .
shop plans prior to fabrication the contractor shall submit shop plans for all signs where sign design is specified in the plans to the department for the departments review and approval .
the contractor shall send an email with the shop plans attached as a pdf to the project engineer and region traffic engineer .
upon request the project engineer will provide the contractor the appropriate email addresses .
the contractor shall not begin fabrication prior to the departments review and final approval of shop plans .
within num calendar days of receiving the initial shop plans the region traffic engineer will send a response with the departments final approval or one reviewed copy of the shop plans to the contractor and submitter with changes to the design marked .
the contractor will make the necessary changes if any to the shop plans .
the contractor will then send the project engineer and the region traffic engineer an email with the final shop plans as a pdf for distribution .
b. perforated tube posts post material shall meet impact performance change in momentum requirements for small sign supports contained in the current aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaries and traffic signals .
perforated tube posts shall conform to astm anum grade num structural steel .
posts shall be a square tube formed of num gauge steel num inch thick rolled to size .
the tubing shall be molded so the weld or flash does not interfere with telescoping .
the posts shall be hot dipped galvanized with a num ounce per square foot coating conforming to astm anum .
as an alternate the post shall be given a triple coated protection by application of hot dip galvanized zinc conforming to astm anum followed by a chromate conversion coating and a polyurethane exterior coating with inside surfaces given corrosion protection by inline application of zinc base organic coating after fabrication .
the posts shall be punched bored or have knockouts with num inch diameter holes on num inch centers of all four sides for the entire length of the posts .
the post sections shall be straight with a smooth uniform finish and a minimum amount of play between telescoping sections .
holes and cutoff ends shall be free of burrs and ragged edges .
num materials for highway signs and delineators page num bolts nuts and washers shall conform to astm anum astm anum and astm fnum respectively and shall be galvanized in accordance with astm bnum .
c. steel posts num .
structural steel posts and stiffeners shall conform to astm anum .
pipe posts shall conform to astm anum type e or s grade b astm anum or astm anum grade b .
num .
steel posts structural and pipe and stiffeners shall be galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
welding punching and boring of the steel posts shall be done before galvanizing .
num .
cantilever structural supports shall be fabricated steel in accordance with the following a .
shapes plates bars sheets and strips equal to or over num inches thick shall conform to astm anum grade num or astm anum .
sheets and strips under num inches thick shall conform to astm anum grade num. b .
pole and tubular members shall conform to astm anum grade num and grade num anum grade b anum anum grade num or anum grade a or b. anum material shall be limited to num inch maximum thickness .
structural support material with a thickness of num inch to num inches shall satisfy charpy vnotch toughness test requirements of num footpounds at numf .
for material over num inches contact the office of bridge design for charpy impact requirements .
num .
highstrength bolts for structural steel joints including nuts and washers shall conform to astm anum in accordance with section num .
d. wood posts wood posts shall be western red cedar .
they shall be construction grade in compliance with the standard grading rules of the western wood products association .
posts shall be surfaced four sides .
e. sign bridges and overhead cantilever sign supports sign bridges and overhead cantilever sign supports shall be constructed in accordance with the details in the plans and at the locations shown .
num .
design specifications the current edition of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals including all subsequent interims .
a .
wind load shall be calculated using the num year mean recurrence interval basic wind speed .
b .
the cantilever supports including anchor bolts shall be designed for fatigue in accordance with fatigue importance category i .
this is to include truckinduced materials for highway signs and delineators num page num gust loads natural wind gust loads and unless installed with approved vibration mitigation devices shall also include galloping loads .
details for any proposed vibration mitigation devices must be submitted with the shop plans for approval by the department prior to fabrication .
supporting documentation historical and research data verifying the damping characteristics of the specific mitigation device for the intended structural support application must accompany the submittal .
num .
general a. cantilever arms shall be truss type members .
monotube or single member arms are not allowed .
b .
no splices of any kind will be permitted in the vertical pole members .
c. truss type sign supports shall have a minimum of num anchor bolts .
d. anchor bolts and rods shall be provided with leveling nuts top nuts washers and jam nuts .
e. all members and components shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with astm anum anum or fnum as applicable .
num .
shop plans prior to fabrication the contractor shall submit shop plans to the department for the departments review and approval .
the contractor shall send an email with the shop plans attached as a pdf and comprehensive design calculations for the sign support structure including anchor bolts signed and sealed by a sd registered professional engineer to the project engineer the region traffic engineer and the bridge construction engineer .
upon request the project engineer will provide the contractor the appropriate email addresses .
the contractor shall not begin fabrication prior to the departments review and final approval of shop plans .
within num calendar days of receiving the initial shop plans the bridge construction engineer will send the departments approval or one reviewed copy of the shop plans to the contractor and submitter with changes to the design marked .
the contractor will make the necessary changes if any to the shop plans .
the contractor will then send the project engineer and the bridge construction engineer an email with the final shop plans as a pdf for distribution .
num .
fabrication a. welding and weld inspection shall be done in accordance with the latest edition of ansiaws dnum structural welding code .
b .
approved welding procedure specifications wps are required for all welding .
wpss shall be based upon procedure qualification testing pqt in accordance with the latest edition of ansiaws dnum structural welding code .
num materials for highway signs and delineators page num c. the steel poletobaseplate connection shall be a fullpenetration groovewelded connection with a backing ring as described in the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
d. if welded connections are used subsequent to galvanizing the weld details and the procedure for preparing the surface for welding and repainting the galvanizing with zincrich paint after welding shall be included with the shop plans .
e. the sddot bridge construction engineer shall be notified as to what date fabrication will begin .
this notification shall be provided a minimum of num calendar days prior to fabrication .
the bridge construction engineer will at that time arrange for fabrication inspection .
fabrication shall not begin until authorization has been given by the departments bridge construction engineer .
f. fixed base assemblies num .
base plates base plates shall conform to astm anum .
the base plates shall be galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
welding punching and boring of the base plates shall be done before galvanizing .
num .
anchor bolts and rods anchor bolts rods and nuts shall conform to the requirements of astm fnum grade num .
bolts rods nuts and washers shall be galvanized in accordance with astm fnum .
g. slip base assemblies num .
base plates and friction fuse plates base plates and friction fuse plates shall conform to astm anum .
the plates shall be galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
welding punching and boring of the plates shall be done before galvanizing .
num .
bolts nuts and washers bolts hex nuts and washers used in conjunction with base plates or friction fuse plates shall conform to astm anum except num inch and num inch bolts conforming to astm anum are permissible instead of astm anum .
bolts hex nuts and washers shall be covered with zinc coating hot dip galvanized per astm fnum .
num .
shims shims used in conjunction with base plates or friction fuse plates shall be covered with a zinc plating electrodeposited zinc as per astm bnum .
h. reflective sheeting num .
grade the reflective sheeting shall be of high intensity type iv or supervery high intensity type xi conforming to aashto m num astm dnum as specified in the plans .
materials for highway signs and delineators num page num num .
general characteristics the reflective sheeting shall be free from ragged edges cracks and extraneous materials .
there shall be no more than four splices per num yard length .
splices shall be made by overlapping the sheeting a minimum of num inch .
num .
fabrication the background for signs shall be sheet reflective material applied to aluminum backing .
the preparation of the aluminum surface and the sheeting application shall be in complete compliance with the recommendations of the manufacturer .
all legend and border utilizing the color black shall be vinyl or screen printed black nonreflectorized material .
all other legend and border shall be of the same type of sheeting as the background of the same sign .
num .
application reflective sheeting shall be applied to properly prepared aluminum degreased and etched or treated with a light tight amorphous chromate coating with mechanical equipment in a manner prescribed by the sheeting manufacturer .
sign faces comprising two or more pieces or panels of reflective sheeting must be carefully matched for color during sign fabrication to provide uniform appearance and brilliance day and night .
alternate successive width sections of either sheeting or panels must be reversed and consecutive to insure that corresponding edges of reflective sheeting lie adjacent on the finished sign .
reflective sheeting for extruded aluminum sign panels shall be of the pressure sensitive type .
splicing of the sheeting will not be allowed except those splices permitted by the sheeting manufacturer .
the sheeting shall be rolled over the edge of the extrusion num inch to prevent an open surface on the finished sign face .
reflective sheeting for sheet aluminum signs shall be of the pressure sensitive or heat activated type .
splicing of the sheeting will not be allowed except those splices permitted by the sheeting manufacturer .
splices will not be permitted on signs which are screen processed with transparent color .
num .
legend message and borders shall be type reflective material and color specified .
either removable copy or nonremovable copy will be allowed .
nonremovable copy may be screen processed or direct applied .
a. removable copy letters numerals symbols borders and route markers shall be demountable cutout legend consisting of reflective sheeting applied to flat sheet aluminum backing .
letters numerals symbols and borders shall be fabricated using a minimum of num inch thick aluminum sheet of astm bnum numtnum or numhnum alloy .
the aluminum shall be properly degreased and etched or treated with a light tight amorphous chromate coating .
each letter numeral symbol border and route marker shall be supplied with numinch mounting holes at no greater spacing than eight inches on center and shall be secured to the sign surface with numinch aluminum blind rivets .
the heads of the rivets shall be painted the color of the legend .
the finished letters numerals num materials for highway signs and delineators page num symbols borders and route markers shall be clean cut sharp and have essentially a plane surface .
b. nonremovable copy num screen process message and borders shall be processed on reflective sheeting using mechanical equipment materials and operational methods and procedures as prescribed by the sheeting manufacturer .
processing shall be accomplished by the direct or reverse screen method using opaque or transparent processing material as required .
screening may be accomplished either before or after application of the sheeting to the base panels conditional upon the method recommended by the sheeting manufacturer .
freehand painting will not be permitted on any part of the finished sign face .
num direct applied cutout message and borders shall be reflective sheeting or opaque lettering film applied directly to clean dust free reflective sheeting background .
message and borders shall be applied in accordance with the operational methods and procedure prescribed by the sheeting manufacturer .
the finished letters numerals symbols and borders shall be cut with smooth regular outline free from ragged or torn edges .
mounting holes will not be drilled or punched in any part of the nonremovable copy .
num .
color the reflective sheeting shall meet the color specification limits and luminance factors listed in tables num when tested in accordance with astm enum or astm enum .
fluorescent retroreflective materials shall be tested in accordance with astm enum .
the reflective sheeting shall maintain the colors and luminance factors provided in the appropriate tables throughout its service life .
table num color chromaticity coordinates corner points num num num num x y x y x y x y white num num num num num num num num red num num num num num num num num orange num num num num num num num num brown num num num num num num num num yellow num num num num num num num num green num num num num num num num num blue num num num num num num num num table num daytime color specification limits for retroreflective material with cie num standard observer and num num geometry and cie standard illuminant dnum .
materials for highway signs and delineators num page num table num color chromaticity coordinates corner points num num num num x y x y x y x y white num num num num num num num num red num num num num num num num num orange num num num num num num num num brown num num num num num num num num yellow num num num num num num num num green num num num num num num num num blue num num num num num num num num table num nighttime color specification limits for retroreflective material with cie num standard observer and observation angle of num entrance angle of num and cie standard illuminant a .
table num color chromaticity coordinates corner points luminance factor y num num num num x y x y x y x y min max fluorescent orange num num num num num num num num num none fluorescent yellow num num num num num num num num num none fluorescent yellowgreen num num num num num num num num num none fluorescent green num num num num num num num num num num table num daytime color specification limits and luminance factors for fluorescent retroreflective material with cie num standard observer and num num geometry and cie standard illuminant dnum .
table num color chromaticity coordinates corner points num num num num x y x y x y x y fluorescent orange num num num num num num num num fluorescent yellow num num num num num num num num fluorescent yellowgreen num num num num num num num num fluorescent green num num num num num num num num table num nighttime color specification limits for fluorescent retroreflective material with cie num standard observer and observation angle of num entrance angle of num and cie standard illuminant a .
num materials for highway signs and delineators page num i .
concrete footings concrete footings shall conform to section num .
j .
object markers num .
description object markers shall be adhesive coated reflective sheeting permanently bonded to sheet aluminum backing .
object markers shall be of the size and color specified .
type num num num and num object markers shall conform to the following requirements a .
type num object markers shall consist of a yellow num x num reflector unit .
b .
type num object markers shall consist of a yellow num x num or size specified reflector unit .
c. type num object markers shall consist of a yellow and black num x num reflector unit .
the yellow and black stripe pattern shall be num black and num yellow .
d. type num object markers shall consist of a red num x num reflector unit .
num .
reflective sheeting the reflective sheeting shall be supervery high intensity type xi conforming to aashto m num astm dnum .
in addition to the requirements stated above the reflective sheeting shall maintain the colors provided in the appropriate tables contained in section num h.num throughout its service life .
num .
fabrication the aluminum shall be a num inch thick sheet conforming to the requirements of astm b num for alloy numtnum or numhnum .
the aluminum shall be properly degreased and etched or treated with a light tight amorphous chromate coating .
the reflective sheeting shall be applied to properly treated base panels with mechanical equipment in a manner specified by the sheeting manufacturer .
num .
shape and holes object markers shall be punched or sheared to size with num radius corners .
mounting holes shall be as follow a .
type num object markers shall have num holes num inch in diameter num inches center to center .
b .
type num object markers shall have num holes num inch in diameter num inches center to center .
c. type num object markers shall have num holes num inch in diameter num inches center to center .
materials for highway signs and delineators num page num d. type num object markers shall have num holes num inch in diameter num inches center to center .
num .
general requirements the finished object markers shall be free of burrs scratches and damaged reflective sheeting and shall have essentially a plane surface .
num .
object marker posts posts shall be flanged channel section fabricated from hot rolled carbon steel bars or carbon steel bars and shapes produced from standard rail steel .
the posts shall meet the minimum physical properties of astm anum grade num .
the posts shall meet the chemical properties of astm anum for rails num pounds per foot and heavier .
the posts shall be painted with a baked on high quality dark green enamel .
all punching boring cutting or shearing shall be done prior to painting .
prior to any punching or boring the weight of the post shall be a minimum of num pounds per foot with a tolerance of plus or minus num .
the post length shall be as specified within a tolerance of plus or minus num inch .
the delineator post shall be punched or bored with num inch diameter holes on num inch centers beginning num inch from the top of the post .
each post must contain a minimum of num holes .
the post may be punched full length .
the bottom of the post shall be pointed for ease of installation .
the posts shall be machine straightened and have a smooth uniform finish free from defects affecting strength durability or appearance .
the allowable tolerance for straightness shall be num inch in num feet .
k. delineators num .
description delineators shall be adhesive coated reflective sheeting permanently bonded to sheet aluminum backing .
num .
reflective sheeting the reflective sheeting shall be supervery high intensity type xi conforming to aashto m num astm dnum .
in addition to the requirements stated above the reflective sheeting shall maintain the colors provided in the appropriate tables contained in section num h.num throughout its service life .
num .
fabrication the aluminum shall be a num inch thick sheet conforming to the requirements of astm bnum for alloy numtnum or numhnum .
the aluminum shall be properly degreased and etched or treated with a light tight amorphous chromate coating .
the reflective sheeting shall be applied to properly treated base panels with mechanical equipment in a manner specified by the sheeting manufacturer .
num materials for highway signs and delineators page num num .
shape and holes delineators shall be punched or sheared to size with num inch radius corners .
mounting holes shall be as follows a .
the num inch x num inch delineators shall have num holes num inch in diameter num inch center to center on a diagonal line between opposite corners .
b .
the num inch x num inch delineators shall have num holes num inch in diameter num inch center to center along the vertical axis .
num .
general requirements the finished delineators shall be free of burrs scratches and damaged reflective sheeting and shall have essentially a plane surface .
num .
delineator posts posts shall be flanged channel section fabricated from hot rolled carbon steel bars or carbon steel bars and shapes produced from standard rail steel .
the posts shall meet the minimum physical properties of astm anum grade num .
the posts shall meet the chemical properties of astm anum for rails num pounds per foot and heavier .
the posts shall be painted with a baked on high quality dark green enamel .
all punching boring cutting or shearing shall be done prior to painting .
prior to any punching or boring the weight of the post shall be a minimum of num pounds per foot with a tolerance of plus or minus num .
the post length shall be as specified within a tolerance of plus or minus num inch .
the delineator post shall be punched or bored with num inch diameter holes on num inch centers beginning num inch from the top of the post .
each post must contain a minimum of num holes .
the post may be punched full length .
the bottom of the post shall be pointed for ease of installation .
the posts shall be machine straightened and have a smooth uniform finish free from defects affecting strength durability or appearance .
the allowable tolerance for straightness shall be num inch in num feet .
cold applied plastic pavement marking and legends num page num num general this material shall consist of a homogeneous mixture of resins plasticizers fillers pigments and glass beads .
the marking material shall be designed to adhere to portland cement concrete pavement or asphalt concrete pavement .
reflectorized plastic pavement marking shall consist of a homogeneous extruded prefabricated pliant polymer material of specified thickness and width which shall contain abrasion resistant ceramic or ceramic coated beads bonded in a highly durable polyurethane topcoat .
the material shall be fabricated with a patterned surface that presents a near vertical face to traffic to maximize retroreflectance .
the pavement marking material shall be capable of being affixed to the pavement surface by means of a pre coated pressure sensitive adhesive .
an adhesive activator supplied by the manufacturer shall be utilized on applications of this material except on newly installed asphalt when the surface temperature is numf or above or when the material is inlayed at the time asphalt is being installed .
num specific requirements a. reseal test the plastic marking material shall reseal to itself when tested .
cut two num inch x num inch pieces of plastic .
overlap these pieces face to face for an area of num square inch on a flat steel plate with the adhesive backing material remaining in place .
center a num pound weight over the num square inch overlap area and place in an oven at numf for one hour .
after cooling to numf the pieces shall be inseparable without tearing .
b .
pull test the plastic shall require a pull of num to num pounds to break .
the elongation shall be no greater than num .
the specimens for this test shall be type num prepared in accordance with astm dnum .
num square inch pieces of carborundum extra coarse emery cloth or its equivalent may be applied at each end of the test specimens to prevent the plastic adhesive from adhering to the test equipment .
the break resistance shall be based on an average of at least num samples and the rate of pull shall be num inch per minute .
this test shall be conducted at a temperature of num to numf .
c. support test a test specimen cut to dimension of num inch by num inch shall support a dead load of num pounds for num minutes .
this test shall be conducted at a temperature of num to numf .
d. color the plastic marking material shall meet the color specification limits and luminance factors listed in tables num and num when tested in accordance with astm enum or astm enum .
the plastic marking material shall maintain the color and luminance factors provided in the following tables throughout its service life .
num cold applied plastic pavement marking and legends page num table num color chromaticity coordinates corner points luminance factor y x y x y x y x y minimum maximum white num num num num num num num num num yellow num num num num num num num num num red num num num num num num num num num num blue num num num num num num num num num num daytime color specification limits and luminance factors for pavement markings material with cie num standard observer and num num geometry and cie standard illuminant dnum table num color chromaticity coordinates corner points num num num num x y x y x y x y white num num num num num num num num yellow num num num num num num num num nighttime color specification limits for pavement marking retroreflective material with cie num standard observer and observation angle num entrance angle num and cie standard illuminant a temporary traffic control devices num page num num general work zone traffic control devices including signs drums cones tubular markers barricades vertical panels and direction indicator barricades shall be reflectorized with supervery high intensity sheeting applied to a satisfactory backing .
supervery high intensity is defined as that which meets the standards of type xi as defined by aashto m num astm dnum .
orange colored material shall be fluorescent .
num fabrication a .
background color the background color shall be as specified in part num of the mutcd .
b. legend message and borders shall be nonremovable copy of the color specified in part num of the mutcd .
the nonremovable copy may be screened processed or direct applied .
mounting holes will not be drilled or punched in any part of the nonremovable copy .
num .
screened process message borders shall be processed on reflective sheeting using mechanical equipment materials and operational methods and procedures as prescribed by the manufacturer .
processing shall be accomplished by the direct or reverse screen method using opaque or transparent processing material .
screening may be accomplished either before or after application of the sheeting to the base panels .
free hand painting will not be permitted on any part of the finished sign face .
num .
direct applied cut out message and borders shall be reflective sheeting or opaque lettering film applied directly to clean dust free reflective sheeting background .
message and borders shall be in accordance with the operational methods and procedures prescribed by the sheeting manufacturer .
the finished letters numerals symbols and borders shall be cut with smooth regular outline and free from ragged or torn edges .
num traffic control device standards a .
warning lights warning lights shall be portable with lens directed enclosed lights .
the lens of the unit shall not be less than num inches in diameter and shall be amber in color .
they may be used in either the steady burn or flashing mode .
warning lights shall be in accordance with the requirements of equipment and materials standards of the institute of transportation engineers ite publication no .
st num purchase specification for flashing and steadyburn warning lights .
the lights shall be certified by the manufacturer .
the use of the warning lights shall be in accordance with part num of the mutcd .
b. channelizing devices channelizing devices including cones barricades tubular markers vertical panels directional indicator barricades and drums shall conform to the num temporary traffic control devices page num requirements of part num of the mutcd .
drums shall be of a two part construction with breakaway bases .
c. temporary sign supports construction sign supports shall meet the crashworthy requirements of test level num of national cooperative highway research program nchrp report num or aashto manual for assessing safety hardware mash and shall conform to the height requirements of the mutcd .
d. pilot car pilot cars shall be a passenger car multipurpose passenger vehicle or pickup truck .
e. temporary pavement marking tape temporary pavement marking tape types i and ii shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum .
the film without adhesive shall have a minimum thickness of num mils .
f. temporary raised pavement markers temporary raised pavement markers shall consist of a yellow or white plastic body providing a horizontal width and length of approximately num inches in both dimensions and approximately num inch high .
the adhesive shall be resistant to the effects of weather and capable of retaining the marker in position during the time it is required to function .
the markers shall consist of a methyl methacrylate polycarbonate polystyrene or suitably compounded acrylonitrile butadiene abs shell fitted with retroreflective lenses .
the exterior surface shall be smooth .
the marker reflector shall have a minimum coefficient of retroreflected luminous intensity conforming to table num .
g. flexible vertical markers tabs flexible vertical markers tabs shall consist of a yellow or white plastic body providing a horizontal width of approximately num inches and approximately num inches high .
a strip of retroreflective tape num inch minimum width shall be bonded horizontally along the top of the vertical area .
the adhesive shall be resistant to the effects of weather and capable of retaining the marker in position during the time it is required to function .
the marker reflector shall have a minimum coefficient of retroreflected luminous intensity conforming to table num .
temporary traffic control devices num page num table num minimum coefficient of retroreflected luminous intensity in millicandelas per lux or candelas per footcandle observation angle in radians degrees entrance angle in radians degrees luminous intensity for each color in millicandelas per lux candelas per footcandle white yellow red num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note the retroreflective tape shall be acrylic backed metalized polycarbonate microprism film molded methyl methacrylate or approved equal .
num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num num requirements prior to fabrication the contractor shall submit shop plans or catalog cuts for all signal equipment and luminaires to the department for the departments review and approval .
the contractor shall send an email with the shop plans and catalog cuts attached as a pdf to the project engineer and the office of road design .
upon request the project engineer will provide the contractor the appropriate email addresses .
the contractor shall not begin fabrication prior to the departments review and final approval of shop plans or catalog cuts .
within num calendar days of receiving the initial shop plans the office of road design will send a response with the departments final approval or one reviewed copy of the shop plans to the contractor and submitter with changes to the design marked .
the contractor will make the necessary changes if any to the shop plans .
the contractor will then send the project engineer and the office of road design an email with the final shop plans as a pdf for distribution .
a .
electrical grounding and bonding num .
grounding wire grounding wire from electrical cabinets to the ground rod shall be bare soft drawn copper size per nec .
grounding wire from pole to ground rod shall be bare soft drawn copper minimum size num awg .
num .
bonding conductors bonding conductors shall be of the same size and insulation grade as the associated circuit conductors .
equipment grounding conductors shall be sized in compliance with the nec .
num .
ground rods ground rods shall be coppercoated electrodes in accordance with underwriters laboratory ul .
the size and length shall conform to nec requirements .
b. conduit num .
rigid steel conduit conduit and fittings shall meet the requirements of ul num and num and shall be hot dip galvanized .
each section of conduit shall bear the ul label .
num .
rigid nonmetallic conduit conduit and fittings shall be polyvinyl chloride heavy wall meeting the requirements of ul num and num .
use and installation of polyvinyl chloride pvc schedule num and num shall be in accordance with nec and each section shall bear the ul label .
when nonmetallic conduit is used in areas subject to vehicular traffic the nonmetallic conduit shall be schedule num .
c. junction boxes surface mounted junction boxes shall comply with nema numx stainless steel shall be ullisted and at a minimum shall be sized according to the nec .
stainless steel junction boxes shall have the cover held in place with a continuous hinge and kept closed with screws and clamps on the remaining three sides .
the cover shall be removable by removing the pin with the continuous hinge .
all seams shall be continuously welded .
gaskets shall be closed cell neoprene .
traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num d. concrete footings concrete for footings shall meet the requirements for class mnum concrete .
cement shall be type ii .
vertical reinforcement shall be deformed unless otherwise noted and shall conform to the requirements of astm anumaashto m num grade num .
circular ties stirrups and spiral reinforcing may be fabricated from deformed bars conforming to the requirements of astm anumaashto m num grade num .
spiral reinforcing may also be fabricated from cold drawn wire conforming to astm anum or hot rolled plain bars conforming to astm anumaashto m num grade num .
e. anchor bolts and anchor rods anchor bolts and anchor rods shall conform to section num .
f. electrical power cables electrical cables shall be type thw thwn xlpe or xhhw rated for num volts ac and be clearly and durably marked with the ul label type of insulation number of conductors and the awg size .
traffic signals and traffic signals with intersection lighting using the same service cabinet shall utilize stranded copper meeting the requirements of astm bnum and bnum class c. roadway lighting shall utilize stranded copper conductors for service feeder and branch circuits .
num .
direct burial cable a. cables shall be made up of single or multiple conductors and shall meet the applicable requirements of iceanema standards or applicable ul standards .
b .
when underground armored cable is specified multiple conductor cable shall be provided with bronze tape armor meeting the requirements of astm bnum with a minimum thickness of num mils and a spiral overlap of not less than num inch .
c. the multiconductor cable shall be either cross linked or butyl insulated .
num .
pole and bracket cable a .
the cable from pole base to luminaire shall be twoconductor of the awg size shown meeting icea standards .
b. conductors shall be thwnthnn meeting astm bnum .
conductors shall be stranded bare soft copper meeting astm bnum and bnum class c. each conductor shall be insulated with high dielectric strength heat and moisture resistant pvc rated for use at numc and shall meet the requirements of icea .
one insulated conductor shall be colored white and the other black .
the two insulated conductors shall be laid parallel and covered with a black polyethylene belt .
the belt shall meet the requirements of icea .
num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num g. traffic signal control cables num .
multiple conductor cables shall be thhnthwn insulated conductors with fillers of nonabsorbent material bound with polyester tape and with a pvc jacket .
two conductor cables may either be of round or flat construction .
num .
conductors shall be class c stranded copper meeting the requirements of astm bnum and bnum .
num .
insulation insulation shall have a minimum thickness of num mils of which num mils shall be pvc with the remaining thickness of nylon .
num .
colors conductor insulation shall be colored in accordance with icea .
num .
jackets jackets shall be pvc meeting ul requirements for class num jackets and icea standards .
num .
markings the cable shall be marked with the name of the manufacturer rated voltage ul label awg size and number of conductors .
h. electrical service cabinet num .
shall be a nema type numr enclosure .
num .
size shall be as required to house required components .
num .
shall be rated for service entrance equipment .
num .
required components a .
main breaker .
b .
a copper bus rated for the voltage current and phases required by the plans .
c. branch circuit breakers meeting plan requirements for amps voltage and phases .
minimum a.i.c .
shall be num. d. when plans require a mechanically held contactor nema rated for the load served shall be provided .
the contactor shall be encased in a ul approved weatherproof housing with an integral test switch included .
the contactor shall be complete with an interface relay for photocell control and photocell bypass switch .
a photocell shall be provided .
traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num i .
traffic signal poles num .
design a .
the location number area and weight of the signal heads and signing as shown on the plan detail plates shall be used for determination of adequate pole and footing structural design .
the actual quantity and locations of signal heads shall be as shown on the plan sheet .
b .
design and fabrication shall be in accordance with the current edition of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals including all subsequent interims and plan details .
c. wind load shall be calculated using the num year mean recurrent interval basic wind speed .
d. new poles shall be galvanized steel .
galvanizing shall be in accordance with aashto m num astm anum .
steel pole material shall be in accordance with astm anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum or anum grade a or b. anum material shall be limited to a num inch maximum thickness .
steel pole material with a thickness of num inch to num inches shall satisfy charpy vnotch toughness test requirements of num foot pounds at numof .
the sddot office of bridge design shall be contacted for charpy impact requirements for steel pole material thickness greater than num inches .
e. the steel poletobaseplate connection shall be a fullpenetration groovewelded connection with a backing ring as described in the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
f. the design yield strength shall be no higher than num psi .
strength of steel for fabricating poles may be higher than num psi but not lower than num psi .
g. anchor bolt or rod circle anchor bolt or rod size and other structural properties of the pole and base are to be designed and determined by the pole manufacturer .
h. connections at the base of the pole shall be made with water tight connectors approved for outdoor use .
i .
pole designs must provide for drainage with no laps or edges to hold moisture .
j. mast arm pole shafts shall have a removable cover and an opening for cable entrance to the mast arm .
k. a j hook for a cable strain relief grip or other strain relief device shall be provided at the top of the pole or electrical fixture .
num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num l. luminaire extensions shall meet specifications for roadway luminaire poles .
m. hand holes and other openings shall be smooth neat and covered .
num .
certification a statement is required signed by a professional engineer registered in the state of south dakota certifying the pole designs meet all plan and specification requirements .
num .
shop plans prior to fabrication the contractor shall submit shop plans or catalog cuts for the traffic signal poles to the department for the departments review and approval .
the contractor shall send an email with the shop plans and catalog cuts attached as a pdf to the project engineer and the office of road design .
upon request the project engineer will provide the contractor the appropriate email addresses .
the contractor shall submit comprehensive design calculations for the traffic signal poles including anchor bolts signed and sealed by a sd registered professional engineer with the shop plans .
the contractor shall not begin fabrication prior to the departments review and final approval of shop plans or catalog cuts .
within num weeks of receiving the initial shop plans the office of road design will send a response with the departments final approval or one reviewed copy of the shop plans to the contractor and submitter with changes to the design marked .
the contractor will make the necessary changes if any to the shop plans .
the contractor will then send the project engineer and the office of road design an email with the final shop plans as a pdf for distribution .
j. roadway luminaire poles num .
design a .
design and fabrication shall be in accordance with the current edition of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals including all subsequent interims and plan details .
b .
wind load shall be calculated using the num year mean recurrent interval basic wind speed .
c. new poles shall be galvanized steel .
galvanizing shall be in accordance with aashto m num astm anum .
steel pole material shall be in accordance with astm anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum or anum grade a or b. anum material shall be limited to a num inch maximum thickness .
steel pole material with a thickness of num inch to num inches shall satisfy charpy vnotch toughness test requirements of num foot pounds at numof .
the sddot office of bridge design shall be contacted for charpy impact requirements for steel pole material thickness greater than num inches .
d. the steel poletobaseplate connection shall be a fullpenetration groovewelded connection with a backing ring as described in the aashto standard traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
e. the design yield strength for steel shall be no higher than num psi .
yield strength of the steel used in fabricating poles may be higher than num psi but shall not be lower than num psi .
f. all poles shall have breakaway transformer bases .
g. anchor bolt or rod circle anchor bolt or rod size and other structural properties of the pole and base are to be designed and determined by the pole manufacturer .
h. connections at the base of the pole shall be made with water tight connectors approved for outdoor use .
i .
pole designs must provide for drainage with no laps or edges to hold moisture .
j. mast arm pole shafts shall have a removable cover and an opening for cable entrance to the mast arm .
k. a j hook for a cable strain relief grip or other strain relief device shall be provided at the top of the pole or electrical fixture .
l. hand holes and other openings shall be smooth neat and covered .
num .
certification a statement is required signed by a professional engineer registered in the state of south dakota certifying the pole designs meet all plan and specification requirements including breakaway and structural adequacy of the aashto specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
the physical testing procedures outlined in the aluminum associations specifications for aluminum structures may be used to establish service limits for structural adequacy certification of aluminum breakaway transformer bases and frangible couplings .
if requested test data of production samples to support the certification shall be provided .
num .
shop plans prior to fabrication the contractor shall submit shop plans or catalog cuts for the roadway luminaire poles to the department for the departments review and approval .
the contractor shall send an email with the shop plans and catalog cuts attached as a pdf to the project engineer and the office of road design .
upon request the project engineer will provide the contractor the appropriate email addresses .
the contractor shall submit comprehensive design calculations for the roadway luminaire poles including anchor bolts or rods signed and sealed by a sd registered professional engineer with the shop plans .
the contractor shall not begin fabrication prior to the departments review and final approval of shop plans or catalog cuts .
within num calendar days of receiving the initial shop plans the office of road design will send a response with the departments final approval or one reviewed copy of the shop plans to the contractor and submitter with changes to the num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num design marked .
the contractor will make the necessary changes if any to the shop plans .
the contractor will then send the project engineer and the office of road design an email with the final shop plans as a pdf for distribution .
k. luminaires num .
must be a complete lighting device weatherproof with cast aluminum housing reflector refractor lamp lamp socket terminal block integral ballast and with internal parts readily accessible .
num .
mounting must be by a num inch slipfitter except for wall mounts unless otherwise noted in the plans .
num .
refractor shall be constructed of clear heat and shock resistant glass or a material which gives similar light transmission with shock resistance .
num .
ballast shall be constant wattage and multiple voltage .
l. light towers num .
design a .
design and fabrication shall be in accordance with the current edition of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals including all subsequent interims and plan details .
light towers including anchor bolts or rods shall be designed for fatigue in accordance with fatigue importance category i. b .
wind load shall be calculated using the num year mean recurrent interval basic wind speed .
c. new towers shall be galvanized steel .
galvanizing shall be in accordance with aashto m num astm anum .
steel tower material shall be in accordance with astm anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum or anum grade a or b. anum material shall be limited to a num inch maximum thickness .
steel tower material with a thickness of num inch to num inches shall satisfy charpy vnotch toughness test requirements of num foot pounds at numof .
the sddot office of bridge design shall be contacted for charpy impact requirements for steel tower material thickness greater than num inches .
d. the steel poletobaseplate connection shall be a fullpenetration groovewelded connection with a backing ring as described in the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
e. the design yield strength for steel shall be no higher than num psi yield strength of the steel used in fabricating poles may be higher than num psi but shall not be lower than num psi .
traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num f. anchor bolt or rod circle anchor bolt or rod size and other structural properties of the pole and base are to be designed and determined by the pole manufacturer .
g. connections at the base of the pole shall be made with water tight connectors approved for outdoor use .
h. pole designs must provide for drainage with no laps or edges to hold moisture .
i .
hand holes and other openings shall be smooth neat and covered .
num .
lowering devices the manufacturer shall furnish a factory respresentative to assist the contractor with the assembly of the first lowering system into the pole assembly and they shall furnish the contractor with written installation and operational instructions .
a. nonlatching type the lowering system shall be a twocable hoisting system consisting of a stainless steel head assembly stainless steel luminaire ring and junction box stainless steel winch drums and corrosionresistant winching system and a portable power unit .
the power cord shall be type w with four num conductors and a num amp num volt twistlock weatherproof male connector .
the power cable shall be tethered between the hoisting cables with a stainless steel harness .
the head assembly shall be manufactured of stainless steel and shall consist of a formed channel bolted to the top of the pole shaft with four stainless steel bolts nuts and lockwashers .
the channel shall support four cable sheaves num inches in diameter with a special cable keeper to ensure proper cable guidance and two pilot guides to secure the horizontal position of the luminaire ring .
the power cable sheave shall be made of cast aluminum with a minimum diameter of num inches .
all sheaves shall have permanently lubricated bronze bearings and stainless steel axle pins .
a cable keeper shall be provided to prevent the power cable from working out of the sheave .
the luminaire ring assembly shall be fabricated of stainless steel and consist of the luminaire ring hoisting cable terminator tubes and a weather proof junction box .
the inner portion of the ring shall be equipped with a pvc shock absorbing tube protecting the pole and luminaires during the raisinglowering operation .
the ring shall be supplied with stainless steel tenons for the required number of luminaires .
the power cord shall terminate into the luminaire ring by a deluxe kellems grip .
the luminaire ring shall be a totally enclosed wire way .
the ring shall be raised supported and lowered by two num inch stainless steel numxnum strand cables each with a hoisting strength of num pounds .
the two hoisting cables shall be continuous from the luminaire ring to the winch drum and of sufficient length to be two times the length of the pole shaft plus num feet .
num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num the luminaire assembly shall be held firmly to the masthead assembly by two compression springs at the end of the hoisting cables and within the stainless steel support cable terminal tubes .
the springs shall compress to hold the weight of the luminaire ring assembly and the luminaires plus num pounds .
the winch assembly shall consist of a worm gear speed reducer with a ratio of num .
the worm gear housing shall be of cast aluminum or other corrosion resistant material .
the assembly shall also consist of a double output shaft and two stainless steel drums with calibrated adjustable clutches which compensate for the cable winding of both drums .
the double output shaft shall be supported by two stainless steel outboard bearing assemblies .
the input or drive pulley shall be equipped with a double brake shoe to serve as a safety brake when either the motor drive belt or the motor is removed .
raising speed of the luminaire ring shall be a minimum of num feet per minute .
the portable motor power unit shall consist of a tefc nema num c face motor num volt reversible with a magnetic brake attached .
it shall be mounted to the winch with an internal bracket and a vdrive belt .
the motor shall be equipped with a power cord and a weatherproof connector to mate with the power supply cord connector .
the motor shall be operated by a push button control on a num foot long extension cord .
two stainless steel chains and grippers shall secure the hoisting cables to the base of the pole while in the static load position .
the ultimate support of the luminaire ring shall not be dependent upon the winch assembly or have latches at the top of the pole or in the masthead assembly .
b. latching type the lowering device shall consist of a head frame assembly a luminaire ring assembly and a winch assembly .
the luminaire ring shall latch to the head frame assembly to eliminate strain on hoisting cables when the lowering device is not in operation .
latches shall be of a camaction type with no moving parts or springs attached to the head frame assembly .
the luminaire ring shall not move laterally or rotate during the latching or unlatching process imparting lateral g forces on the luminaire .
the power cable shall be guided over a roller assembly when lowering or raising the luminaire ring .
the luminaire ring shall employ roller contact spring loaded centering arms to keep the ring concentric with the pole in winds up to num mph .
the arms shall be interconnected and loaded with stainless steel springs to uniformly apply equal centering force when any one has been actuated .
the winch assembly shall be prewound with num inch diameter numxnum stainless steel aircraft cord and shall be supported at both ends .
keepers shall be provided to ensure uncoiled cable will rewrap onto the drum .
traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num the portable power unit shall be a heavy duty reversing type with a stalling torque at least twice that required to operate the device and shall be controlled by a reversing switch with a num foot cord .
num .
certification a statement is required signed by a professional engineer registered in the state of south dakota certifying the light tower designs meet all plan and specification requirements .
num .
shop plans prior to fabrication the contractor shall submit shop plans or catalog cuts for the light towers to the department for the departments review and approval .
the contractor shall send an email with the shop plans and catalog cuts attached as a pdf to the project engineer and the office of road design .
upon request the project engineer will provide the contractor the appropriate email addresses .
the contractor shall submit comprehensive design calculations for the light towers including anchor bolts or rods signed and sealed by a sd registered professional engineer with the shop plans .
the contractor shall not begin fabrication prior to the departments review and final approval of shop plans or catalog cuts .
within num calendar days of receiving the initial shop plans the office of road design will send a response with the departments final approval or one reviewed copy of the shop plans to the contractor and submitter with changes to the design marked .
the contractor will make the necessary changes if any to the shop plans .
the contractor will then send the project engineer and the office of road design an email with the final shop plans as a pdf for distribution .
m. photoelectric control requirements photoelectric controls shall be one of the photoelectric controls listed on the departments approved products list .
n. controller cabinet the controller cabinet shall be nema compliant .
num .
cabinet design a .
the cabinet shall be made of welded sheet aluminum .
b .
the type and size of cabinets shall be determined by the signal controller supplier .
the cabinet shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the controller and associated equipment .
c. the cabinet shall be furnished with a hinged door that provides complete access to the cabinet interior .
the controller cabinet door shall be hinged on the right side .
the door shall have a gasket making a weatherproof and dust tight seal .
the door shall be provided with a lock and two standard keys .
base mounted cabinets shall be furnished with doorstops to hold the door open during servicing .
d. the cabinet door shall contain a police panel with a lock and key .
the police panel shall contain two switches .
one switch shall be designated flashnormal and the other switch designated signal offon .
at any switch position power shall be maintained for all control equipment including detector amplifier units num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num within the cabinet .
the switch shall be labeled and rated for the current load .
switch terminals on the rear of the police panel shall be insulated so live parts are not exposed .
e. the controller cabinet shall be a nema type numr enclosure .
f. underside mounted led light strips shall be installed on each shelf in the controller cabinet .
an onoff switch that is turned on when the cabinet door is opened and turned off when the cabinet door is closed shall activate the lights .
the switch shall be wired to place an input to the signal controller event or alarm log when the cabinet door is opened .
the power supply for the led light strips shall be separate from the standard double plug receptacle .
g. the controller cabinets shall be capable of placing vehicle and pedestrian calls into the controller .
placed calls shall provide for eight vehicle phases and four pedestrian phases .
the placed calls for vehicle phases shall be capable of extending the associated vehicle phase by continuous or intermittent contact .
num .
fan assembly cabinets shall be provided with thermostatically controlled fan vent assemblies .
the thermostat shall be adjustable within a range from numf to numf and shall be separately fused .
a screened and filtered air intake area of at least num square inches shall be provided .
the filters shall be removable cleanable reusable and replaceable .
num .
electrical a .
a three wire num ampere nema standard double plug receptacle with ground contact shall be wired as a separate circuit ahead of the main breaker .
b .
a main circuit breaker shall be furnished and installed in the controller cabinet .
an auxiliary circuit breaker shall be provided and connected to the load side of the main breaker .
the main breaker shall be wired to protect the signal load and controller circuits .
the auxiliary circuit breaker shall be properly rated and fused to protect circuits utilizing unfiltered ac power .
terminal facilities in the cabinet for incoming ac power will be protected to prevent shortcircuiting when working with tools in the cabinet .
the circuit breakers shall be capable of manual operation with markings to indicate ratings and whether it is in the open or closed position .
c. a power line filter certified in accordance with ul standard num and meeting the following specifications shall be installed at the main breaker num num db minimum attenuation over a frequency range of num kilohertz to num kilohertz .
num minimum feed through current of num amperes at num volts num hertz .
traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num d. the cabinet shall be equipped with a surge protection device certified in accordance with ul standard num and meeting the following specifications num nominal discharge current rating of numka .
num voltage protection rating numv .
e. bus bar terminals such as ac common neutral ac power safety chassis ground and ac signal power shall be furnished and properly installed .
f. terminals and panel wiring for detector leads interconnect time switches relays load switch sockets flash transfer relay sockets and any other components required to provide the controller operation shall be installed .
g. terminals and components that make up the basic terminal facilities shall be permanently identified in accordance with the cabinet wiring diagram .
identification shall be permanently attached as close as possible to the terminal or component and shall not be affixed to any part which is easily removed .
h. each input or output terminated on a terminal block shall be identified on the front of the panel by a position number and functional terminology e.g .
num red num hold channel num red etc ..
the same identification shall be used consistently on the cabinet wiring diagram .
i .
each component shall be identified on the front of the panel by a symbol and function terminology consistent with the cabinet wiring diagram .
provisions shall be made that each load switch socket can be identified by the phase or overlap number by writing on the panel in an area established for this feature .
j .
panel wiring shall be neat and firm with panel mounted terminals for signal lamp circuit conductors one for each signal circuit and one or more terminals for the common conductor .
the terminals shall be located a minimum of num inches from the bottom of the cabinet and arranged for adequate clearance between the terminals .
the controller equipment and terminals shall be arranged within the cabinet so they will not upset the entrance training and connection of incoming conductors .
k. a flasher socket and a solid state flasher meeting current nema standards shall be provided in the controller cabinet .
o .
controller the controller shall be a solid state digital nema tsnum type num from the departments approved products list and as approved by the south dakota department of transportation traffic design engineer in the office of road design .
the controller shall have front panel access to display cycle length offset and internal timing values .
access to these timing functions shall be by keyboard entry as an integral part of the controller .
the controller shall meet nema environmental and electrical performance standards .
the controller shall also have a usb port and an ethernet port .
num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num the controller shall be two through twelve phase controllers .
digital timing shall be provided with a battery backup .
the controller shall be capable of programming by manual entry via the front panel keyboard data downloading from a portable pc computer via nullmodem cable data downloading from one controller to another using a serial port on each controller and restoring data using a data transfer module data key .
in a closedloop system the controller shall be capable of data downloading via telemetry .
in an enterprise system the controller shall be capable of data downloading from a central server .
the controllers shall be capable of operating coordinated by timebased hardwire and telemetry .
the controllers shall have a copy function to copy all timing data from one phase to another .
the controllers shall also permit copying all coordination pattern data from one pattern to another .
hardware for future pedestrian signals shall be provided when shown .
the controller shall be equipped with solid state signal load switching devices meeting current nema requirements .
load switches shall be furnished with input and output indicator lights on the front panel .
the interface panels shall be capable of inserting up to sixteen load switches .
each controller shall be furnished with a malfunction management unit mmu conforming to the requirements of nema standard tsnum section num .
the provided mmu shall have visual displays for programming and operational purposes .
a sufficient quantity of bus interface units shall be installed in the cabinet to provide communication between detectors load switches controller unit etc .
each bus interface unit shall conform to nema standard tsnum section num .
the controller shall be furnished with extra feature wiring to provide for remote flashing and each wire shall have its own terminal connection .
the flash control circuit shall ensure that remote transfer to flashing from normal stop and go operations occurs during the end of the mainline green interval in the cycle .
when the controller is in a flashing condition the signal switching mechanism shall be inoperative .
the controller time of day flash shall alternate the red and yellow indication with yellow on the major route and red on the minor route .
the controller malfunction flash shall be redred .
load switches for pedestrian indications shall be required when pedestrian indications are shown .
the cabinet wiring load switch sockets and connection facilities shall be included for pedestrian movements permissible with phasing shown .
traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num the controller shall have internal signal dimming .
the controller solid state flasher shall have dimming capability .
initial signal activation shall be done by a manufacturer trained technician .
the technician shall be onsite for at least two consecutive days .
the controller furnished shall meet current ntcip requirements .
p. detector unit components and workmanship shall conform to the standards of nema .
detector units shall include a visual display screen in the controller cabinet .
q .
detector loops num .
leadin home run wires feeder wires from loop leads to detector units shall be twisted shielded pairs belden number num or equal num awg minimum size .
splices are to be avoided in feeder wires .
num .
sawedin loops a. conductors shall conform to the following requirements material stranded copper size num awg minimum insulation xhhw thhn rhh or rhw encasement num inch polyethylene tubing b .
backer rod material shall be resilient nonabsorbent material approximately num larger in diameter than the width of the sawed slot to be sealed .
c. loop sealants shall be one of the products as listed on the departments approved products list .
num .
preformed loops conductors shall conform to the following requirements material stranded copper size num awg minimum insulation num volt xlp bearing the u.l .
designation for either type rhh and rhw or type xhhw r. signal heads num .
all vehicle and pedestrian signal indications shall be light emitting diode led signal modules .
num traffic signals and roadway lighting page num num .
vehicular signal indications shall meet the requirements of the institute of transportation engineers ite standard vehicle traffic control signal heads .
num .
pedestrian signal indications shall meet the requirements of the ite standard pedestrian traffic control signal indicators .
num .
the light intensity requirements of the ite standard will not apply to vehicular and pedestrian signal indications for solar powered signal systems and the intensity shall be as approved by the engineer or as specified in the plans .
num .
the led signal modules shall be warranted against defects in materials and workmanship for a period of num months after the installation of the modules .
the manufacturer shall provide this warranty in writing to the engineer prior to installation of the led signal modules .
num .
size shall be a minimum of num inches diameter .
num .
color doors visors and backplates shall be dull black and housing highway yellow .
num .
material may be either cast aluminum or polycarbonate resin .
num .
visors shall be of the tunnel type .
num .
backplates for signal heads unless otherwise stated on the plans signal backplates shall be num inch thick polycarbonate .
the polycarbonate backplates must be made up from no more than two pieces .
s. pedestrian push button all pedestrian push buttons shall be compliant with the americans with disabilities act ada .
accessible pedestrian push buttons shall be one of the accessible pedestrian signals on the departments approved products list .
num .
general a. shall be pressure activated with essentially no moving parts .
b. shall be vandal resistant .
c. shall activate with num pounds force or less .
d. shall have an led that illuminates when the button is being pushed and remains illuminated until the pedestrian call is served .
e. shall give a toned beep verification of button being pushed .
f. shall have an operating life of num million actuations .
g. shall be compatible with nema tsnum controllers .
traffic signals and roadway lighting num page num num .
housing a. button housing shall be unfinished high impact cast or machined aluminum .
b .
all switch electronics shall be sealed within the high impact cast or machined aluminum housing .
c. shall have a gasket between the button housing and the mounting cup .
num .
electrical a .
operating voltage num to numv dc or num to numv ac .
b .
on resistance num ohms when the button is activated and placing a call .
c. standby current num micro amps typical .
d. shall have built in surge protection .
e. shall have a solid state electronic piezo switch rated for num million cycles with no moving plunger or moving electrical contacts .
f. shall hold the call for a minimum of num seconds .
g. requires only two conductors be run from the traffic signal cabinet to the push button to operate .
h. six units wired in parallel on a single pedestrian isolator input shall not pull the input voltage of the pedestrian isolator down such that a false pedestrian call is placed in the controller .
t. flashing beacons flashing beacons shall conform to part num of the mutcd and the following num .
each signal indication shall have a visible diameter of not less than num inches .
num .
all signal indications shall be led type .
the led module shall be in accordance with the requirements of the current performance specifications of the ite .
num .
when solar powered flashing beacons are specified in the plans the solar powered flashing beacons shall be one of the products as listed on the departments approved products list or approved by the engineer .
num pipe culverts and drainage tubing page num num requirements a. reinforced concrete pipe reinforced concrete pipe shall conform to aashto m num m num and m num .
num .
basis of acceptance the acceptability of the pipe will be determined on the basis of plant load bearing tests compressive strength of concrete material tests and inspection of the complete product .
num .
materials materials shall conform to the requirement of the following sections a. portland cement shall be type ii conforming to section num. b .
water shall conform to section num. c. fine aggregate shall conform to section num. d. coarse aggregate shall conform to section num except the gradation requirements shall not apply .
e. reinforcement shall conform to section num. f. air entraining agent shall conform to section num .
the entrained air content for wet cast pipe shall be num plus or minus num. g. fly ash shall conform to section num. h. flexible watertight gaskets shall conform to astm cnum .
i. admixtures shall conform to section num .
num .
concrete the concrete in special sections shall have a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
special sections are those sections of concrete pipe not covered by the class requirement of aashto m num m num or m num .
the strength shall be determined by test cylinders or by cores .
b .
corrugated metal pipe corrugated metal pipe shall conform to aashto m num or aashto m num .
c. bituminous coated corrugated metal pipe bituminous coated corrugated metal pipe shall conform to aashto m num except the pipe shall conform to aashto m num or aashto m num before coating .
d. structural plate pipe structural plate for pipe shall conform to aashto m num or aashto m num .
pipe culverts and drainage tubing num page num e. corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing couplings and fittings shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num except section num is modified as follows the length of the individual slots on the num inch to num inch diameter tubing shall not exceed num of the tubing inside nominal circumference .
f. corrugated polyethylene pipe corrugated polyethylene pipe couplings and fittings shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
g. high density polyethylene pipe high density polyethylene pipe couplings and fittings shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
num concrete reinforcement page num num requirements a .
bar reinforcement structures and paving excluding dowel and tie bars bar reinforcement for structures and concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num astm anum grade num .
bar reinforcement shall be deformed unless otherwise noted .
b. welded wire reinforcement welded wire reinforcement shall conform to astm anum including the optional yield strength measurement .
c. tie bars tie bars for concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num grade num except rail steel shall not be used for tie bars that are to be bent and restraightened .
tie bars shall be deformed .
tie bars shall be epoxy coated conforming to section num e. sawing or shearing of the tie bars to obtain the specified length will be permitted provided the coating is not damaged and the resulting bar is free from burring and other deformations .
the cut ends shall be coated .
d. pcc paving dowel bars and dowel bar assemblies the steel cores of dowel bars and plain round bars shall be plain round bars conforming to aashto m num astm anum grade num or num m num astm anum grade num minimum or m num astm anum grade num minimum .
the bars shall be the diameter shown in the plans free from burring or other deformation restricting slippage in the concrete .
dowel bars shall be epoxy coated conforming to section num e. sawing or shearing of the dowel bars will be permitted provided the coating is not damaged and the resulting bar is within the permissible deformations .
the cut ends are not required to be coated .
any deformation larger than true shape shall not exceed a num inch increase in diameter or thickness and shall not extend more than num inch from the dowel end .
bond breakers used to precoat dowel bar assemblies shall be one of the products from the departments approved products list .
e. epoxy coated reinforcement a certificate of compliance and a copy of all quality control test results for the epoxy coating shall be furnished for each shipment supplied for use on a project .
dowel bars for concrete pavements shall be epoxy coated and shall conform to aashto m num type b except the film thickness shall be from num to num mils after cure .
all other epoxy coated reinforcement shall comply with astm anum .
f. pretensioning reinforcement pretensioning reinforcement shall conform to aashto m num astm anum and shall be lowrelaxation strands unless otherwise specified .
gabions num page num num gabions gabions shall be supplied in various lengths and heights .
the lengths shall be multiples num num or num of the horizontal width .
the heights shall be fractions num num or num of the horizontal width .
the horizontal width shall not be less than num inches .
gabions shall be of uniform width .
gabions shall be fabricated so the sides ends lid and diaphragms can be assembled at the construction site into a rectangular basket .
gabions shall be of single unit construction .
base lid ends and sides shall be either woven into a single unit or one edge of these members connected to the base section of the gabion so strength and flexibility at the point of connection is at least equal to that of the mesh .
the gabion shall be furnished with diaphragms the same mesh and gauge as the body of the gabions secured in proper position on the base in such a manner that no additional tying at this juncture will be necessary .
the spacing of the diaphragms shall be the same as the horizontal width .
all perimeter edges of the mesh forming the baskets including end panels and top of the diaphragms shall be selvedged with selvedge wire .
for sound structural integrity the gabion mesh wires shall be wrapped around the selvedge wire with a number of turns necessary to interconnect each of them with the adjacent mesh wire .
for multitiered structures the internal connecting wires shall be furnished .
the internal connecting wires shall meet the same specifications as the wire used in the mesh .
tie wire or connecting wire shall securely fasten all edges of the gabion and diaphragms to provide for four internal connecting wires in each cell onehalf unit high and eight internal wires in each cell one unit high .
the tie wire shall meet the same specifications as the wire used in the mesh except that the tie wire may be two gauges smaller .
interlocking fasteners for galvanized gabions shall be high tensile num inch diameter galvanized steel wire measured after galvanizing .
the galvanizing shall conform to astm anum class num coating .
fasteners shall also be in accordance with astm anum class ii type c. interlocking fasteners for pvc coated gabions shall be high tensile num inch diameter stainless steel wire conforming to astm anum type num class i .
the gabions shall made of be woven wire mesh .
the woven wire mesh shall be made of galvanized steel wire having a minimum size of u.s. steel wire gauge num .
the tensile strength of the wire shall be num to num psi when tested in accordance with astm anum .
the minimum zinc coating of the wire shall be num oz .
per square foot of uncoated wire surface as determined by astm anum .
the maximum linear dimension of the mesh opening shall not exceed num inches and the area of the mesh opening shall not exceed num square inches .
num gabions page num the wire mesh shall have elasticity permitting elongation to a minimum of num of the length of the section of the mesh without reducing the gauge or tensile strength of individual wires to values less than those for wire one gauge smaller .
a section of the mesh num feet long and not less than num feet wide after the elongation test shall withstand a load test of num pounds applied to an area of num square foot in the center of the section .
an uncut section of mesh num feet long not less than num feet wide including selvedge bindings shall have the ends securely clamped for num feet along the width of the sample .
when the width of the sample exceeds num feet the clamps will be placed in the middle and the excess width will fall free on each side of the clamped section .
the sample shall be subjected to sufficient tension to cause num elongation of the section between the clamps .
after elongation and while clamped the section shall be subjected to a load applied to an area of num square foot in the center of the sample section and perpendicular to the direction of the tension force .
the sample shall withstand without rupture of wire or opening of mesh fastening an actual load of num pounds .
the ram head used in the test shall be circular with its edges beveled or rounded to prevent cutting of the wires .
the wire mesh shall resist pulling apart at the twists or connections forming the mesh when a single wire is cut and the section of mesh then subjected to the load test described in the elasticity test .
each shipment of gabions shall be accompanied by a certificate which states that the material conforms to the requirements .
gauge table for zinc coated steel wire wire gauge equivalent diameter designation inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num steel sheet piling num page num num steel sheet piling steel sheet piling shall be of the style dimensions and mass specified .
steel sheet piling shall conform to the requirements of astm a num astm anum grade num astm anum astm anum or as specified .
the piling shall be true straight and uniform in section .
the side of each piece shall be furnished with an interlock that is continuous for the full length of the sheet .
num steel sheeting page num num scope this specification covers the fabrication of galvanized steel sheet products .
num requirements the galvanized steel used in fabricated metal products shall conform to astm anum .
the sheeting shall be true straight and uniform in section .
the sheeting shall be galvanized at a rate of num ounces per square foot total for both sides .
the steel sheeting for fabricated lightweight sheet piling and other items in which interlock is specified shall consist of corrugated or flat steel sheets which when properly driven or installed will interlock with adjacent sheets for the full length of the sheet .
the interlock shall be formed by bending the metal num degrees leaving an opening to allow free slippage of adjoining sheets .
the specified metal products shall be fabricated to the strength shape and dimensions shown in the plans and so as to avoid cracking or breaking the spelter coating on the galvanized sheets .
index page num a abbreviations num acceptance final acceptance and final payment num of field work num addendum num advertisement num aggregate crushed for maintenance stockpiles num asphalt concrete num num num asphalt surface treatment num num polymer chip seal num num granular bases and surfacing num num portland cement concrete num num num airentraining admixtures num american with disabilities act num asphalt concrete num additives num aggregates num num num asphalt binder num composite num batch plant num class d num class e num class g num class hr num class s num cold recycling of num compaction num num composition of num crack sealing num drum mix plants num equipment num hydrated lime num maintenance num mix design submittal num num pavers num proportioning of aggregates num rollers num salvaging processing and stockpiling num shoulder joint sealant num stockpiling aggregate num tacking spreading and compacting num transportation and delivery of num weather and seasonal limitations num asphalt concrete composite num asphalt material num index page num asphalt surface treatment num aggregates for num b backfilling above bedding grade num num bridge end num select granular num bank and channel protection num base course num num num bid proposal num num combination bidding packages num consideration of num contents of bidding package num dismissal of num guaranty num interpretation of quantities in bidding package num irregular num issuance of bidding package num limitations bidder submitted num preparation of num proposal form num public opening of num return of proposal guaranty num submission of num withdrawal or revision of num bid schedule num bidder num cancellation of award num disqualification of num prequalification of num requirement of contract performance bond num blotting sand num bonded fiber matrix num box culverts drainage fabric num bridge num bridge deck preparation and resurfacing num bridge end backfill num bridge field paintingrepainting num bronze castings num buy america num c cable guardrail num calcium chloride num index page num calendar day num num cattle guards num cement portland num chain link fence num num change order num chemical admixtures for concrete num claims for adjustments and disputes num responsibility for damage claims num class m concrete num computerized batching equipment num concrete sidewalk num curb and gutter num drop inlets num manholes num clay num clearing num clearing and grubbing num cofferdams cribs and shoring num cold applied plastic pavement marking num num cold milling asphalt concrete num cold recycling of asphalt concrete num commission num compaction ordinary compaction method num specified density method num concrete class m num computerized batching equipment num concrete sidewalk num curb and gutter num drop inlets num manholes num concrete drilled shaft num concrete structural num backfilling and application of live load num batching equipment num coarse aggregate num computerized batching equipment num commercial texture finish num curing num delivery requirements num falsework num fine aggregate num forms num grout num joint filler num joints num mixing num mixing and hauling equipment num index page num placing num prepour inspection num protection of num removal of formwork num superimposed element construction num special surface finish num surface finish num underwater concrete placement num construction stakes lines and grades num contract num num contract item num time num num default and termination of num execution and approval of num failure to execute num intent of num notice to proceed num performance bond num prosecution and progress num significant changes in the character of work num subletting of num termination of num contract time num num extension of num failure to complete on time num calendar day count contracts num fixed calendar date contracts num working day contracts num contractor num character of workmen methods and equipment num cooperation between num cooperation by num liability insurance num limitation of operation num responsibility for work num crack sealing num cracking and seating num culvert num curb and gutter num d delineators num department num no waiver of legal rights num personal liability of department employees num digout unclassified excavation num index page num dowel bars num drilled shaft construction num casing num concrete num crosshole sonic log csl testing num dry construction method num permanent casing construction method num temporary casing construction method num underwater placement of concrete num drop inlets num castings num dust control num dust control chlorides num e eliminated items num embankment num compaction num placing num preparation of num engineer num authority and duties of area engineer num authority of num environmental protection num epoxy coated reinforcing steel num epoxy resin mortar sand num equipment num erosion control num num erosion bales num num erosion control blanket num erosion control wattle num num floating silt curtain num mucking silt fence num remove silt fence num repair silt fence num seeding and fertilizing num silt fence num num temporary num num turf reinforcement mat num num estimate of quantities num excavation digout unclassified excavation num muck excavation num option borrow excavation num rock excavation num structure excavation num unclassified excavation num index page num unclassifiedrock excavation num undercutting num excise tax num expansion joint filler preformed num explosives num extra haul of materials num extra work num num num extruded insulation board num f falsework num formwork num federal aid participation num fence chain link num num rightofway num num temporary num fertilizing num field laboratory num type i num type ii num type iii num final acceptance num final payment num floating silt curtain num flush seal coats num fly ash num num fog seal coats num force account work num equipment num excise tax num extra work authorization num insurance and tax num labor num materials num profit num subcontracting num forest protection num formwork num foundation seals num freight rates num fuel cost adjustment num g gabions num galvanizing num index page num geotextile num glass beads num granular bases and surfacing num salvaging processing and stockpiling num aggregates for num gravel cushion and gravel cushion salvaged num gravel surfacing and gravel surfacing salvaged num subbase and base course num subbase salvaged and base course salvaged num gravel cushion num gravel surfacing num guardrail cable num steel beam num h haul roads num health and safety provisions num heavy roadway shaping num highway signs and delineators num holiday num hydrated lime num hydroseeding num i incidental work num inspection of work num inspector num duties of num j joint sealer num l laboratory num num field num quality assurance num quality control num laws to be observed num liability insurance num index page num m maintenance during construction num failure to maintain roadway or structure num of traffic num manholes num brick num num cast in place num num concrete block num num precast units num num masonry mortar sand num material buy america num department furnished num handling num local material sources num samples tests cited specifications num source of supply and quality requirements num storage of num unacceptable num mobilization num muck excavation num mulching num bonded fiber matrix num fiber mulch num fiber reinforced matrix num grass hay or straw mulch num n navigable waters construction over or adjacent to num notice to proceed num o obliterating old roads num opening sections of project to traffic num option borrow excavation num ordinary roadway shaping num p painting shop num field num paint residue containment num index page num patented devices materials and processes num pavement jacking num pavement marking num cold applied plastic num num grooving for num pavement marking paint and beads num traffic paint num pavement structure num payment final acceptance and final payment num for extra haul of materials num for materials delivered to project num progress payments num prompt payment num scope of num permits licenses and taxes num piling num bearing value num cutting off piles num driving num preparation for num sheet piling num num steel sheeting num num test piles num timber piles num num pipe culverts num num backfill above bedding grade num bedding num concrete num num corrugated metal num num polyethylene num num plans num conformity with num coordination of num examination of num plans and working drawings num plastic pavement marking cold applied num num portland cement concrete pavement num airentraining admixtures num bar reinforcement num num batching equipment num cement num central plant mixing num chemical admixtures num coarse aggregate num concrete saw num cracking and seating num cure num num index page num delivery requirements num dowel and tie bars num num num edging num fine aggregate num finishing num fly ash num num forms num handling measuring and batching materials num incentive payment num joint sealer num joints longitudinal num joints transverse num mixing num mixing and hauling equipment num opening to traffic num pavement jacking num placing num preformed expansion joint filler num profilograph num protection of num quality of num random cracks num reinforcement and dowel bar assemblies num num num rubblize num sealing joints num slip form method num spall repair num spreading and finishing equipment num stationary side form method num surface test num ten foot straightedge num thickness num truck mixing num undersealing num vibrators num water num precast concrete box culvert num precastprestressed concrete num preformed expansion joint filler num preformed fabric pads num prestressed concrete beams num cure num handling storage transportation installation num pretensioning reinforcement num surface finish and patching num prime tack fog seal and flush seal num profile grade num prompt payment num index page num public convenience and safety num q quantities compensation for altered num measurement of num r railing num railwayhighway provisions num reinforcing steel num num removal of structures and obstructions num restoration protection and restoration of property and landscape num of surfaces opened by permit num rightofway num fence num furnishing num riprap num num roadbed num roadside num roadway shaping num heavy num ordinary num surface preparation num rock excavation num rubblize pcc pavement num s sand blotting num seeding num hydroseeding num select granular backfill num select subgrade topping num sheet piling num num shop painting num shop plans num num num num num num num num num num num num num shoulder num sidewalk num num cushion material num signs and delineators num num concrete footings num delineators num fixed base assemblies num materials for num index page num object markers num perforated tube posts num num post size num signs num num slip base assemblies num steel posts num num wood posts num num silt fence num mucking num repair of num sodding num sodium chloride num sound control requirements num sources local material num spall repair num epoxy resin mortar num type a spalls num type b spalls num special provisions num special surface finish num specifications num special provisions num standard specifications num supplemental specifications num state num steel beam guardrail num steel sheeting num num steel structures num num assembling num bearings and anchorages num bridge paintingrepainting num cambering num falsework num num high strength bolts num num material num preformed fabric pads num shop painting num num shop plans num steel forgings and steel shafting num welded stud shear connectors num welder qualification num welding inspection num stockpiles num aggregate for maintenance stockpiles num street num structural plate pipe and structural plate pipe arch culverts num backfill above bedding grade num fabrication num index page num installation num structure excavation num box culvert num bridge num cofferdams and cribs num disposal of num preservation of channels num structures num removal num subbase num subcontractor num subgrade num substructure num superintendent num superstructure num supplemental specifications num surety num surface course num surface preparation num t tack coats num temporary traffic control num num barricades and warning signs num num num flaggers num maintenance of traffic num removal of pavement markings num temporary pavement marking num temporary works num bridge falsework num cofferdams cribs and shoring num formwork num foundation seals num removal of num tie bars num topsoil num num placing num salvage num num salvage of num traffic diversion num traffic paint num num glass beads num num traffic signals and roadway lighting num num traveled way num tremie num index page num u unclassified excavation num unclassifiedrock excavation num undercutting num undercutting culverts num backfill material num bedding material num extruded insulation board num underdrains num undersealing num deflection testing num utilities cooperation with num v value engineering incentive num w waste sites option num num water num num num num num water pollution control num wood preservatives num work num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized num working drawings num written order num num copies of this document were printed by the south dakota department of transportation at a cost of num per document .
